WORK: Orationes 46  (slug: aelius-aristides-orationes-46-01d156)

CHAPTER: 01-orationes-46



[217328] 231. thought best, which of us set about the task with the better and juster business—the man who thought fit to educate the tyrant and sailed so far from his fatherland, or those who were willing to give their own citizens the best counsel, and to make their affairs better from what was possible? What do you say, Plato, to this?' they will ask; 'and since, once and for all, we did not prevail, which of us came nearer to our original purpose? And which of us advanced things further? Did we make the Athenians better, or you the tyrants? And indeed, for them, except perhaps in a few things, everything has gone wrong, whereas for those who acted with us everything, except for a few things, has been done more nobly than among all mankind. By so much did we show those who dealt with us to be better than you showed those who dealt with you. And if you shall say that these were better by nature, by this too you prove us the wiser, if we placed some hopes in such men, and did not, as you did, wholly fail of the mark, having thought it of some use to converse with those tyrants. Then, just as you allege their nature in the things in which they became better than others, so, if they seem to you to have acted somewhat too rashly, set this down to that same nature, and do not bring it against us; nor, while the things they accomplished under our leadership you take away from the counsellors and from us who helped bring them to pass by being thought to have advised the best, do you say that the wrongs they committed against us, on their own account, are wrongs that we do. For of the former we too are in part the cause, but of the latter not even a little. But these things, as Sophocles said, are matters of suffering rather than of doing. And indeed, if to give offence and to meet with some calamity is proof of baseness and carries a just reproach for the one who suffers, consider our case and your own. What benefit did you reap from the tyrants whom you chose to educate? Did not Polycrates—" the

[219347] 232. fortune that came from without—"was no better than ours to you either. Thus from the beginning, contrary to all hope and contrary to all your worth, you were shut up and reared; and if a certain Italian Greek of the Pythagoreans had not begged you off—just as you say of the chief magistrate, that he prevented one of us who was about to be cast into the pit—you yourself perhaps would have fallen into the stone-quarries, or at any rate, the second time, you would not have escaped 'the sheer streams of the Styx-water' of the strait, but would have died there in Sicily. As it is, it was Archytas who prevented it, and Dionysius was ashamed before Archytas when he sent his message and granted the favour, but he was not ashamed before Plato, with whom he had consorted and from whom he had heard those fine and solemn discourses; rather, so far was he from honouring or obeying him as he spoke, that, in order not to hear your voice, he kept you shut up like some 'worthless vagabond.' And the lot of Cimon befell you—that lot which you say the Athenians inflicted on him, unwilling to hear his voice—nor did Dionysius then think you worthy even of that, save that you were not on equal terms. For Cimon the Athenians removed so that they might not hear him for ten years, but for you it was not even possible to remove yourself, though surely you wished it and sought it, having sense, as I declare. But this was the dreadful calamity: that it was not possible to depart, but you had to remain by force and all but be nailed fast. And then your dearest friend hands you over, after these things, to a Spartan, Pollis, and not even there did he stay his outrage, but ordered that you be sold—sold, alas, the best of the Greeks, like a slave bound for export. He, that man hated by the gods, would not have committed this outrage had we been living and our triremes in being. Yet he ordered it, and Plato was led out of Sicily by Pollis, and Pollis in his turn, taking charge of you, was ashamed even before the absent Dionysius and remembered what he had enjoined, but seeing you and being in your company set you at nothing; rather, your marvellous power and persuasiveness in discourse was overcome by the commands of Dionysius. And Pollis sided with that man, and that too when he had given such

[221655] 233. orders, but with you not at all. Let us add that, though a Spartan and one reared in the laws and constitution which holds second place of all in your own judgement—or rather, first of those that exist. And in vain, it seems, were all those many praises sung by you of the city of the Lacedaemonians. At any rate, the man who was once the admiral of the Lacedaemonians fell as far short of your worth as not even any one of the Persians or Scythians could have done, who had no power to understand your voice at all. And yet, if you thought fit that he should become better than Dionysius concerning you, and should resolve on something better, but he paid you no heed, but belonged to the absent man and to the one who had enjoined the basest things—how are you not utterly inferior to the tyrant? And in what respect are you justified in bringing it forward, if anyone undertaking to persuade another failed? But if you thought fit to be content with the present circumstances, while he had no respect for your silence, nor held it more sufficient than all words to set before himself the fitting reckonings concerning you—how did you obtain what was likely, or how did you reap what befitted the nature of your own self? 'By Zeus, but you are in no way worse, if Pollis and Dionysius were beside their senses.' Nor are we either, blessed sir, if some Athenian proved base toward us. So then, to such a pitch of excess did Pollis come, and was so very earnest, on being made master to deliberate concerning a man such as he had not hoped for even in a dream, and then to be shown to have deliberated something most magnificent and surpassing in humanity and culture, that, conveying you to Aegina—in which death had been proclaimed for any Athenian caught setting foot there—there he disembarks you. And here again you met with the lot of Themistocles, or rather you fared even better. For he came to the Molossians, to Admetus, an enemy

[223601] 234. of his, and through him was saved; and to you it happened to be brought to trial among the common enemies of your own fatherland. And if those men had not proved better than the tyrant and his servant—and these too, doing well, were ashamed before the philosophy and reputation of Plato—you would have died there on the spot, having exchanged island for island, in the very forecourt of your fatherland, not in Sicily: so much were you going to gain. But the worthy fellow-voyager, the Spartan, did not even thus forget what he had heard from Dionysius, but sold your sacred head; and while Pollis was selling you, no one of the Greeks would buy you—so wholly were all of them gripped by your discourses—but a Libyan, a man named Anniceris, whom not one of mankind would even have known, had he not made use of your misfortunes. As it was, he did not buy Plato, but reputation for himself and the being known. And then at last Dion played the part of the marvellous benefactor, sending the ransom to the Libyan. But not even that man was outdone by Dion; rather, he released you free of charge—a man who had never before set eyes on you nor consorted with you anywhere, on islands or mainland. Coming home, then, and having escaped, like some Odysseus, not deaths only but slavery as well, and having so plainly owed your deliverance to the baseness and the kindness of others, you kept quiet for a time; but when, the elder Dionysius having died, the Dionysius who sprang from him took over the rule and summoned you again to the much-hymned Sicily—as though, along with the other things he had inherited from his father, he had inherited also the outrage against you, and were heir also of giving you orders, as to the Syracusans or the others in Sicily—you went sailing off. And of what

[225397] 235. kind of treatment you reaped in turn, you yourself know: how you accomplished none of the things for which you set out, and endured many things of every sort, and these on behalf of anything rather than yourself; having only this one piece of good fortune—for it shall be said—that you did not share the lot of Philoxenus the dithyrambic poet, although in your conduct you were, in a way, his very counterpart. Do not suppose that we are ignorant of your discourses, or do not agree that they are true—that it is not lawful for a better man to be outraged or harmed by a worse. We know these things and bear witness that you speak truly; yet nonetheless that marvellous lover of yours left out not one bit of outrage and wantonness. And you perhaps were in no way outraged, but he, by the things he thought were outrages, did more of them than by those through which he knew he would do you honour. And not even so did you put an end to your association with that man and to your voyaging; but having, contrary to hope and contrary to your worth, been so released and gladly brought safely home again, you were so far from being able to give counsel to others that you did not even counsel yourself, which was all that remained. But the proverb, and Homer too, says: 'The fool knows a thing once it is done.' Yet you, the wisest of the Greeks, were not even thus instructed; rather, Dionysius mastered you again, holding out kindly hopes, and again in turn you made trial of the evils of tyranny, sailing a third time, just as wrestlers wrestle—twice having stumbled against the same man, and the third time stumbling altogether against a tyrant and a tyrannical household.

[227077] So neither did you yourself run all your course before a fair wind. Why then do you cast fortune in our teeth, when you yourself have had such experience of it? It is as if Odysseus should reproach Menelaus with his wandering: 'My good man, I too came home not with all my company, but with more

[227374] 236. of them than you, and sooner than you, and having sailed an unequal course; and moreover without meddling, as you did, sitting in Sicily beside the Cyclops.' But, O Plato, most marvellous of all men, do not thrust with both hands—and that not through one of your friends and one of your enemies, but through yourself and these men, whom it were more reasonable to consider friends; or, if not, look not for what you will charge but for what you will first answer in your own defence: so many are your own affairs too. And yet you think fit to mock even the dithyrambic poets, as men set in motion only toward pleasure and gratification. But it appears that Dionysius, when he could not bring Philoxenus the Cytherian once more under his power, but that man wrote to him freely 'Go and weep,' yet got you a second and a third time into his grip after those first sojourns. You will say the pretext is a fine one for you: that you did and said all these things for the sake of Dion's affairs. Nobly indeed do you both say it and do it. Consider then our pretext too, and if you find it more dishonourable, or that we meddled for the sake of small ends, take and brand us, and become a Dionysius instead of a Plato toward us. But if, just as you endured all these things for Dion's sake and for his hospitality and friendship, so we, on behalf of the common hearth of our fatherland and of the common treaties and rights—some of us of the city, some even of the Greeks—undertook to say and do and suffer anything whatever, reverencing all the titles of Zeus, reverencing the titles and honours of all the other gods, and besides

[229006] 237. the heroes and our common ancestors, and the memory of the time past and the reckoning of the age to come, and all the things that are held greatest among all men, both Greeks and barbarians—if then anything turned out contrary to our intention from these endeavours, why do you accuse us of what is not yours? And indeed, if this too must be added: we, if we did stumble somewhat, yet stumbled having acted on behalf of the things we were earnest about, whereas you did so straightaway from the very beginning. So then, if to have met with some troubles is a reproach and a censure for the counsellor, you have met with no fewer than we. And there is added the fact that you accomplished none of the things you wished. But if the deliberate choice itself must be examined by itself, then your part is reasonably blameless—and from the same considerations our part is blameless too. And there is added the fact that we mastered our affairs, and that these are greater than both the things you were earnest about and the things in which we ourselves stumbled. You, then, thinking to refute us, speak against yourself; while we, speaking on our own behalf, also tend to your case. Or rather, in your defence we too have a share, but you have not as much as we. So that, if anyone shall spare us, it is unclear whether he will spare you too; but if anyone shall condemn you, he might perhaps pardon us; and if again he will not even spare us, hardly will he spare you. Thus our winning comes about on your behalf. In view of this, look not to mine, but to yours too,' as Teucer said to someone, and do not wish to examine everything exactly, nor, there being three things to which one might look—judgement, deeds, fortune—dismissing the two, lay hold of the third, and that too when the greatest part even of this is on our side. For if we had had to foreknow these things from the start and yet deliberately give ourselves up on behalf of Greece, we should not have shrunk back, nor fallen so far short of Codrus,

[231024] 238. and you too, I think, would have given this very counsel.' Since—come, by friendship—which would you rather have wished: that neither the things accomplished through us had been done for the city, nor that any of the citizens had wronged us—well then, others were going to wrong both us and them—or that, for the sake of those deeds, they should be done, even if it had to turn out so? I, for my part, think the latter. So then, since you would say you would rather have both than neither, you agree both that to us, who took part in public affairs, belongs everything that befits, and that more largely we are the cause of what tends to the city's good repute. How then were you not more justly bound to praise than to blame? For if, even to those very men who wronged us, what was well deliberated and done is of more account, and one might not unreasonably remit these things to them, how is it not just that we be released from all blame—we who have no part whatever in the accusations, but of the things that come under praise, if you are willing to speak the truth, have the greatest share? We then, though we could exalt ourselves in many ways, pass it by. But that you may know how much fairness is ours, and how far in every way we are from wishing to grasp more than our due, let the whole be common; take away, if you will, all the additions above; let us settle on equal terms—we are surely not inexperienced in treaties—and let neither you make mention to us of misfortunes, nor we use this against you. For there is no middle ground: either we too must be convicted along with you by these arguments, or both you and we must be let off guiltless, and it must suffice that certain others wronged us." When they had said these things, I think, they would readily go back again to join the majority—if indeed those men too must be thought to lie among the majority, as I, for one, do not think. I, then, should most gladly acquit them both; but if anyone thinks otherwise, the poets would call him "hard of heart." Come, then, let us also examine his examples.

[233102] 239. "Good charioteers, then," he says, "do not at first fall out of their cars; but once they have tended their horses and themselves become better charioteers, then they fall out." And somewhere higher up, among the things directed against Pericles, he says: "A keeper of asses and horses and oxen, being of such a kind, would be thought bad, if, having taken them over not kicking nor butting nor biting, he showed them doing these things from wildness." But, my good man, you speak of the same individual asses and horses and oxen; whereas, of the same Athenians, all of these, I think, were leaders—Solon, I mean, and Cleisthenes and Miltiades and Pericles, and whoever each was. But the city is one, and the name one, while the men are different and different through the ages. What wonder, then, that some met with gentler and more tractable subjects, and others with rougher and more spirited—just as countless other things, surely, change with the times? For we do not gather even the fruits of the earth alike year by year—I mean neither in quantity nor in quality. Rather, the strength of the year is held to be no less than that of the land. So that, if in the earlier time the Athenians, being of easier natures, in the days of those men were already hard to hold in check, the affliction would not be outside the whole of nature—just as, with time advancing, I think, their spirit too would change according to their misfortunes. Furthermore, charioteers do not corrupt horses by this—that they train some and fail with others—but rather if they make worse the very ones they had before as good and faultless; whereas Miltiades and those after him did not have the same subjects throughout, but some were added, surely, and some passed away, and some even quit their company. How then is it just that they be judged against the charioteers, or how, as though the same horses remained theirs, must they so render account? It is as if someone should think fit that the Molionidae, and the horses of Diomedes the Thracian, should be

[235147] 240. ruled in the same way as those one had from the start. And indeed the charioteers each rule their own cars by themselves, and no one interferes; and I say this very same thing concerning the keepers of the asses and the oxen; so that, if anything were mishandled, they would reasonably bear the blame securely. But not Pericles, nor Themistocles; nor did any of those men rule the Athenians alone, nor freed from anyone undertaking to do the opposite; rather, many others, surely, managed affairs of state along with them, having neither the same natures nor the same judgements; so that one ought to assign the errors to these still more than to those. For I, for my part, would say they belonged to those men by so much the more, as the wrongs were done against them. But, to speak simply, how is it just to demand a reckoning from those alone who were not the sole causes of affairs? We do not, then, blame the original charioteers, if another, taking over the same horses, shows them to be worse; rather, both charioteers and teachers win greater repute when others, set in charge of the same subjects, prove unequal to them. And, by Zeus, if even at the same time—say, on the same day—another, taking over the chariot, mounts it, the good charioteer, the famous one, is no longer answerable for the whole; but if once and for all the care is settled upon him, then these matters too are so judged, and no one inherits the misdeeds of another. But this very thing too is a base accusation—that they did not allow the better man and the one not of their own party to use his art, but tripped him up, like those in the foot-races. So too, then, concerning the statesmanship of those men: until you show that, while the philosophers reigned and were alone set over affairs, these errors were committed—I mean of Miltiades, of Themistocles, of Pericles, of

[237010] 241. Cimon—do not by any means lay the blame on philosophy herself. But if you are able to refute these men by themselves, use this method and show their errors; if not, you accuse the asses rather than their keepers. For if there were no errors before those men engaged in statecraft at Athens, but all these things began from Miltiades and Themistocles and from those men, it would be another argument; nor, if some others took part in statecraft at the same time as those, would I mention it, but I grant that those men alone are accountable for everything. But if it is likely that something else too had been erred before, why do we blame the Laconians for these things? For surely you, at any rate, are permitted to jest, since this very thing—that the calamities are ancient, and, as you somewhere say, beginning from Theseus, and perhaps even from yet earlier, and that these men were not the first to stumble—I shall let pass. And yet Theseus, though exiled and destroyed, dying in Scyros, did not remain dishonoured in the eyes of the god, but the god commanded the Athenians to bring back his bones, many ages later, as they say. But nonetheless I shall let these things pass. Yet your argument about these men has gone to ruin on you. For by the fact that you have accused all of them with the same charges, you have undone what you think you hold as strong. Why? Because this charge might perhaps belong to Miltiades, but no longer to Themistocles; and if to both Miltiades and Themistocles, yet not to Cimon; and if to Miltiades and Themistocles and Cimon, yet surely not also to Pericles, but to him least of all. For Themistocles took them over from Miltiades already butting, and Cimon from Miltiades and Themistocles, and Pericles from Miltiades and Themistocles and

[238796] 242. Cimon. Thus Pericles least of all was accountable, the very man whom you accused most of all, and likened, apart from the rest, to the bad keepers of asses and oxen.

[238968] Let us reflect, then, also on what we were just now speaking of: the association of Plato himself with Dionysius. For if this is the one true and just and sufficient defence and excuse on Plato's behalf, of all defences, concerning the offences the tyrant committed both while Plato was with him and again after he had withdrawn—namely, that even before he saw Plato and heard his discourses he had done many things of every kind—what prevents us, on behalf of those men too, from saying not that the affairs of the people are on equal footing with those of the tyrants, but rather that the wrongs done before their statesmanship were less than those committed by the tyrants from the start, and that the wrongs done during their statesmanship deserve not equal censure with those of the tyrants from the time they admitted Plato; and what prevents us from saying this very thing in common—that even before those men set about speaking, there were errors at Athens, and if these were less than those of Dionysius, then surely the later ones too were not comparable to his, but were such as men, being human, are likely to err? Come then, let us also consider and go through the things that befell these men. For the people did not so condemn all of them, nor did they suffer these things by a common decree, nor, to begin with, did all suffer the same. How could they? Rather, Themistocles and Cimon were ostracized. But this was not hatred nor estrangement of the people toward them, but there was a law among them concerning these matters, holding—however it held; for I pass over whether one would much praise the law—but at any rate their stumbling was not without excuse, but had, as in such cases, a certain decency, for it came about by law, as I said. And this law was such: they cut down those who stood out, removing them for ten years, and no other charge attached, nor anger as upon a proof of misdeeds. And yet how is it not monstrous, if those whom not even their removers could blame, we shall blame on account of those who removed them?—like men who know nothing

[241048] 243. for certain, but accuse on some hearsay, and that hearsay not even itself clear. But I return to my point: that it was for the sake of restraining high spirits that they devised this form of exile. So then, by this greatest proof it is clear how far these men were from flattery, seeing that, in order that they might bring down their high spirit, for this reason they removed them, for no other thing of all. So that this point too you have, unawares, spoken not against them but on their behalf—you, so clever at watching what is said and refuting others. For they seem to me, reflecting on the calamities that came upon them under the Pisistratids, to wish to allow no one to think himself greater than the many, but that all be on an equal footing of power so far as possible. Were they then acting justly in driving out Cimon and Themistocles? I do not say that. But neither was it altogether shameless; rather, it both had an excuse for themselves and was no unseemly calamity for those men. And if, then, the pretext was not sufficient even for those who did it, for those who suffered it this very thing at least suffices—not to be considered base—or else we should wrong them more grievously than those who cast them out. For if those men conceded this much to themselves and admitted that the city did them no wrong at all, while we shall take even this away and add slander to their misfortune, how shall we not be harsher to them than their exile, or how shall we not wrong them more than those who wronged them from the start? So then, and for these reasons, having removed Cimon, they brought him back even thus within the appointed time, while Themistocles, in my opinion, they were prevented from recalling by the Lacedaemonians. For when the affair of Pausanias occurred, at once, falling into despondency and wishing to draw the Athenians along with them—that they might not enjoy the disgrace alone—and at the same time, if that man were left at Athens, fearing lest they should have in him a hard-fighting adversary against all their ends, and besides, bearing a grudge for the deceptions concerning the building of the walls, they accused the absent man and bade them prosecute him together with themselves, using the wickedness of Pausanias

[243317] 244. as a proof against him. But Themistocles, taking the one party's plot and the other's rashness as his provision, and outwitting the King as he was wont, was deprived of his return, yet showed himself sufficient to himself against every fortune.

[243568] And so much for the affairs of Themistocles and Cimon. As for Pericles and Miltiades, the people did them no harm, neither greater nor lesser; but judges sitting in court fined each of them with money, being some small fraction of all the Athenians. Again, then, even when these things had so befallen, the whole people chose Pericles as general none the less, and entrusted everything to him, as the same witness shows whom we just now produced concerning him. And Miltiades died first—not because the judges condemned him to death, nor, as you say, because he would even have been cast into the pit, had it not been for the chief magistrate, but because his wound had become gangrenous. And of these things there are many, or rather all, as witnesses. It is clear, then, from the fact that they were reconciled with Pericles and once and for all entrusted the city to him, after the conviction for theft, as you call it, that they would have done this very thing toward Miltiades too, had not the workings of fortune prevented it. Consider, then, in what circumstances those who condemned Pericles condemned him—since you said that it was at the end of Pericles' life that they convicted him of theft. For so long as the city was at peace, he had no charge among them, neither greater nor lesser, but was admired on equal terms with the gods; and still earlier, having led out many armies of the Athenians against those unwilling to abide by what was just, he was not only blameless but in some great measure

[245080] 245. first. But when at once they were compelled to be deprived of their land, and the plague lay upon them destroying everything, and there was no respite from troubles, then indeed, overcome by their calamities, they grew harsh toward him. And here recall to mind for me the example of the charioteers. For perhaps you will be caught by your own chariots and not by their wings. At any rate Nestor was the most skilled with horses, as is said, of those in his day. And Homer, among few, calls him "horseman" in his verses. So that, even in the games over Patroclus, going up to Antilochus, who was about to send down his chariot, and adding the remark that Zeus and Poseidon had taught him all horsemanship from his very boyhood, and though there was no great need to teach him, he nonetheless suggests and points out to him some of the things for the course, and how he shall conduct the contest. So great was his abundance of knowledge. Yet this man, on an occasion when there was a flight of the Achaeans, remained alone—not willingly, but because his horse was hard pressed, the horse that 'godlike Alexander, husband of fair-haired Helen, struck with an arrow on the very top of the head, where the foremost hairs of horses grow upon the skull, and where the wound is most deadly; and in pain it reared up, and the shaft sank into the brain, and it threw the horses into confusion as it rolled about the bronze.' And neither could the horse any longer obey, because of the affliction and the wound, though all the previous time it had shown itself obedient, nor had Nestor anything he could do—not, indeed, with that horse, but not even with the other horses, thrown into confusion by the suffering. Nay, he could not even easily loose the rein in the tumult, but, as upon a bronze car, he stood waiting—so far as he was not absent from holding still. So utterly was he at a loss, through the crisis and the calamity, though he was the best in the matters of the art. In the same way, I think, Pericles too, so long as nothing was past remedy, held his horses in check, and very readily they listened to him, and they reckoned his voice no whit worse than Nestor's, although indeed he used them in many and various ways,

[247309] 246. both in matters of peace and of war. But when their fodder outside was destroyed, and at home they had fared wretchedly, and there was no room even to turn, but the hardships pressed upon them, dreadful and unceasing, and now their heads and inward parts were burning, now the corpses were seen many, night and day, and everything was full of men rolling and falling and at a loss, and not even the slightest good hope was preserved—then indeed, shut in on all sides and overcome by the strangeness and the excess of their present evils, they shook off the charioteer. But having shaken him off, they had been so well and nobly driven by him in the time before, that they recognized what they had done, and changed their minds, and bowing down again, surrendered to him from the beginning to rule and lead them wherever he would. So, of his horsemanship I do not know, but in discourse he was in no great degree worse than Nestor. So that, if it seems marvellous to you that at the end they condemned him, first of all this very example of the charioteer releases him from the charge. So that he comes nearer the end of Pericles, and they appear, at the very end, to have honoured him, not dishonoured him. But indeed, since both in the time before he had been held in high repute for many successive years, and after the condemnation he was again the greatest of the citizens, how is he not for both reasons enviable—both for the beginning and for the end? For the offence given to the earlier circumstances did not cast its shadow, but the being honoured after this struck off the whole calamity. For the middle is not master of both seasons, but the two together prevail over the middle. For if one must give the vote to the first, he was honoured from the beginning; and if to the later, they did not halt at the point where they condemned him, but turned again to him as

[249191] 247. their better. And indeed it is not merely that two are set against one, but also that the amount of each period of time is not equal nor near it, but that the marvel of his good repute prevails by how much. So that even the middle of the whole time does not come to calamity, but stands for him amid brilliant honour. For the misfortune was a thing of a day, but his primacy was undisputed over the whole of time. So that, even if, dismissing judgement, one must examine fortune, by so much does his good fortune prevail. And indeed the one thing came about by anger, the other belonged to him from the justest judgement; and the one came from a few, the other from all alike. How then are these things equal to those? And indeed one must not think that all who drew the lot condemned the indictment against him, but that there were some who, doing well, voted also for Pericles. These, then, he had made better, and the best. Thus he boasted nobly, it seems, of both the many and the few; so that, if one must rely on the many as witnesses, it was the people who honoured him, and if on the best, he was acquitted at least so far as their part went. And if he did not educate all in succession, nor make all alike, but there are those who escaped his wish and power, what wonder is it, or how could anyone justly be indignant? Indeed not even Socrates educated all who consorted with him, but they accuse Critias the son of Callaeschrus, and they accuse Alcibiades the son of Cleinias, of deliberating the basest things for the city and of living the rest of their life least of all according to Socrates. Was Socrates then, on this account, doing wrong, or because of their baseness was he himself base? I do not think so. Rather, those men did wrong in not showing themselves like Socrates nor obeying his discourses. For if in the things in which they obeyed

[251060] 248. they erred, the charge is Socrates'; but if in the things in which they disobeyed, it is theirs. You, then, by the very things in which you say they refused to obey Pericles, by these you think fit to refute Pericles. And who could make a greater defence on behalf of Miltiades and Themistocles and Pericles than this—that, obeying those men, the Athenians did what was best, but when they refused to do this, then they erred? Thus those men persuaded them to what was best, and the Athenians would always have done what was best, if they had obeyed those men to the end. And yet those who wished to make use of Socrates were with him daily, whereas with Pericles and the other orators the Athenians were together, so to speak, publicly, three days in each month. And indeed, that it is easier to hold two or three than so many at once, and to educate the young in anything at all than men advanced in years and every age in succession, who of all men does not know? Furthermore, Socrates surely enjoined nothing burdensome on those who consorted with him, save only so much as to be temperate, whereas Themistocles and Pericles and Miltiades and Cimon enjoined both to be away from the city and to risk their bodies, and ordered many things involving hardship; in which it is not wonderful if they did not endure once and for all, but rather that they held out so long. Then, releasing Socrates from the charge concerning those men, do you examine these by the wrongs that certain men committed? And indeed, what manner of things those men—I mean Critias and Alcibiades—turned out to be, and of how many great troubles they proved the cause to the city and to the rest of the Greeks, and what manner of education they displayed of their own, the historians tell; but if Plato thinks he says something strong, this—that certain Athenians wronged Miltiades himself—then Critias too laid a penalty on Socrates, and that no slight one, but one which he least accepted. For he forbade him to converse with the young. And yet what is this but a brilliant dishonour? And of this folly he persuaded the others too to take part, all who at that time held the city with him.

[253232] 249. Let us add, then, that no one of Pericles' associates, nor of those from the people, brought that indictment, but one of his political opponents, or rather a man not even rightly and truly acquainted with him; whereas the one who ordered Socrates to keep away from the young and be silent was not one of the sophists nor of the rival craftsmen, but one of those who, when he was young, frequented him. So great, it seems, was the benefit he reaped from his company. Shall we then bring these things against Socrates? Surely we shall not be doing what is just.

[253798] And it seems to me that justice overtook Plato too for his discourse and his censure. I beg him to be gracious and merciful at what is said, if there is any perception in him. And I will not name Dionysius—neither the son of Hermocrates nor the son of Dionysius—nor any of those in Sicily who spent their time with him; but there are those who say, and others again declare that these speak the truth, that when he made his third journey abroad to Sicily, then certain of his companions and of those who had associated with him most closely, having been left behind at home, deliberated revolutionary things, and imitated the Athenians—or rather not the Athenians, but I mean the subjects of the Athenians, the ones who revolt. And yet what they did resembled an uprising of those subjects: they thought fit to set up rival schools against his, near his own, and built upon the Academy, and bade men in general to despise—I will not add the name in this fashion straight off—saying that he was very old and was already out of his wits. So that, my dear Plato, the very lot of Pericles befell you. And just as a moment ago you appeared to share in the fortune of Miltiades and Themistocles and Cimon, each in turn, so for you too the

[255032] 250. fourth, the remaining one, has here come to meet you. For clearly, in just this way, you suffered the same thing as Pericles at the end of your life, and moreover in your old age, and being much older than his age then, were so outraged—if it is lawful to say it. And if Chabrias and Iphicrates, men of the stamp and rank of Pericles and Themistocles—so far as it is possible to liken these to those—had not perceived what was happening and grown indignant, and torn down the fortification, and ordered them in future to be temperate toward you, all that would have been full of tragedy. And yet what shall we say, O best of the Greeks—whether that they then justly dared these things against you, or that you are accountable for their madness? For my part I would say neither. And indeed one could, requiting your discourses, twist them double against you and against Socrates—that, even if these things befell you most unjustly, yet in a way you suffered what befitted, if you displayed such men as those you were educating; and the example of the sophists, which you have used against the demagogues, one might far more justly use against you, inasmuch as those who associated with the sophists are nearer to be likened to those who spent their time with you and Socrates than to those who dealt with Pericles and the men of his circle. So then, if the errors of the associates are accusations against their leaders, you have accused yourself and your companion more than Pericles and those you suppose; and, by Zeus, if you wish, I yield you the "more"—that it is "no less" suffices. But if you are guiltless, those men too, on the same grounds, are likely to be so, if indeed you remember the principle of equality and do not willingly overstep your geometry. And indeed Socrates too appears to have been convicted of the indictment for impiety in his old age, and not only at the end of his life, but having met with this very end of his life. For they assessed his penalty at death. Is it not then strange that, for all that great length of time besides, he conversed and educated those he met, and neither any of the public men bore him ill will

[257192] 251. nor any of those earnest about the poets—but rather one who composed a comedy against him went away defeated, and if it pleased anyone, nothing more came of it then than laughter—yet after so long a time, and when the city was recovering herself from such great evils, and when they had sworn not to bear malice against the wrongdoers, then they took offence at his discourses? But these things were perhaps likely, perhaps not; yet they fell out thus all the same. And nonetheless Socrates is no whit the worse; and we have rendered also the likely arguments on behalf of Pericles, in which it is nothing unfair that Plato too concede, if indeed, as I said a little before, he cares for justice. For again, even this—if someone should ask Plato, supposing he himself had sat as judge over Pericles when he was on trial for theft, whether he would have been among those condemning him, and would have thought the speeches of Cleon worth more than those of Pericles—and when I say this, I mean of the truth—or whether he would not have blushed at what was happening, as I, for one, would maintain stoutly on Plato's behalf, that it is surely impossible to say he would have been like Cleon. Then the man whom you yourself would have acquitted of the charge—him you slander out of this very same charge? And how is it not strange to refuse to believe another saying it, yet to accuse him oneself? And, for the very things on account of which you would deem the speaker worse, on these to think fit that Pericles be considered base? And, blaming us for those who condemned him, to persuade us to join in condemning, as though we were about to share in some worthy thing, and not in what it was not even noble for those men to do? And they themselves did not reckon their own condemnation against him, but honoured him again as worthy and just; while we, against the man whom we have nothing else to accuse, shall dishonour him on account of the trial, and of the same men shall make strong what they erred in, but what, being of sound mind, they did, we shall count for nothing—and that too, while we agree they erred, or rather while we accuse them? And what

[259355] 252. reason this had, I, for one, do not perceive. For to what would there seem to be a limit and an end of the defence on their behalf, if the things Plato charges suffice not? For instance: if the accusation of these men had been made, and the one reviling them had abused these arguments—that among the Athenians themselves they were convicted and paid the penalty as wrongdoers—and then someone had shown that these things came about not rightly nor on all just grounds, but that those who condemned them erred in judgement, or for some other reason voted thus, and not because they had judged them to be wrongdoers, this surely would have sufficed everyone, and they would have thought the matters of the charge sufficiently dissolved. Plato, then, blaming them for what befell them, and saying they were the errors of the multitude, nonetheless takes them up as a refutation against those men, and has accused them of the calamity as of a wrong, examining fortune instead of judgement, and setting down the error of others as belonging to them. And I should gladly ask those attached to him what ever they would have thought fit to say against these men, or what opinion they were persuading us to hold, if they had been able to show this—that on every just ground, with no base pretext, the Athenians condemned them—when he himself, declaring that they had been wronged contrary to law, and likening those who condemned them to kicking horses, thinks he says something strong against those men. Soon enough, if he had been able to liken those who condemned them to the Twelve Gods, he would have refrained from speaking ill of the convicted. Then he says that they did not do these things at the start—as Critias and the others who wronged him did these things straightaway at the beginning—but began to butt many years after, or after they had frequented those men. But even if they did not do these things from the start, they had at any rate in their

[261317] 253. nature, surely, the power even to prevent it—a power wholly greater than belongs to man. But if Plato will accuse the men on both counts, as though he had grasped some clever point, what prevents someone from rendering the like in return, and on both counts again, taking it up contentiously, dissolving the argument thus: that if the Athenians condemned them rightly and justly, then they had not been corrupted by them—for they were doing what was just; therefore neither had those men corrupted them. So that, if they were justly convicted, they were in this respect no whit the worse; but if those men condemned them unjustly, it follows that the men were wronged, but in no way did wrong; and to those who are wronged it is reasonable to bring aid, not to accuse them; and even if it is not possible to bring aid, yet it is not just to accuse. But I leave these things to the cleverer sort; what do I myself say, and how do I take the argument? It is not just to accuse both at once, both the people and those men; or we shall plainly be slandering one of the two. For if those decisions were rightly made, those men, it seems, were doing wrong, and what befitted has been done by the people. So that it is surely not just to accuse him of these things. How then, likening him to the savage beasts, shall we rightly say we are acting? But if the people erred, both the error has been committed by them and the reproach of the men is dissolved. For we say, surely, that the Athenians erred in this very thing—in assessing against those men a penalty of exile, or of money, or of whatever they assessed for each. But what does this argument say? That those men were worthy of none of these things. And indeed, if they were doing wrong, they were worthy of them. But since they were not worthy of them, it is clear that they were not doing wrong. And to speak ill of and slander those who do no wrong is in no way to act justly.

[263254] We, then, instead of accusing both, make on behalf of both the fitting defence, neither saying that the people

[263366] 254. bear the blame for everything, nor that those men should be considered worse if they stumbled at all. And we show that, there being four men, the people did not even lay a hand on two of them, and of the two they were thought to condemn, they did not even condemn these as wrongdoers, but, like children, thought fit that they withdraw before them as before a teacher. Again, then, in each pair, one is found to have met with the justest kindness from the people—the one returning within the appointed time, the other holding a generalship before he had paid the fine, and being master of all things, even of those who condemned him. How could anyone make a finer defence on behalf of both—if one must say something of the truth even concerning Plato's own arguments? If, then, the people had condemned all, and afterwards had shown no kindness to any one of them, not even thus would it have been just to say against both the wrongs committed by the others, and to think fit to render to neither the things that belonged to both for their good repute. For if from these things alone both the Athenians in common and their leaders were judged, it would be well to reproach with them; but if there are other things, better and more numerous than these—and you yourself have most nobly agreed; for at last you somewhere said that they fell into these troubles late, since in all the earlier time both those men did as they wished and the people showed itself such as it ought—how was it not right to imitate the practice of the Persians? For with them, they say, there is a law that, if any of them incurs some base charge, they do not condemn him beforehand, not even if he is convicted, until, having examined side by side both the things he did well and the things he did badly, they find the worse to prevail; but when the benefactions stand foremost, the law commands that even manifest wrongdoers be let off. Then, among the

[265301] 255. barbarians it is so; but shall Plato, the best of the Greeks and the one knowing in human affairs—and I will add, in divine ones too—think fit that a man should succeed in everything together and master everything, and that too not only in the things over which his judgement is master, but also in all that pertains to fortune; or that the one who has stumbled even a little be worth nothing? We shall then seem to accuse not those men only, but the whole of human nature. But look, if you will, again to your own examples. For you will find that neither do the good charioteers win everything in succession, nor do they make such a promise, nor do the horses themselves run as if upon stated terms; rather, even the horses of Miltiades and of Cimon, reputed to have been the best, did not carry off all the contests, nor win continuously the whole time they lived. Nor again do I say that the best pilots always save all who sail with them, but that already some, overcome by a thunderbolt and a storm, have made use of a fortune mightier than their art; and that, altogether, all of them yield to Poseidon, and so it is written even in the records: "If the ship be saved, to do this and that." But that the ship will be saved, no one yet has promised. These are the things to which Homer too, looking, said: "Common is the War-god, and he slays the man that would slay." For he knew the weakness of human nature, and a sufficient example of this argument is at hand from the very text. For the mightiest of the Greeks, Achilles, is surely portrayed by him as such, and that by far; while of the barbarians, Paris is almost the softest of all, so that Hector often casts cowardice in his teeth, brother though he is, and calls him "Evil-Paris" with the addition. But nonetheless Achilles shut up all the rest of the army of the Trojans within their wall and easily slew Hector at the gates. And Paris in turn—or Evil-Paris—he so much worse than Hector, is sung as having slain Achilles himself at these very same gates. So that from the

[267346] 256. utmost extremes on either side—I mean of courage and of cowardice—the verse is confirmed; and I think that not only is the War-god common, but Hermes too might justly be heard called "common." And if the proverb means to show this, or at least includes it, let this too stand as a witness; but if it has come about for some other reason, let us at least add this much—that the god would justly bear this title too, since indeed he is a god of contests. For the affairs of the crowned victors, I think, are much like those of war: no one prevails so much as he wishes, nor so as to be able to declare beforehand that he will go off victorious. And even now the spectacle of the Olympics makes this clear, ever bringing the greatest surprise—as, for instance, they say once befell Polydamas. For that man used to stop running chariots, yet at Olympia he was defeated by some small adversary. But surely Polydamas, I think, was in no respect, on the whole, worse than his opponent, nor would he justly be robbed of his whole reputation on this account. And it is not in the case of athletes only that it so falls out, while the matters of music hold the victory fixed for the better; rather here too the saying of Pindar prevails. For very truly did he sing this: "In deeds it is fortune, not strength, that conquers." Sophocles was defeated by Philocles among the Athenians with his Oedipus—O Zeus and gods!—a Philocles to whom not even Aeschylus had anything to say. Was Sophocles then, on this account, worse than Philocles? Nay, it is a disgrace to him merely to hear this—that he was better than Philocles. Countless other things one could mention; but how does Homer report the contest that took place over Patroclus? Were not the best of the horses, the Thessalian mares which Eumelus drove, "swift as birds," last of all on that occasion? And Eumelus himself falls out of the chariot, never having suffered this before, but remaining mounted, and that too while borne, as upon birds, by his

[269348] 257. horses—a thing not easy for any of the others. So that even Achilles, seeing him, pitied him and says: "The best man drives his single-hoofed horses last." Is it not then paradoxical to set thus side by side, in succession, and call the same man both "last" and "best"? But nonetheless he says that human things are such—for this, I think, is the intent of the words—the same man both best and last; the very thing they say Orontes the Persian once said about the finger, that, being the same in itself, by its position it sometimes signifies the ten-thousands and sometimes no more than one. So that to me Eumelus seems to bear directly on Plato's example, both in other respects and in this—that he was not only robbed of victory, but had his elbows and mouth and nostrils torn by those best of horses, and by the very ones by which he had never before been thrown, but, driving them wherever he wished, was always admired above all men. But Ajax, by Zeus, the swiftest of the Greeks at running and the one who in pursuits caught the most, of whom this was said: "For there was no man like him to follow with his feet, when men were fleeing, when Zeus stirred up panic"—this man too reaped such-and-such other fruits of his running: running naked and clear of enemies, he went off both robbed of victory and besides filled with dung. "For Athena harmed him," says the poet; and it was this same Athena who also cast Eumelus out of his chariot. What does he mean by this? Signifying fortune through Athena, as it seems to me, that human things turn wherever she wishes, and the prizes do not in every case go to those who excel. And the other Ajax, by Zeus, the son of Telamon, the great bulwark of the Achaeans, who was instead of a wall to the Greeks—not he only, but his shield too—this man, as for how he fared concerning the discus, it would perhaps be of less account to say, though he was wont to have in his two hands a spear

[271289] 258. "fitted with rivets, two-and-twenty cubits long," and, sweeping all the Trojans before it and driving them from the ships, surely he was likely to handle the discus easily and to show up as children Polypoetes and the rest—the likely winner, that is. But let us grant that this requires some other kind of skill; well then, how did he fare concerning the wrestling? And if this too was less, yet at least taking up his arms, in which he was at his greatest and finest and strongest and most robust, he caused much tumult among the Greeks. The rest I pass over; but they feared for him more than for Diomedes. So he fared here too. And yet the herald proclaimed, when once a review of all the Achaeans was being held, thus: "Of men again far the best was Telamonian Ajax." And not once, nor saying only this much, did he take his leave, but, as if on purpose, everywhere he keeps proclaiming and bearing witness: "And of Ajax, who was the best in form and frame of the other Danaans, after the blameless son of Peleus," and "Ajax, who was preeminent in form and preeminent in deeds," and "and great Telamonian Ajax would not yield to any man," and other such things—as though forestalling our judgements, that we might not be confounded at the contest, nor, if he fought worse than some other in something, on that account consider him baser, nor worse than any other of the Achaeans except Achilles. And indeed his brother too shared with him an added measure of fortune—Teucer, in the matter of archery; for he hit the cord, but let the dove itself be taken by another, and that one worse than himself.

[272899] All these things, in succession, being so—what must one think them to be? Must one not consider them as certain oracles regarding all human affairs? So that, neither if anyone seems to excel in bodily strength or in size, nor if anyone has acquired the best horses, nor if he is swift himself or fair, is any of these things master for him, unless

[273248] 259. it seems good to the higher powers. If you are strong in friends, if in money, if you have reputation in the city, be lifted up by none of these, nor think bigger than your power. If you master all things, you will be mastered by fortune. This is that contest; this is what Homer says. Nothing of human affairs is secure or level or self-sufficient; rather, the strong will be overcome by the weak, when there is a season for it, and Babylon will be taken, walls and all, and again others will sack the Persians. All these things come round in alternation. So too your own saying, Plato, is preserved—that man is the plaything of god. When the charioteer falls out of the chariot in which he before stood firmly, and the pilot is at a loss how to save the ship, having already saved it many times, and the better man is made dizzy by the worse, and the slow overtakes the swift, and everything goes round, up and down, then one might see your argument, then truly it would seem to be that of some prophet—that god and fortune lead all things, and that all that is ours was, after all, but play. But if all the pilots saved all who sailed, and all the physicians saved all the sick, and the better always conquered, and the greater conquered, and this attended all these always, and none of those who began to succeed ever failed, and prayer and power differed in nothing, then all the affairs of men would be immortal, and there would perhaps be no further need of prayer, nor would the one jar wash over us, as now. But as it is, the poets, in many ways useful, are stationed here too and accompany us, ever reminding us of our nature, calling us creatures of a day and walkers upon the ground, and in every way purging away our arrogance, that not even if anyone seems to fare well should he by this

[275056] 260. grow bold, nor lightly cast fortune in the teeth of another who has stumbled somewhere. And what need is there to tell how the rest stands?

[275202] But how did the matters of the lawcourts stand from the beginning? For let us come now to the very chief point. Palamedes, being the wisest of the Achaeans, was convicted at the trial for treason. And you will not say that the Athenians condemned that man. Rather, all Greece had come together, and the trial took place in the midst of them, and he was thought to be doing wrong; but that he was not justly thought so, you yourself say in the Apology of Socrates. And yet who would not say that there is great absurdity in this—that he, being more authoritative than Odysseus in respect of wisdom, as Pindar said, was then defeated by his inferior, and that too when the matter had not come to a trial of hands, nor to anything else of the kind, but to this very thing in which he was the better? And again, that the Achaeans, having received from him so many great benefits, for which it befitted them to love and admire him, then returned so thankless and unlike a recompense—he who had become their leader in nearly everything, both serious matters and those for delight of soul. And one thing greatest and most perfect and worthy of the most honour he discovered—tactics, by which it was theirs at once to be safe and to be superior to their enemies. For, as the tragedy says, they differed in nothing even from the grazing beasts before consorting with him. And they were so far from being able to number them all together, or to count how many ships they were leading, that they were not even going to find how many in number their kings were, both Agamemnon and Menelaus—nor, it seems, those men their own feet, or even their hands, each of them, far less the army. But these things Plato jests with us about the tragedians, and we have jested along. The point, then—that, owing Palamedes thanks for many great things, and justly bound to pay them even for

[277067] 261. greater, they did not remember him even in the matter of their very salvation—how would one not say it is of great absurdity, and that that very man cleverly contrived all else, yet was at a loss for the things of his own defence, and that too when it was so easy and the very facts came to his aid? But concerning others he was wise, yet himself he could not help, and that too though running the race for his life, who ought—even if he were being tried among the Trojans—taken up by his wisdom, to have been able to save himself. But he went off, having met with friends and allies and those to whom he was a benefactor harder than enemies, and finding all the other devices, found not one—how he should be saved. But when they condemned him of wrongdoing, they did not do the same as the Athenians; for they did not assess money, nor exile, nor remove him so much as ten years, but killed him outright. So then, so far as fighting not to one's mind and getting the worse of slanderers, the company of Pericles shares with Palamedes in our fortune; but the things that follow even differ, and the Athenians appear far gentler than all the Greeks together, and the orators in turn to have stumbled more mildly than the orators of old, and in this at least to be wiser than Palamedes, in that—if nothing else—they were able to persuade them that they were not worthy of death at the Athenians' hands; not, as that man, who was not even useful to himself in the matter of the penalty. But I think that Palamedes and Miltiades and Pericles and all men share in the common defence which Plato himself supplies, which I mentioned a moment ago—that fortunes and seasons lead the affairs of men—since even what he further corrected and added, setting beside god and fortune art as the third, he defined while of sound mind. At any rate he says thus: "More gently, however, one must concede, as the third, that art should follow these." Most excellently, and most divinely, Plato, in very truth. If, then, in both order and power art is third,

[279110] 262. how could it ever be sufficient once and for all? Or how could anyone think fit that the least and basest of things should master the more numerous and the greater? It cannot justly be so. Do not wonder, then, if Pericles, having knowledge and art, was overcome by god and fortune; nor be forgetful of the seasons, which you yourself say avail not a little, and which that man at that time clearly used when they were not at all gentle. Many surprising things both have come about and will come about among men. Among these are also the things that befell these men. Who would not say so? But these things are not yet a proof against them—that they neither knew anything good nor were able to make men better; rather, it was possible for them surely both to have the art and to be good, even if at that time, at least, they were deprived of the greater aids. Nor let us say that they proved inferior to their adversaries—no indeed, not we—but that, like men slipping, they were superior on the whole. Cleon prevailed over Pericles. Yet this same Cleon prevailed also, as he thought, over the Lacedaemonians once, and even led them bound in fetters to Athens, and—what seems greater than this—having foretold the time when he set out, and that not the longest, but only of twenty days; yet that he was not very much superior to the Lacedaemonians, Amphipolis showed, fighting against which he gave Brasidas no great work. But even when Brasidas was dead, a Myrcinian peltast sufficed to slay him fleeing, with a cast, as the informant says. And this same writer says, too, concerning the dead on either side, that no small difference came about; for seven, I think, he reckons against six hundred. So then in the trial too it was not the speeches of Pericles nor his knowledge that he overcame, nor did he prevail over him as over an ignorant man, but he profited from the season, just as at Pylos too he made use of fortune and the season; since Pericles, even dead, prevailed over Cleon, if one must tell the truth. And there is a great sign:

[281160] 263. for there was no one who would not have prayed that the one rise again, so that even in the dramas they took delight in seeing him as risen; but the other, there is no one who would not have wished to lie dead in his stead. By so much was Pericles, dead, better than that man living.

[281450] Leave these things, then, to the slanderers, and do you in turn remember something of your own. For that it is nothing impossible nor unlikely that those who speak the very best things on behalf of the people should give offence to the people—but that this very thing fairly becomes a cause of their calamities, the not being willing to depart from the rightest judgement—one need not learn by hearing it from the seers; rather, Plato the son of Ariston, worth many peoples and cities, testifies expressly, speaking thus, and that too in the very passage where Socrates was in danger, not justly so. What then are the words? "For there is no man who will be safe, neither for you nor for any other multitude, who genuinely opposes and prevents many unjust and lawless things from coming to pass in the city; rather it is necessary that the one who truly fights for justice, if he is to be safe even a little while, lead a private life and not a public one." Very well, my friend. Then do you still wonder if Miltiades and Themistocles and Pericles and Cimon gave offence to the Athenians, telling them the best things and avoiding what was toward pleasure? But indeed you yourself said that from this very source the dangers were set in motion, and that it was not possible to escape them even for a little while. Whether then is it wonderful if they gave offence, and is this worthy to accuse them of, or is that other thing far more worthy to admire in them—that they held out for so great a time, and neither suffered this sooner nor, even when they did give offence, were punished with death; rather the people took some middle course, and on the one hand, being so well and nobly led by them, was ashamed and preserved a certain stamp of mildness, but on the other was not able to escape the nature of the thing, but took at least some part in the errors that befit a populace? And gladly

[283345] 264. would I ask, whoever wishes to accept the question on Plato's behalf—but what, after all, did Plato himself learn, that he did not take part in public affairs? Would anyone whatever say anything other than this very thing which Socrates too appears to say to him? What else indeed? Then the very things which, fearing lest you should suffer them, you did not address the assembly—if one of those men has suffered these things, do you insist that he was not giving the best counsel? And indeed, if there was no danger at all, why did you benefit your fatherland in nothing? But if it was ready at hand to perish, why do you wonder if one of those men met with calamity, and—while you yourself, setting it down that danger follows upon speaking the best things, follow that principle—do you deprive those men, on account of the misfortunes they met, of the credit of speaking the best things? Come then, let us also consider this: when it was possible, in choosing to do what is just, to receive some such thing from them, which of the two, by the gods—how could I fittingly put it—are more public-spirited in judgement, and, even if not wholly better, at least more useful to the city: those who, foreseeing the danger present, then stood out of the way, or those who, knowing it, did not shrink back? For to me it seems that to say nothing base is common to both, but that to undertake to say the best things, rather than not to speak at all, belongs to those men as no part of the baser sort. For even if they erred somewhat, in what they chose, one will say they prevail. If then they not only chose, but also succeeded in many noble and just things, and things of common benefit, let it not turn to their disadvantage. For this, surely, it is open to them to say. And if this too may be asked—which of the two have deliberated and done things more in accord with the argument of Socrates himself and of Plato? Which argument do I mean by this? The one which is, I think, the finest of all arguments. Which is this? "You do not speak well, my man, if you think that a man in whom there is even a little use ought to take into account the risk of living or dying, but not rather to look to this alone, whenever he acts—whether he does just or unjust things, and the works of a good man or of a bad." So then, since those men appear to have taken into account none

[285716] 265. of the troubles that were to be theirs, in comparison with justice, but to have given themselves unsparingly and simply on behalf of the common good, they have used the argument of Socrates. So that either it must be shown that the things they chose and undertook were neither just nor the deeds of good men, or it must be conceded that the men were worthy, even if anything whatever befell them—and by so much the more and the more greatly, as they did not fear the difficulty of the undertaking. For base they would be, by your own argument—and I now speak the very words of Plato—those of the demigods who died at Troy, both the others and the son of Thetis, who so despised the danger, set against enduring anything shameful, that when his mother told him—and I say all that follows upon this. For surely we shall not praise those of the Greeks who went to Troy, because they chose to die nobly, yet judge by what befell them those who, if they should suffer anything troublesome from public life, did not put it first nor surrender the best to fear; nor shall we say that those who grew indignant on behalf of one woman outraged used the reckoning of good men, while those who stood forth as champions of all Greece, when they were in danger on behalf of children together with women and temples and tombs and all that is, these we shall enroll among the cooks, leaving it to the demigods to judge; nor, if someone, avenging a friend, endured to die, shall we send him to the Isles of the Blessed, but if certain men set themselves, in place of all else, on behalf of the whole city and the affairs of the Greeks, then, if anything ever afterward befell them, shall we add the being ill spoken of. Not, at least, so long as we keep the arguments concerning justice. For it was fitting to take away their calamities from good men, if somehow it were possible, rather than, having nothing to do this with, to trample, as the saying goes, on those who lie fallen.

[287688] I wish, then, to make brief mention of Demosthenes of Paeania as well, for it would be nothing the worse, especially as the discourse is about orators. And I shall make mention only so far as bears upon these men. How then did that man, concerning these same men . . .

[287958] 266. He has addressed himself to this, when Aeschines had charged that Demosthenes was unworthy of the crown, and had set him beside his predecessors, and all but laid him under compulsion, so as to be drawn into speaking even against his own judgement and to contend against those men because of Aeschines' slander. Yet Demosthenes, very gently and soberly and in a manner worthy of himself, turned his vehemence against Aeschines, while he kept his fair words for those men. For he says, as I recall, this: "And then you make mention of the good men of former times; and you do well." Now first, this little touch of his addition—"and you do well"—how is it not at once kindly and noble? It is not as Plato says, "You do not do well, Callicles, in making mention of these men as good; for they were not such." And then, so far was he from attempting to take away from the glory those men already possessed, in order that he himself might seem the greater, that he has referred his own policy back to theirs, declaring it to have the same aims. For he speaks thus, so far as I remember: "And indeed, if this too must be said, my own policy and purpose, if anyone examines it rightly, will be found to resemble that of the men praised in those days, and to aim at the same things, whereas yours resembles that of those who in those days brought false charges against such men." And yet there were three things, the greatest of all, that he might have said in extravagant praise of his own policy. First, that the circumstances of the times were not the same either for the Athenians or for the rest of the Greeks then and in his own day; rather, those men displayed their virtue when affairs were flourishing, while he came forward to the leadership of public affairs when all was sick and all but already ruined. Second, that the affairs of his adversaries were not comparable either, but he stood against men keen and formidable and well-drilled, and these too sharing his borders and dwelling close by, men who used at once the herald's staff and the sword, and who stripped most of his resources from out of the dark.

[290081] 267. He himself appointed himself to the struggle and demanded it of the city, and things that not even seers could have foreseen or foretold he was forced at one and the same time to predict and to ward off. Third, besides these, that he, almost alone one might say, set himself against the fortune that bore down upon the Greeks, when those who shared his purpose and worked with him were few indeed, while those who spoke and acted for the opposite side were marvelously many—men over whom to prevail was far harder than over open and external enemies. Yet even so, out of disadvantages so many and so great, he draws up a kind of catalogue of allies and resources and forces, which he gathered for them by the most just means, speaking of these somewhere on his own account in the speech, even before making mention of these men. And having mentioned them, he says nothing further of that kind, but though he possessed the points of superiority I have described, he did not give them pain; he thought it enough to call his own policy like to theirs. And he even assigned the superiority to them, speaking thus: "And consider this too, and weigh it: which is the finer and better course for the city—on account of the benefits of its predecessors, which were exceedingly great, indeed no one could say how great, to lead those who do good in the present life into ingratitude and outrage; or that all who do anything with goodwill should have a share in the honour and kindness that comes from these men?" So here in this way; but elsewhere again, speaking before the Athenians many years earlier and using all freedom, persuading them to choose what is best rather than what is pleasant, though he might without making mention of the orators of old have carried through the matter of his theme, he introduced, like a serviceable episode, a reminder of Pericles and of others, speaking thus: "But I hold it the part of a just citizen to choose the safety of affairs rather than the favour that comes from speaking. For I hear—as perhaps you also do—that those who spoke in the days of our ancestors, whom all who come forward praise but by no means imitate, used this custom and this manner of statesmanship: that Aristides, that Nicias, my own namesake, that Pericles." Two things, then, one might note in these words.

[292405] 268. One, that not from necessity but out of abundance and from a reasonable conviction he made mention of these men and praised them; the other, that he attributed to them the very opposite of what Plato charged them with. For Plato treats them as flatterers and slaves, servants of pleasure, who looked to nothing beyond this; whereas Demosthenes praises them plainly as men who used the most just freedom of speech, and who nowhere set the giving of favour above what is best, uttering the very same word as Thucydides. For Thucydides too, as we showed in the earlier discussions, says that Pericles possessed a marvelous degree of liberty and frankness, since he led the people rather than was led by them, and did not look to what he might say to gratify them, but counselled them what he held to be best for them. And somewhere too he praises Nicias for practising every virtue. So honourably and consistently has Demosthenes spoken concerning these men.

[293367] Come then, let us examine what follows upon this with all goodwill, as in some common assembly of the Greeks. Both men, in every respect, are at the summit, and their speeches too concern great matters. But as for the standing of the speaker himself, let each set it where he will; let it stand so for now. What I wished to say is this: which of the two was the more humane in his whole judgement and the more skilful about the words themselves in this particular respect—the one who, with no necessity upon him, chose to speak ill of these men, or the one who, though provocation was present, was not led on and did not see fit to exalt himself in passages where he was about to speak ill of others, and again, with no necessity upon him, deliberately mentioned the best of their qualities? Unless to someone rhetoric appears inferior to dialectic. And yet I, for my part, thought these were not so very separate from one another, but that dialectic was a certain part of rhetoric, like questioning a part of the whole of speech, and that they stand in the same relation in which runners share in

[294466] 269. walking—though not all who walk are able to run—so do the rhetorical stand to the dialectical. But Plato I exempt from this account, for he is competent in both. Yet he shall not get away from us by leading us along with his words about these men, since that I gathered the faculties together not without reason nor unfittingly Plato himself joins in voting; for this too is perhaps not beside the matter. For when, discoursing on the correctness of names, he says that the heroes were orators, and again dialecticians, then surely he bears witness to both: that rhetoric is not the work of flatterers but of certain heroes—so that it is not fitting to liken those who practise it to cooks, but rather to heroes—and again that dialectic belongs to rhetoric. For when he joins the dialecticians to the heroes through the middle term of the name of orators, how does he not bear witness to what I say? But about these things I do not contend. What I now wish to show is this: that not only from the testimony of Demosthenes and Thucydides and Aeschines, but also from what Plato himself has conceded in these very dialogues—and, by Zeus, in this very part of his discourse in which he treats of these men—it follows that all his abuse was uttered in vain and is false; if I do not seem to anyone to be meddlesome in examining everything too exactly. Yet I wish to say this much by way of preface: if I should be convicted of falsehood, I give leave to anyone who wishes to wipe it all out, and I shall be grateful besides; but if, speaking the truth, I shall not speak most pleasantly to all, that would be another matter. The truth, at any rate—that one ought to honour it—many have said, yet there is none more worthy of credit than Plato. And it is now possible to consider what I say. For all his discourse about these men set out, I take it, from this: that there being two methods, the one to converse for the sake of pleasure, the other for the sake of what is best, the orators belong to those that look to gratification, and so harangue for

[296520] 270. their own private advantage, looking to nothing else. And having mentioned these men too—because Callicles had exempted them—wishing to show that they were like the rest and no better, but were themselves also servants and such as fill men's desires, when he had charged what he wished and reproached them with their misfortunes, then, as if forgetting his first premises, or rather the whole theme, he added at the end: "So that if they were such orators, they used neither the true rhetoric—for then they would not have been cast out—nor the flattering kind." Hold now, in the gods' name. How could anyone more be convicted of saying things contrary to himself than one who, while arguing that they were flatterers and contending for this, then says again himself that they did not use the flattering art; and again, for the charges from which he absolved them he condemns them; and through the very points by which he was eager to convict them he was forced to acquit them, while through the points by which he absolved those whom he accused of flattery, through these he claims to convict rhetoric as flattery; and at one moment says these men are on a level with the rest, and at the same moment that they did not use flattery, while charging the rest with flattery? And indeed, if they deserve to be called servants and flatterers, why do you say that they did not use the flattering art? But if again they had no share in the flattering art, how do you place them among the flatterers? See whether these things do not agree with one another, but whether Callicles may not truly be entitled to give back the saying of Amphion—that Plato, in these matters at least, does not accord with himself. And yet which of his arguments must one believe—those that accuse and slander these men, or those that absolve them? For he began as an accuser, but ended like a witness come to testify on their behalf. And indeed, if he were going—for this is now the strongest point—to show them by his charges to be in some manner flatterers, and were to stand his discourse there, then perhaps, even if he charged things that were not true,

[298655] 271. still he would have seemed to have some advantage from his words; but when, having said all that he thought he had against them, he then, like a juror who has heard another speaker, acquitted them of the charge, what is the use of the words? Or how has it not been all at once said both falsely and in vain? For if they were not going to appear such as he wished to show them to be, why was it necessary to slander them to no purpose? For where, even if they had been most thoroughly convicted, there still remained the argument on behalf of all rhetoric—that it is not such a thing—how is it likely that it should seem to be refuted by the very men acquitted of the charge? And as for saying that they did not even use the true rhetoric, "for they would never have been cast out," how is this not now monstrous and contrary to that other argument of his which we showed a little before—that it is not possible for one who speaks for what is just before a popular assembly to come off safe?

[299652] But let us recall his words again and set side by side what he says there and what he says here. "For there is no man who will come off safe, opposing genuinely either you or any other multitude and hindering many unjust and unlawful things from being done in the city; rather, it is necessary that the man who truly means to fight on behalf of justice, if he is to be safe even for a little while, should live a private life and not act in public." Come then, what does he say here? "For no leader of a city would ever be unjustly destroyed by the very city he leads." These statements, by Zeus, how could anyone say they are of the same mind or come to the same conclusion—at once that the man who aids justice must of necessity be destroyed by the city he leads, and at the same time, if he is destroyed, that he can never have suffered this unjustly at the hands of the city he leads? Where is there any likeness in this, or how do they come to the same point? And even if it were most certainly the case that they used neither the true rhetoric nor the flattering kind—let us grant it—I think it was still not fitting to speak ill of them. For why should one suppose them rather flatterers and base if they did not use the

[300881] 272. true rhetoric, than serious and good men because they did not use the flattering kind? For if their speeches and purposes were midway between these, they were surely not those of flatterers nor of base men. You yourself, at any rate, call the things midway between good and evil no more evil than good. For how could even this still be left to them—to be midway between the two—if they were held fast in one of them? So that why should one blame them rather than praise them, if they had part in neither—neither in the honourable nor in the base? But I wonder what he would ever have done, or what fair words he would have granted them, had he meant to convict flattery, when, though his own argument carried him to the point that they could have no share in this thing, he yet did not shrink from charging things that nowhere held true. But indeed, when you yourself drew this distinction of two kinds, and called the one true rhetoric and the other the flattering kind, how do you accuse rhetoric outright as flattery, and where you acquitted the men you accused, how do you convict the rhetoric which you yourself have also called good? Well then: in what other type of speech did they engage, or in what manner did they play the orator? For if they spoke neither as men taking care nor as men granting favour, some other manner was left to them. And if there is yet some third kind besides these, you at least made no mention of it, but you distinguished these two methods—the one to converse for pleasure, the other for what is best. So that when they conversed neither for pleasure nor for what is best, for what then did they converse? Or how have they not escaped your own boundaries, which you set for them as though to catch them past all escape and beyond doubt? But let no one of those favourable to those men suppose rather of you wise men that, more than anything, you used toward the people neither the true rhetoric nor the flattering kind. For this, I take it, would lie in

[302878] 273. keeping quiet. And yet, since you yourselves appear to have used neither of these, what dreadful thing has been done by those men, if even in haranguing they used neither? But perhaps it was necessary to use the one or the other, since they spoke at all, and it was not possible for them to fall short of both. That they set out to serve, then, Plato alone has said; but that their conduct was not of this kind, all declare, and besides, Plato himself has agreed. So that the one charge he alone brought, if he himself is found to dissolve it, it remains that the original opinion prevails—that they were good citizens and harangued for what is best. I, for my part, would rather say this than that, being orators, they used neither kind of rhetoric. And I consider this too: that if rhetoric is flattery, they must outright be shown to have used flattery, since they were orators. So how does he either absolve them of the charge, or call some rhetoric true? But if again rhetoric is good or serious, they must be held to care for what is best. So how does he either accuse them of not speaking for what is best, or call rhetoric flattery? But if again rhetoric is twofold, and one part of it is flattery and base haranguing, the other the championship of what is just, it follows clearly enough that they had a share at least in the one part. How then do you deprive them of both? And indeed, if you justly deprive them of both, there would be a third rhetoric again, beside both these two. So that on this argument rhetoric is no longer twofold, and Plato has surely not shown what this third kind is. And indeed, if there is something midway between speaking for pleasure and speaking for what is best, even so it was not fitting that they should be ill spoken of. For even if they did not harangue for what is best, at least they did not harangue for pleasure. Not only, then, from the points by which he absolved them of the charge of flattery is he shown to have made his abuse of them in vain, but also from the points by which he praised Aristides so brilliantly along with

[304967] 274. those men. For if he had no one at all to praise, and could not find any orator who had been just and good, then perhaps one might have said that he came to this point—of convicting these men—out of abundance, that he might from every quarter confirm his argument against rhetoric. But for one about to praise anyone whatever, what gain was there in speaking ill of these? For the question was not which of the statesmen was best, nor whether Aristides was better than these, but whether it lies within rhetoric to speak on behalf of justice. So that when anyone whatever was found to be such, it amounted to the same thing as if any one of these too had been found such. And as for declaring that there had been others both at Athens and elsewhere, and, by Zeus, adding that there would be such, yet for all that coming to such a pitch of contentiousness against these men—what reason has it? For the former was to seem to be in earnest about the matter, but the latter to have wished to speak ill of certain persons privately. So that if they were justly accused, nothing more is gained for the arguments against rhetoric; but if they heard what was not fitting, on either count the abuse is in vain. But I think that, at once ashamed before the arguments spoken against them and overcome by the truth, he healed the evil not with evil—and yet not honourably—but rather refuted the evil with good, by rendering Aristides his due. And yet, if no orator is decent, why do you adorn this man? But if this man at least is clearly just, what more do you gain from their wickedness? For even if you do convict them, you do what you wish for nothing; for rhetoric is no more base on the whole. Whence, then, was he led into this? And how does he appear to say these things and those at once? Hence that question: "Do you think that the orators always speak for what is best, aiming at this, that the citizens may become as good as possible through their words, or do these too, set upon gratifying the citizens and, for the sake of their own private advantage, making light of the common good, consort with the

[307079] 275. peoples as with children, trying only to gratify them, and care nothing whether they will become better or worse on this account?" For he ought, if he most wished to speak ill of rhetoric, to have avoided the question, since it is twofold for the one who is to take it up, and to have carried it through plainly, just as he did the examples—I mean the case of the pilot and of the engineer and the rest. But as it is, since the answer was not forced from one side, nor capable of capture on both, he splits the theme and assigns the second alternative to Callicles, no doubt, and says, "This is no longer a simple question that you ask. For there are some who, caring for the citizens, say what they say, and there are also such as you describe." "By Zeus," one might say, "for this is the very thing you are eager for: to show and distinguish that rhetoric is twofold, the one for what is best, the other for pleasure." But I shall think it right to inquire whether rhetoric is twofold or not, when we examine also whether philosophy is twofold, and medicine too and navigation, on account of those who, in each of the sciences, err from what is needful. And I would say many things—first, that it was not so put in the arguments against Polus, but quite simply rhetoric was there called an image of a part of statesmanship; next, that even if he most fully supposed rhetoric to be twofold, it was not in the arguments in which he had purposed to speak ill of it that he ought to appear praising it, nor to be acquitting from the very points by which he convicted. For it is one thing to declare it twofold, and another, while trying to show it outright base, to be unable to do so. For how is it not absurd—if he had convicted it of being flattery, this would stand strong, but since he was nowhere able to teach this, to take refuge in saying that it is twofold? And the greatest of all: if he thought it right to praise some of the orators and to speak ill of others, why then did Socrates take it as sufficient when he had assumed these very things, saying:

[309148] 276. "For if this too is twofold, the one part of it would be flattery and base haranguing, and the other noble—to make provision that the souls of the citizens may be as good as possible, and to fight it out by saying what is best, whether it be more pleasant or less pleasant to the hearers." Having so set it down and distinguished it, again he inclined contentiously toward the other side, adding: "But you have never yet seen this rhetoric; or if you can name any of the orators of this kind, why have you not told me too who he is?" For do not, because he says thus in word, "you have never seen it"—for, most of all, what difference does it make to you whether I saw it or not, if I can name him? And then those whom he convicts—these he convicts not as being of the orators of that time, nor those whom Callicles saw, but those whom he says it is likely Callicles heard of. Therefore, when he tries to convict these, he means to speak against all. Thus, accusing rhetoric as simply an evil, he was forced to make it twofold; and having made it twofold, again he tries to take this away by wishing to speak against all. And this is plain too from the exchanges. For it goes thus: "But by Zeus, I cannot name you any one of the present orators." "How then? Can you name any of the old ones?" Clearly because none of them either proved to be good. For what could be his wish, in either reproaching these as being of the old ones, or in challenging him at all whether he can name any of all men? And yet how is it not plainly contradictory to say that he has not yet seen this rhetoric—by which he means that no such orator has ever yet existed—and again to declare that Aristides was such a man? For of these one must necessarily be false. And he came to such a pitch of disagreeing with himself that at once he says that no citizen at Athens had ever been

[311011] 277. a good man, and at the same time bears witness that such men have existed elsewhere too, and even prophesies that they will exist again.

[311154] And perhaps one might wonder at this too: that he spoke ill of four in a row—and these not the meanest of the Greeks—but mentioned only one for praise, and passed over Nicias the son of Niceratus, and this though he was among the orators of his own day, except that he mentioned him too rather for slander, in the part of the discourse where he did mention him. For of his statesmanship he made no account at all. And yet Nicias was so far from haranguing the citizens for pleasure and from helping to swell their desires, that when they were victorious over the Lacedaemonians in the former war he persuaded them to make peace and seek nothing more; and again, when certain men—who had often and at length heard Socrates on these matters, but did not greatly heed his words—were urging the Athenians to sail to Sicily and to take on trouble against all mankind, he sent forth every cry, speaking against it on behalf of what was best and fighting it out like one who had come to the very summit of philosophy. But if we shall call those attached to the people flatterers, while reproaching others as oligarchs in this covert way, and shall try to convict men of what is not true, while willingly passing over the points by which we are ourselves convicted, there is no way in which we shall not give some handle to one of the orators. He ought, then, perhaps, to have granted that Nicias too was someone, and even if he did not wish to praise him, in mentioning him in this way to have felt shame within himself and to have thought that his statesmanship stood in the way of arguments against all. For either, in saying of him what he said against the others, he would have appeared to speak what was not true, or, having nothing to charge against this man, in speaking ill of all alike, even so his argument was not true. And indeed, that he has spoken ill of this man too is clear. For he is one

[313054] 278. of the orators of that time, and these, surely, he has all spoken ill of. But if indeed he held Nicias too in contempt, yet at least Solon, surely, did not escape his notice—how great a worth he proved to be to the city in former times. For he was not going to ask concerning him either which of the slaves or of the freemen he made better, nor to reproach him with filling the city full of tributes and trifles without order and decorum. But if he did not make them lawful and orderly out of what was possible, then someone else, it would seem, did. He, at any rate, when it was in his power, while the city was in faction, to take the lead of whichever side he wished and play the tyrant, chose rather to be hated by both for the sake of justice; and from the rich he took away as much as was honourable, while to the people he did not give as much as it wished, but stood in the borderland most manfully and most justly of all, guarding, as it were, boundaries truly drawn as if by geometry; and neither fear of the stronger, nor honour from the many, nor anything else of the kind drew him on, nor unsettled him, nor incited him to do anything contrary to what he held best. So far was he himself from thinking it right to harangue for his own private advantage, and from filling up the desires of others, that he abstained from it utterly. And yet what does Plato say? That he places him among the poets. By Zeus—on account of his trimeters and elegiacs. Be it so. You yourself, then, say that if anyone should strip from poetry its metre and rhythm, what is left is haranguing. So that even if he never once spoke from the platform, but only sang his poems, by your own verdict and ballot he was haranguing. Or, in the gods' name—if it is needful to speak ill of rhetoric drawn from poetry, shall we say it is one and the same, or differs but little; but when in truth the poets play the orator and say things best and most useful to hear, shall we then say that this is now something else and differs greatly? It is not just, surely, nor

[315105] 279. likely. And yet Solon is said to have sung what concerned the Megarians, but he did not go about singing his laws, nor his speeches on behalf of the well-to-do to the people, nor those on behalf of the many to the rich did he sing, nor all the other measures of his statesmanship did he conduct singing or in verse, but using purely the form of rhetoric; in all of which he most nobly showed that, by the most upright kind of discourse, he himself would be both orator and wise—he had, at any rate, both titles and both faculties—and that rhetoric and lawgiving are of the same nature. But, by Zeus, rhetoric is not so much inferior to lawgiving as to be a falsely fabricated image of the second and inferior thing. And indeed, if no one else appears to have made any of his contemporaries better, Solon at least appears to have made even the Athenians who were to come better, so far as he could, and these the very things that Plato most cares for. For he saw fit to make them, so far as in him lay, lawful and just and keepers of order; and not the Athenians only, I think, but many others also of the Greeks who resolved to use his laws. And then Plato does not mention this man, but examines certain others. And having praised Aristides, he said, "There have been others too," and thought it enough to add this much; but in their case he did not do the same thing, nor, even if he could not contain himself, did he take his leave after speaking ill of some one of them, but ran down all in succession. And yet what prevented him, as here, from passing over the others when he had mentioned one, from there too not speaking ill of all by name? But as it is, as if truly assigning a fourth part to statesmanship beside flattery, he made mention of one for

[316870] 280. praise, but of four for the others. That, then, not even the man he praised did he praise opportunely in his own arguments, but here too he made mention of him where it least served his purpose—this might seem an exaggeration, yet I think I shall show even this without difficulty. For he has accused Miltiades and Cimon and Themistocles too and Pericles, that they gave offence to the people, and he has made this the greatest token that the Athenians became no better through them—rightly, if indeed they themselves were just and made others just. But Aristides he praised as a fair and good man and just. Yet this man too appears to have met with the Athenians no more gently toward himself, but he too was ostracized well and properly, and, by Zeus, as I think, earlier than Cimon, and earlier than Themistocles too. Choose, then, here too which of two you will. For if one must judge men from their misfortunes, and if the people condemns anyone, hold him at once to be base, then this man is no better than those; for he too does not appear unscathed in his escape, but suffered the same things as some of them. But if again nothing prevents Aristides from being held a good man, even though he was often ostracized, why do you urge against those men, as something strong, that they gave offence? For the same justice applies to both, and not even that man himself, were he alive, would have said otherwise, being just, as you say. Either, then, to blame this man too, or not to accuse those—the same considerations show it to be fitting. So, that he praises all brilliantly, and not only from the points by which he absolved them of the charge he brought, nor from the points by which he rendered Aristides his fitting praise, none of the slanders holds good, but also from the points by which he plainly says the very same things as I—on these a brief discourse will suffice me. For he who praises for their virtue those who fought in the front rank at Marathon, and calls them fathers of freedom for the

[318889] 281. Greeks, and moreover for the whole continent; and who again, encomiumizing those who took up the second contests—those who fought at sea at Artemisium and Salamis, and those who sailed to Cyprus and Pamphylia, and set firm the boundaries of freedom for the Greeks; and who blames the Greeks for their folly, those who marched against the land of those men, while praising as fitting those who captured their leaders, and goes through a panegyric speech upon them unbidden—what else does this man do but adorn Miltiades and Themistocles and Cimon and Pericles with these words? For when he praises their policies, how does he not praise the men themselves? For it cannot be said that the proofs of virtue which the deeds hold for those who were persuaded must be reckoned as vice against those who persuaded them; nor that those who served should be praised as good men, while those who proposed and counselled these things one should try by the argument to make out servants; nor that those whose purposes began freedom for the Greeks should be said to have been slaves to the desires of the citizens. For if these things are otherwise mere grace and pleasure of speech, why does he accuse rhetoric of them? And why does he become one of the flatterers, speaking what is more pleasant in place of what is true, and that with no necessity upon him? But if they were spoken on all just grounds and with truth, by what greater means must one dissolve the slanders? Or whom can one make a finer witness than Plato himself, when here, and on the spot, he plainly absolves them of the charge, and elsewhere outright encomiumizes them and imitates Stesichorus in his recantation? And indeed, when laying down the laws, of the Persian wars . . . both other things concerning the polity in the time of those orators, things least in keeping with the charges of flattery, and that, had not the design of the Athenians and Lacedaemonians saved

[320828] 282. the Greeks, no one could decently accuse the rest of Greece, speaking justly and what is true.

[320929] Therefore these things were done by the Athenians decently; and if decently, then in order; and if in order, then with decorum. In an orderly manner, then, did those who set them in order lead them, and they neither thought it right to speak at random, nor to overlook those men acting however they chanced. Not without temperance, then, did they fill the city with tributes and allies and such things, if indeed one must believe Plato's arguments and laws. And I will show it still more clearly, going through it word by word; for it stands thus: "For with us at that time, when the Persian assault came upon the Greeks, and perhaps upon nearly all the inhabitants of Europe, there was an ancient polity, and certain offices based on property assessments of four classes, and there dwelt within us a mistress, Reverence, through whom, being slaves to the laws of that time, we were willing to live." Therefore, when you grant me that they were reverent, you grant that they were decent men. And besides, the magnitude of the armament that came by land and by sea, casting an inescapable fear upon us, made us slaves still more to our rulers and our laws. Well done, dearest of the Greeks! For you say that the people were enslaved to those to whom it most befits to be enslaved—rulers and laws—and that those set over them ruled and prevailed, did not flatter nor were ruled. "And on account of all these things there fell to us toward one another a strong friendship." All these things are truly full of praise, both for the people and for those set over them. Then, going on, he says, "Borne upon this hope, they found that their refuge was to themselves alone and to the gods." Therefore all were temperate, as I think—rather, more so. "These things, then, all wrought friendship of one another for them—the fear then present, and that which had arisen from the former laws, to which being enslaved, by being slaves to the former laws they had possessed it"—that Reverence which we have often spoken of in the foregoing arguments, and to which we said they must be slaves who are

[323014] 283. to be good. You have done away with all dispute, calling the men good, and that not only themselves but also those who attended on them. How, then, do you accuse either those as corrupted, or these as having corrupted them? Or how is it possible that they are not good, those for whom you set down that to be enslaved is good? Well then: in common you have praised these men thus, saying "those who at that time presided over us," both as a panegyrist and as a lawgiver; but privately again, where and how have you praised Pericles, whom here you have most eagerly spoken ill of? As to where, what need to say? But as to how it will be said. "For having fallen in, I think, with such a man as Anaxagoras, and being filled with the study of things on high, and arriving at the nature of mind and intelligence—the very things about which Anaxagoras made his chief discourse—from there he drew over to the art of words what was suited to it." Therefore here he bears two witnesses: both that rhetoric is not an artless routine but an art concerning words, and that Pericles was supreme in it, and he adds the cause. So far is he from reproaching flattery or service. Therefore rhetoric does not appear base from the statesmanship of Pericles, but Pericles is inscribed in these words as best in rhetoric. He appears, then, to have accused these men in common as servants and flatterers, and again to absolve them of the charge; to have accused them for this purpose, that no orator might seem to have been good at Athens, and again to praise one of the Athenian orators—and that one held by the very same charges as these, I mean Aristides—and one of two things must follow: either that he is praised undeservedly, or that he shows those men to have heard what was not fitting; and further, not this man only, but all of them in succession he has praised elsewhere, where there is no contentiousness; and again privately, declaring that Pericles became most perfect in rhetoric. How,

[325001] 284. then, could anyone justly be indignant with us, when Plato himself votes that we speak the truth? For the things this man accuses these men of are not agreed by us, but the things we praise, of these he is himself a fellow-voter. So that our victory is agreed by both, but his is not granted even by himself. And to such a pitch of saying the opposite of the facts has he come that he says Pericles took over the Athenians more gentle and rendered them more savage and harsh—and that against the very man he least wished to. How, blessed sir? For if your argument is true, that they all but cast Miltiades into the pit, the whole opposite now appears: that Themistocles, taking over men most savage, made them more gentle—the ostracism, at any rate, and, if you will, the punishment of exile, were gain compared with that calamity. And again Cimon was ostracized, but was not further punished with exile, but even returned before the time. So much gentler did this man find them. And Pericles again, suffering still more moderate misfortune than this, was only fined money and was again the same in his rank and his honours. Thus from rougher and harsher they appear to have become ever gentler and easier, and Pericles, finding them nearly the most decent of all, and rendering them more gentle than he took them. Against this let the just and gentle stand, and let Homer bear witness. For he adds, "Reasonably, then, they honoured him while he lived and missed him when dead, and having been led on, they repented"; which then is worth noting along with the rest—for, having so clearly and justly praised Pericles by what we showed just now, again elsewhere he appears to disparage him. For having accused Alcibiades of dwelling with ignorance, and having said that not he alone