WORK: Orationes 45  (slug: aelius-aristides-orationes-45-9670fd)

CHAPTER: 01-orationes-45



[0] 1. I hold that anyone who is to say what is needed, or to cast a vote rightly, ought not to look to this — ought not to begrudge it — if some earlier man of established reputation happened to speak otherwise about the same things; rather, he should seek, here as everywhere, the side on which the truth most probably lies, and wish that side to prevail. For it would be absurd that in the assemblies the first speaker should not be believed, nor in the courts of law — and indeed everyone knows well that if cases were decided in that fashion, none of the defendants would ever be acquitted, since they of course always speak after the prosecutor — and yet, in the contests of speech and in the judgment of them, that those who came first in time should prevail, rather than those who can demonstrate the matter in dispute; that tragic poets and lyre-players and the rest who practise music should not draw the same lot for their merit as for their order of appearance — otherwise it would have been enough simply to draw lots — but that whoever competes most beautifully should be crowned and proclaimed first, even if he happened to come on last; while those who claim to be contestants or judges of the more refined contests should so

[1239] 2. greatly exalt time as to suppose that the later are entirely inferior, and that they could not possibly discover anything better than what has already been said. Yet I observe that even in the athletic contests it is not the man who first entered his name who goes away victorious, but the man who, in the trial itself, best displays the very thing for which he entered. And this holds true throughout, so that even in the prizes themselves — I will add, even in those of speed itself — the token is awarded not to those who came forward at the start, but to those who passed first at the end. And how is it not a great absurdity that those who practise or honour the things that depend on the body's fortune should both now and formerly have so greatly honoured the beauty and justice of speech, while those who devote themselves to speech, and who would not even consent to live apart from this pursuit, should be so idle — or rather so unjust — as to rely on one single authority about everything, if a man happens to have come earlier, and should choose to admire names instead of the truth, as though our task were to assume what we ought, rather than to discover what is better; and that they should set the very laws themselves in motion, if it is advantageous, but should not admit, on the same terms as the first, the arguments about the things that by nature abide forever — that they should revere those who have taken possession before them as if they were boundary-stones or pillars, and that, though here they ought to repeal the earlier laws by their opposites, they should not do so, but should think others worthy of the same place as those laws; and that it should be permitted to add to the common oaths a clause cancelling and inserting whatever, on later consideration, seems good to them, while the arguments which they would always and forever examine on the same authority

[3140] 3. they should add only to the time that has gone by — as though one were to say that only those born first ought to enjoy health — and should not even see this, that such a verdict and such a reckoning is not even profitable to the very first men whom they honour. For if we must yield to time and measure worth by it, then the reverence which all now feel toward those men no longer has any place. For on that reckoning Iasus would win the prize in speech, and Criasus and Crotopus and Phoroneus, and any Argive out of legend, and Deucalion, or whoever else came from one place or another, and Lycaon from Arcadia and Cecrops from Athens, instead of those now celebrated; and among the nations, the Phrygians, on the strength, I suppose, of the testimony of *bekos*. And I have passed over Callaethyia, who is said to have been the best of women and of men alike. If we judge in this way, then Codrus will have no share in the honour, but he too will be a child compared with those I have named, and no ancient at all; and going on by little steps in this manner, we shall be inquiring whether anyone existed before the moon was. But for Homer and Hesiod and those who have triumphed down to our own day — Plato, if you like, and Demosthenes, and those a little before them — there will be no hope, even after the longest span of time, that a like reputation should arise, since the period before them keeps advancing equal with them forever. But if this is plain to all, that these men too, surpassing their predecessors in nature and in power, eclipsed them, then it is not reasonable to bar absolutely all who come later, nor to disbelieve it if someone who has shared in the present age is able to contribute a judgment about the matters before us; rather, it is, as it seems, from the very men whom we honour that

[4962] 4. we ought to learn, since we know how much it matters whether we merely admit a thing or attend to it. Now it is perhaps just to reverence all the ancients, but not to shudder at them — at least not if we are to seem to honour those named for their speeches rather than the speeches themselves; and that, if one must hold this view toward anyone, one may hold it toward Plato also, I need no other witness, but he himself suffices — not only by the things he everywhere proclaims, urging that nothing be put before the truth, but also by a small example. For if he, in censuring Homer about many things, though Homer came so long before him, is not deprived of a hearing, but has something to say to those who are indignant at whatever he says, then, by Plato himself, as it seems, it is possible — even for those who praise that man and free him from every charge — to dare to listen, if someone else seems to say something contrary to him, not making this an accusation, but only if he is left behind in the arguments about the matters themselves. The things, then, that he has said about rhetoric, more contentiously than was fitting, having set up a meeting of Gorgias and Socrates at Athens — come, let us examine them and show how they stand. For it would be a strange thing if he, having undertaken to accuse rhetoric openly, did not in a certain way deprive her of the arguments on her own behalf — but allotted them to two or three to speak in answer, as one does in the form of dialogues — and yet we, who are able and have chosen to defend her wholly, should not dare to do so, as though we ought to say against Plato as many things as he himself wished to say against himself. It seems absurd to me that Plato should not have been ashamed to find fault with rhetoric, of which perhaps he himself had some share, while we should be ashamed to speak on rhetoric's behalf, for fear that someone should be displeased on his account. And apart from this, if we must say nothing in answer, but rhetoric must be convicted by default as in a court of law, and that

[7034] 5. too when it is an art of speech, this would be one kind of injunction; but if there is someone who ought to speak, it would befit us above all, so that in this very first matter we may at once display the justice of the cause we champion — that it is not the act of one who preserves reason on rhetoric's part to refuse her a share in her own gifts, the very faculty by which men plead on behalf of others; but one of two things must follow: either she must seem to be such as Plato has wished, or she must be made to seem such. For this is not one and the same everywhere, that silence confirms the charges; rather, at once she will both fail of justice and have her dignity refuted upon herself. For she will seem unable to preserve justice. And I, chiefly and first out of reverence for the speeches themselves, and from the belief that one ought to come to their aid as to one's parents, each according to his power in them, and then also for the sake of the rest of mankind — that they may not be wrongly led astray about the greatest matters, nor fail to recognize that the more brilliant and great a man is, the more readily they trust him; and that they may not, thinking they reproach her whom it is not lawful to hear ill of in any way, willingly deprive themselves of the fairest things — for these reasons, equally unwilling to speak, I have undertaken this discourse, both for the sake of justice and of usefulness. Such, then, is the dignity of the present contest. And for this venture I call upon Hermes the god of speech, and Apollo the leader of the Muses, and all the Muses, to be my guides — most of all by reason of the very nature of the present invocation, since the gift of these gods is the very thing for which, and through which, we contend; and next because two reasons coincide. For neither against the meanest of the Greeks, nor on behalf of

[8910] 6. the meanest of things, is this discourse. And there are some who, even among his recorded sayings, most admire those which he has used here and on these very topics. So that everywhere we truly need divine aid. Therefore, just as those who bring indictments for illegal proposals do, we shall make our beginning from the very things he has said. They are these. "It seems to me, then, Gorgias, that it is a pursuit which is not an art, but belongs to a soul that is given to guessing and is bold and naturally clever at dealing with men. The chief name I give it is flattery. Of this pursuit there are, it seems to me, many other parts, and one is cookery, which seems to be an art, but, as my account holds, is not an art, but a knack and a routine. And of this I call rhetoric a part, and also cosmetics and sophistry — these four parts dealing with four objects. So if Polus wishes to inquire, let him inquire, for he has not yet learned what part of flattery I say rhetoric is, but it has escaped him that I have not yet answered. And he asks again whether I do not think it a fine thing; but I will not answer him whether I think rhetoric a shameful or a fine thing before I first answer what it is. For that is not just, Polus. But if you wish to inquire, ask what part of flattery I say rhetoric is. — I do ask, then; answer me, what part. — Would you understand if I answered? Rhetoric, by my account, is an image of a part of statecraft. — What then? Do you say it is fine or shameful? — Shameful, for my part; for I call evil things shameful, since I must answer you as one who already knows what I mean. — By Zeus, Socrates, I myself do not even understand what you mean."

[10598] 7. — Naturally, Gorgias; for I am saying nothing yet that is clear. But this Polus here is young and keen. — Well, let him be; tell me, rather, how you say rhetoric is an image of a part of statecraft. — Then I will try to declare what rhetoric seems to me to be; and if it is not in fact this, Polus here will refute me. You call something a body, I suppose, and a soul? — Of course. — And do you not think there is a certain good condition of each of these? — I do. — What then? An apparent good condition, but not a real one? Such a thing as this I mean: many seem to have their bodies in good condition, whom one could not easily perceive to be otherwise, except a physician or one of the trainers. — You speak truly. — Such a thing as this, I say, exists both in body and in soul, which makes the body and the soul seem to be in good condition, while they are no better off in fact. — That is so. — Come now, let me show you more clearly, if I can, what I mean. There being two objects, I speak of two arts. The one concerned with the soul I call statecraft; for the one concerned with the body I cannot give you a single name in the same way, but, the care of the body being one thing, I speak of two parts of it, the one gymnastic, the other medicine. And of statecraft, the counterpart to gymnastic is legislation, and the counterpart to medicine is justice. These do indeed share something with one another, since each pair is concerned with the same object — medicine with gymnastic, and justice with legislation; yet they differ from one another in some respect. There being these four, and each tending always to what is best — some the body, some the soul — flattery, perceiving this (I do not say knowing, but guessing), has divided herself into four, and slipping under each of the parts, pretends to be the very thing she has slipped under; and she takes no thought for what is best, but with what is most pleasant hunts down folly and deceives it, so as to seem worth most.

[12590] 8. Now under medicine cookery has slipped, and pretends to know the best foods for the body, so that if a cook and a physician had to contend before children, or before men as foolish as children, as to which understands good and bad foods, the physician or the cook, the physician would die of starvation. Flattery, then, I call this, and I say such a thing is shameful, Polus — for it is to you that I say this — because it aims at what is pleasant apart from what is best. And I say it is not an art but a knack, because it has no account to give of the things it applies, of what nature they are, so that it cannot tell the cause of each; and I do not call anything an art that is an irrational thing. If you dispute these points, I am willing to submit an account. Under medicine, then, as I say, cookery lies as a flattery; and under gymnastic, in the same manner, cosmetics — a thing knavish and deceitful and base and illiberal, deceiving with shapes and colours and smoothness and dress, so as to make a man draw to himself an alien beauty and neglect the beauty that is his own, the beauty that comes through gymnastic. So, that I may not be long-winded, I am willing to tell you, as the geometers do — for perhaps by now you would follow me — that as cosmetics is to gymnastic, so is sophistry to legislation; and as cookery is to medicine, so is rhetoric to justice."

[13971] Here there is no demonstration whatever, nor any refutation advanced of necessity; the thing is simply laid down as if granted — the very point about which there was much sweating before — no differently than if he were asking his hearers to concede these things as a favour. And yet, if it is ridiculous to assume what is in question as though agreed, how is it reasonable, from the very start, to assume those things which it would be ridiculous so much as to inquire into? For how is it not ridiculous to inquire whether rhetoric and cookery are of the same nature? Yet he has taken the matter as though agreed.

[14587] 9. And one might see it in this way: if, taking out the name of rhetoric and putting in the name of philosophy in its place, one were then to use all the same terms about philosophy. And let no one condemn the argument as boorish or as cold. For, in the first place, when men champion one of two sciences or faculties, even if they utter every kind of blasphemy against the others, we shall not say that there is anything boorish underlying it; but shall we not even grant them the right to defend themselves with the same weapons? And next, it will be said not for the sake of vulgar abuse, but for the sake of demonstration — which we say is nowhere to be found in his argument. Now it comes out thus: "It seems to me, then, Gorgias, that it is a pursuit which is not an art, but belongs to a soul that is given to guessing and is bold and naturally clever at dealing with men. The chief name I give it is flattery. Of this pursuit there are, it seems to me, many other parts, and one is cookery, which seems to be an art, but, as my account holds, is not an art, but a knack and a routine. And of this I call rhetoric a part, and cosmetics, and sophistry — these four parts dealing with four objects." And through all that has been said, then, if someone, leaving everything else in place, were to transfer rhetoric into philosophy, it follows, I suppose, that the words themselves are in no way hindered. But neither is the one the act of a sound mind, I think, nor the other the act of one who demonstrates. For none of the reproaches of cookery will touch philosophy, so long as it is something else in nature; nor does anyone, by the things with which he reviles cookery, refute rhetoric, so long as he does not show the necessity by which these are alike — unless he thought this very thing sufficient, to drive a man into the necessity of saying how cookery differs from rhetoric. Yet this I hesitate to say, but I cannot fail to learn that it is the mark of an insolent man.

[16573] 10. Nevertheless I myself will assume this strange position. For in truth it is more outrageous and more strange, if the man who tries to teach that rhetoric is not shameful should be more ashamed than the man who first dared to censure it as a shameful thing. First, then, even if we were entirely to grant that it is not an art — the point he keeps turning to throughout the argument as a windfall — why shall we agree that it is therefore the more shameful? For if everything that comes to be without art were of necessity evil, or worth nothing, there would be something to the point; but as it is, there is no one who would not agree that the greatest and fairest things granted to men from the gods are at once outside of art and superior to art. And this has so prevailed among all men, both the clever and the many, that whatever any of the so-called Seven Sages — who are among the few easily numbered of all men — said or counselled, or any of the others whom we admire for their wisdom as foremost, no one attributes to a god, but the name of the man is assigned to each saying; whereas whatever the prophetesses at Pytho declare, when they are out of themselves, this both Plato and all men say "the Pythian spoke." And yet what art do they understand at that moment, who are not even able to keep guard over it or to remember it? And though medicine, which knows all human reasonings, and which is superior to cookery, is a small thing, I think, compared to the responses from Delphi — all those that have appeared to men, both privately and publicly, for diseases and sufferings of every kind — and though justice, which is ranked beside it, is a small thing, concerned with the judgment of affairs and with counsel: what will all the trainers together say, that their whole science is not outdone by two or three oracular sayings, if at least they understand this one small thing, to be temperate? And what of your august legislation, that discovers great things for men? It will yield, I think — or rather long since has yielded — to the women

[18634] 11. who speak from the tripod. For men go to Delphi and inquire about their constitutions; and then they enact their laws in accordance with the voice that comes from the Pythia — beginning with Lycurgus, whom, though he came after many, we may call first for the sake of the argument. They say, then, that he established nothing for the Lacedaemonians without the voice that came from the god; yet, although Lycurgus, the best of the Greeks, established them, it was not on that account that the god won the reputation of having established the laws. Rather, Lycurgus, being the best of the Greeks, bore witness that the words of the Pythia — who knows nothing of her own — prevail; and she answered as it seemed good to the god; and he, in the part that came from the Pythia, won the reputation that attached to the laws. And yet these women have no special knowledge beyond other men, nor, if they do know anything, do they speak from what they have learned and foreknow, but, as they are moved on each occasion by the higher power, they send everywhere over the earth — to Ionia, to Pontus, to Cyrene, to the ends of the earth; and they do not foreknow, even if someone is coming to them or will inquire, before the evening and the sitting on the tripod, so to speak. But, just now ignorant even of their neighbours' affairs, on a sudden they know the affairs of all men, and address the people in the god's presence, and govern the common concerns of the earth, and are set up as leaders, for all the sciences and arts, of what must be done or said. And not even Plato passes them by; rather, he too thinks fit to question the Pythia whenever he establishes a polity and legislates, and says that one must then act, if the Pythia too concurs in the decision, but before that he is not confident. So be it: this, then, is the testimony to our argument from Delphi and from Apollo the Pythian. And what will you say of the priestesses at Dodona, who know just so much as it seems good to the god, and only so long as it seems good to him? And yet they had no such knowledge beforehand, before they entered into communion with the god, nor do they afterwards know anything of what they said,

[20829] 12. but everyone knows it rather than they. So that those who were ignorant and who inquired of them have learned, while those who spoke do not even know what one ought to do, nor even this very thing, that they have spoken. Therefore, in setting down this testimony as coming from Zeus, you would not be in error. And these same things I say also about those at Claros and at the shrine of Ammon, and about all, men and women alike, who are concerned with oracles. And yet, shall we demand of all these men and all these women the reasoned account by which they give such counsel? And how shall we seem to be temperate? Or shall we say that these things are worth nothing and are flattery, simply because we cannot demand the account from those who spoke? Far more, surely, should we then fall short of temperance. Therefore from nearly all the gods, so to speak, a testimony and a vote has been brought in, that such an argument is worth nothing, which either seeks for the art, or disparages what is not accompanied everywhere by art. And as for all those who, having once submitted themselves to a god, and having no share of art even in small measure, have foretold many wonderful things not only to their own contemporaries but also to those who came after — such as, if you please, Bacis, the Sibyl, and others besides — even if they are not many, this too is in favour of our argument; for the greatest things have escaped the many. Who is so artful at speaking ill as to revile even these? And when I look to the poets, the common nurses and teachers of the Greeks, who expressly confess concerning themselves that they know nothing whatever — not even the number of the ships — but always and about everything trouble the Muses, begging them to tell them, since they themselves have the form and rank of prophets, while the Muses are true diviners about all things: it seems to me more fitting sometimes to adorn what is not accompanied by art, than to do one of two things — either to say that the poets compose adequately by knowledge, which they themselves do not admit, or to consider the gift of the Muses worth nothing. Then again, by Zeus,

[22987] 13. is it not a strange thing that to speak in verse without art is no terrible thing, but often even divine, while to speak in this plain way the best things is terrible unless it is done with art? I, for my part, do not see the necessity. For how is it not absurd, if the poet, composing without art, will rightly imitate the orator and say the best things, while the orator himself will not say the best things unless with art? And surely the poets have called Hermes munificent, no less than any of the gods — indeed, I think, beyond the rest. Therefore, if divination proceeds through Apollo, and poetry through the Muses, and without these the things of art are cold, what prevents us from setting rhetoric too among the gifts of Hermes — a thing which truly ought to be called divine and superior to art? Up to this point, then, one might say that Plato is refuted by these very arguments; but I wish to show him refuted also by his own arguments. Now in a way this has already happened. For in the passages where we showed him taking refuge in the Pythia, in many places in the *Laws*, he did not escape this refutation. But nevertheless I wish to show him uttering the same things throughout the whole succession of the matters I have spoken of. For it will appear that the very things we now say, he himself has said before — if not in these very words, nor to the full measure of necessary demonstration, yet at least in the whole tenor of his argument. And I will remind him of the fair Phaedrus. For what he himself there does, setting the words of Lysias between his own, this I too will now do: I will set forth that man's own words, as if they were a law. "Where, then, is the boy?" he says. "Where for me is the boy, and the speech I made to the boy?" "Here he is, very near." "Come then, what does he say?" "If it were a simple thing that madness is an evil, the saying would be well; but as it is, the greatest of goods come to us through madness, given indeed by a divine gift.

[24986] 14. For the prophetess at Delphi and the priestesses at Dodona, when mad, have wrought many fine things for Greece, both privately and publicly, but when in their sober senses few or none. And if we should speak of the Sibyl and the others who, using inspired divination, have foretold many things to many and set them right for the future, we should be lengthy in telling what is plain to all. But this is worth calling to witness, that the ancients who set the names did not think madness shameful or a reproach. For they would not have woven this very name into the fairest art, that by which the future is judged, and called it the 'manic' art, but, thinking it a fine thing whenever it comes by a divine dispensation, they so named it. But men now, in their want of taste, throwing in the t, have called it the 'mantic' art. And the inquiry of the sensible into the future, made through birds and the other signs, since it is furnished from intelligence by human conjecture, they named oionoïstic, which the young now, dignifying it with the o, call oionistic. By so much, then, as the manic is more perfect and more honourable than the oionistic — the name than the name, the work than the work — by so much do the ancients bear the fairer witness that the madness which is from a god is finer than the soberness that comes from men. But indeed, from diseases and the greatest sufferings — which arose somewhere among certain families from ancient wraths — this madness, arising and prophesying to those who needed it, found a release, by taking refuge in prayers to the gods and in their service. Whence, having obtained purifications and rites, it set free, both for the present and for the time to come, the man who possessed it, finding for him who was rightly mad and possessed a release from the present evils.

[26810] 15. And a third kind of possession and madness, from the Muses, taking a tender and untrodden soul, rousing it and inspiring it to Bacchic frenzy in songs and the rest of poetry, adorns countless deeds of the ancients and instructs those who come after. But whoever comes to the gates of poetry without the madness of the Muses, persuaded that he will be a competent poet by art, is himself imperfect, and his poetry — the poetry of the sober — is eclipsed by that of the mad. So many fair works of madness coming from the gods, and still more, have I to tell of."

[27376] If, then, O Zeus and ye gods, there is a certain madness better than soberness, coming to men from the gods, how is it just to censure everything that comes to be without art, or how to consider rhetoric simply shameful and not to grant that there is some faculty superior to art? And if he has named the fairest of the arts "manic," and has said that poetry is simply not even an art, but an inspiration from the Muses — "but whoever comes to the gates of poetry without the madness of the Muses, persuaded that he will be a competent poet by art, is himself imperfect, and his poetry, the poetry of the sober, is eclipsed by that of the mad" — how is it not shown from both that art does not prevail, but that there are cases where the thing that is not enslaved to art is more brilliant and more dear to the gods? For thus does Plato now plainly determine that one must not seek for art in the greatest things. So that, if you please, the saying of Euripides and his own, by Zeus, applies: "This you hear from yourself, not from me," O you who have conceived so great a thought; or, if you please again, the saying of Aeschylus, "Not by others, but by his own wings" — those which you keep harping on in those arguments — "is he caught." And surely, if you set divination as coming from Apollo or even from Zeus, and the rites as coming from some other of the gods, and poetry from the

[28766] 16. Muses, then neither will Hermes — brother of the one, son of the other — be at a loss for arguments about his own gift, but, attributing the arguments both to himself and to his father, he will speak what is true and just. And I think that those who have addressed these gods as "the gods of speech," ancients and moderns alike, differing not over a single letter, bear witness far more clearly than concerning madness, that we shall refer to a sufficient authority if we have any share of speech, even if we take refuge in no art. So be it. What came next, then? "So let us not fear this very thing, and let no argument disturb us by frightening us, that one must choose the temperate man as a friend before the one who is moved." Look at this also. "So let us not fear this very thing, and let no argument disturb us by frightening us," that it is not the man who succeeds by nature and by a divine portion who must win, but whoever is artful in a small way. But let him carry off the prize of victory who, besides that, has shown this, "that love is not sent from the gods for the benefit of the lover and the beloved." And this also, then, let him carry off the prize of victory who has shown, besides that, that speeches do not come from the gods to men for their entire and greatest benefit. "But we, on the contrary, must demonstrate," he says, "that such madness is given by the gods for the greatest good fortune." And do you not think Telephus thought these same things? But even if that man holds nothing in higher honour, yet we must demonstrate that for the greatest good fortune the power of speech came from the gods to men at the beginning, and now too is given, and will be given, in the rank of a fair thing, first and for all time to come. And surely, if Plato is trustworthy, this is

[30575] 17. the very man who does not award the first prizes to art; and if no one even grants this, how is rhetoric shameful through his arguments? For my part, I hold him, on the whole, trustworthy as no other of the Greeks; but I would gladly ask those on his side which it is more worthy to trust him in, these things or those. And surely, if he is in the highest degree august, he is seen bearing witness for us, so that he is august on our behalf. For when we say the same things both to ourselves and to him, while he says them neither to himself nor to us, he is bearing witness rather than contradicting, by this very fact of not speaking the truth. Come now, let me bring forward another testimony from the same training-ground, instead of an image, said Plato. For Plato, I suppose, will not be vexed if Aeschines puts to the vote what Plato proposed: "I, if I thought I could help by any art, would convict myself of great folly; but as it is, I thought this had been given me by a divine portion in the case of Alcibiades. And none of this is worth wondering at." You hear a companion, who considers the same man wisest as you do — I will add, who also attributes the speeches to the same man as you do. "One must not wonder, O Plato," he says, "if a man who has not acquired an art is able to benefit men. For many of the sick become healthy, some by human art, some by a divine portion. Now those who become so by human art are healed by physicians; but those who become so by a divine portion are led by desire to what will profit them; and then they desired to vomit

[32152] 18. when it was going to be of profit to them, and then to hunt, when it was going to be of profit to them to labour." Heracles, how expressly and conspicuously does Aeschines, the fellow-disciple of Plato, bear witness to Plato of these things, which we set forth a little before from him — things much more human and, by the gods, finer than those for which, for the sake of paradox, he has framed his argument! Therefore the man is seen both bearing witness to us as though by a herald, and as it were setting his seal upon this man's testimony; for he confirms Plato's words on our behalf. And surely, if many of the sick become healthy apart from physicians and art — and this when the art of physicians consists in nothing else than in making men healthy — then it is in no way improbable, nor need we call it outside human art, or rather a divine portion, that in speeches too men attain the best while using no art, even if it were most of all the work of the art to attain the best in speeches themselves. About this part, at least, I shall no longer contend with Plato by argument, that many were saved through a divine portion; nor, I suppose, will Aeschines the son of Lysanias be indignant with me, nor anyone else, if I say that I myself am able to bear witness to the words rather than to need his testimony on these points. But truly, like the god-inspired prophets who are initiated under the titles of the things themselves, I have the lesson from the gods themselves, by whom, in cases that no physician either knows how to name,

[33702] 19. much less to cure, nor has seen happen in human nature, I live, escaping by various consolations and counsels from the god, beyond all that the present circumstances make probable. And many others besides me are sharers and witnesses of these things — not only Greeks but barbarians — both the companies of those who ever dwell in the shrine of Asclepius, and all who have had communion with the god in Egypt. And yet none of us, I suppose, has any share of art in these matters; rather, the very beginning of taking refuge in the gods is, as it were, the despising of art. And nevertheless — to speak with the gods' leave — neither do the gods dishonour such a reckoning of ours, nor have many regretted choosing the fortune that comes from the god before the art. But we even make use of dreams, not foreknowing, I think, in the evening what we are about to see, and we know what we must do to be saved, being ignorant up to that part of the hour in which the good came from the gods; and again — for like one chanting a refrain in a song I will say the same — understanding nothing whatever of art, we are able to speak, not only about what is profitable to ourselves, but often about what concerns others, if it seem good to the god; so that nothing prevents even the physicians from shuddering whenever they hear of the many such works. Is it, then, the dreams that make human affairs depend upon the gods, or is it that the gods care for men and save men through dreams? I, for my part, think the latter. What, then, O greatest of Greek tongues, said Cratinus, what is there to prevent a man from knowing the best things even while awake, without art, and being able to counsel others — if indeed dreams enable him to counsel others too? Or is it possible to be saved without art, and to save another by means one does not know, but not possible to give counsel without art at all — neither from one's own fortune, nor from the divine, nor, as Demosthenes says, from that of

[35688] 20. one's hearers? And these things, moved by the argument itself and by what is, as it were, consecrated to the gods, I have perhaps drawn out at greater length; and let me have pardon both from Plato himself and from everyone, having suffered the very thing that was in the arguments. For it was not possible to restrain it, since a divine portion and salvation fell across my path. Therefore, although I was using testimony, I was compelled myself to bear witness to the argument. But I return again to the rest of the testimony. "I, on account of the love I happened to feel for Alcibiades, suffered nothing different from the Bacchants. For the Bacchants too, whenever they become inspired, draw honey and milk from the springs whence the others cannot even draw water; and so I too, knowing no lesson which by teaching I might benefit a man, nevertheless thought that, by being with him through my love, I made him better." Here the dialogue ends, not in riddles, nor in hidden meanings, nor saying the same things as we in some indirect way, but as if made on purpose for our use. If, then, dreams release the companies of Asclepius from the art of the physicians, and the Bacchants of Dionysus and the gifts of the Nymphs work changes when they become inspired, what is there shameful, or what outside nature, in receiving the inspired in speeches too, and in thinking it possible to refer to them as protectors, those who are in some way superior? And surely it cannot even be said that the witness is worth nothing, or far from the matter, or that we take refuge in a mere name. But if one must speak of some as genuine sons, so also of some as genuine companions, we have received Aeschines as a genuine companion of Socrates. And the false opinion of some bears witness too, who have supposed these writings to be Socrates' own; even if one ought not to trust them altogether — as I, for one, would be the first to deny — yet the error has not befallen through utter unreason, but these things were judged so very

[37715] 21. proper and fitting to the character of Socrates, that this opinion too found room. And it seems to me that Socrates himself, even if no written speech of his is preserved, bears witness no less than either the august Plato or the refined Aeschines, but even more finely, and truly into the midst. For it is agreed that he said he knew nothing, and all who associated with him say this. And it is agreed again, on the other hand, that the Pythia declared Socrates the wisest. How, then, do these things stand? For it is not right to believe of the god, that he was wholly mistaken in declaring the wisest of men a man who erred in everything. He said, as it seems, that he did not practise an art, speaking truly. At any rate, though he associated with Anaxagoras, he is seen not to have honoured that man's pursuits. This one thing, then, Socrates bears witness to, that it is not shameful not to have acquired an art, since, speaking about himself, he was not ashamed. And there is a second, following from it. For there is no one who does not say of Socrates that he claimed that his divine sign gave him signs. Therefore it is impossible that the man whom the divine sign accompanied should have known nothing of what was needful. But that he knew nothing, he himself said; and saying so, he did not lie, since the god too called him wisest. What, then, remains as the meaning of his saying that he did not know? I think it is, that he did not know by art. And surely, if in neither case would he still be wisest — neither lying about himself (since lying is one of the shameful things), nor speaking truly (if not using an art were one of the simply shameful things) — then Socrates bears witness to the argument through both, both through what he denied and through what he admitted; and through Socrates the

[39534] 22. god has borne witness about both, declaring him to be wisest; so that the testimony of Socrates, being twofold, is confirmed by another authoritative testimony, that from himself. And one might learn from the matter itself how the things from the oracle accord with the speech and life of Socrates. For how is it not reasonable that the man who lived under a god and had neglected human affairs should readily be declared by a god as judge the wisest of men? Such, then, is the testimony we have from Plato — passing through himself and through both his companions, and ending in the god at Delphi, who confirms by vote to Plato the things I said a little before that Aeschines said. And if we must also furnish testimonies from the poets, it is indeed a task to furnish either the testimonies of all, or those of the chosen, throughout; nevertheless, to pick out and state what one can of the most famous, it would be sloth to leave aside. Now in general all the poets bear witness by their deeds — by the very testimony of fact — if indeed they are poets by the account that art does not prevail. But it is not this I need now, for it is among the things already said, but the testimony in their actual words. This, then, the oldest of them and the most familiar to all, praising Pandarus the Zeleian for his archery, says, "to whom Apollo himself gave the bow." And the king of the Phaeacians, having made him exceedingly humane and dear to the gods, he has honoured with this phrase: "Alcinous then ruled, knowing counsels from the gods." Do not ask me, he says, what art he had acquired, or who was his teacher; for "from the gods he knew counsels." And again praising Demodocus the harper, as supreme in music, he makes him thus: "whom the Muse loved exceedingly, and gave him both good and evil; of his eyes she deprived him, but gave him sweet song"; and again, "the Muse roused the singer to sing the glories of men."

[41466] 23. And Alcinous himself, introducing and presenting him, straightway at the beginning says, "for to him the god gave song beyond others, to delight in whatever way his spirit prompts him to sing." These things Alcinous himself says, who surely would have taken pride, if he had spent anything even on teachers for him — and that too, being a splendid and great-souled man and a lover of glory. But nonetheless, he says, "I myself tell you and declare it: this man I did not have taught." And not only does Alcinous, the king of the Phaeacians, speak thus, but the wisest of the Greeks too is not unlike him about the same things, but, admiring still more the display of Demodocus and, as it were, deliberately seeking what greatest thing he might say, "Demodocus," he says, "beyond all mortals I praise you; either the Muse, child of Zeus, taught you, or Apollo" — as though the thing were too great to grasp by art. "For very rightly do you sing the fate of the Achaeans." Nor is this thrown in by the way, nor at random, nor as a mere appendage to the foregoing, but showing forth and pointing to one thing: that this orderly and brilliant power comes not from art but from the inspiration of the gods. For art is something neat, but far inferior. And again, as if setting his seal on the testimony, having proposed to him to sing the device of the horse, he promises this much: "If now you tell me this," he says, "in due order, straightway I will declare to all men that the favouring god granted you divine song" — as if having nothing greater than this to promise him. So firmly, then, had the poet persuaded himself about these things that, as if fearing lest someone should think he said this of Demodocus alone, he made Odysseus begin from the common case of singers, and speak thus: "For among all men upon the earth, singers have their share of honour and reverence, because the Muse has taught them songs, and loves the race of singers."

[43418] 24. As if Homer feared, on his own behalf, lest someone should say he had learned something from another, and not from the Muses themselves. How, then, do the Muses teach? Is it as the schoolmasters do, opening a schoolroom? It is not. But, I think, they bring things to mind and stir the invention, as is shown in these very verses; for he says, over all, "thus he spoke; and the man, set in motion by the god, began, and revealed his song" — showing the same thing throughout, that art is foolishness compared with the god who moves. Phemius, again, in the slaughter of the suitors, he has made to plead for himself and say, "I am self-taught; the god planted in my heart songs of every kind, and I am fit to sing before you as before a god; therefore desire not to cut my throat." This, on the one hand, showing closely thus that "self-taught" and "the pupil of the gods" are the same; and on the other, that Phemius said nothing greater for his own salvation than that he is no man's pupil. Naturally; for it was reasonable that one who was to be saved by those who thought themselves wronged should take refuge in the honour from the gods. For which reasons he saves him with these words. Again — for I will take it up afresh — he has made Telemachus, going abroad in inquiry after his father, in the first books, as one who, when he reached Pylos and had to meet Nestor, was anxious and at a loss what to say to him, because he was conscious of having no art whatever about speeches, nor even that which, as Plato says, is experience, up to that point. At any rate he has shut up this very thing in a verse, from beginning to end: "Nor yet have I made trial of cunning speeches." And the god encourages him and says: Let none of the sophists deceive you, nor be of poor heart over yourself. "For even if you are left behind in art and in experience, some things you will yourself perceive in your own mind, and some a divinity will suggest; for I do not think that you were born and reared against the will of the gods" — here too in a way joining and setting side by side

[45498] 25. both that he should understand of himself and that the god should prompt him, and again attributing his nature and rearing to the divine portion. And these things are said to him not by Mentor, nor by Halitherses, but by the wisest of the gods, to whom the things of prudence and what concerns the arts are referred. And Telemachus, then for the first time playing the orator, becomes resourceful and finds speeches sufficient for the need — for I forbear to speak of what he declaimed among the suitors — by Athena's help, and hits the mark so well that Nestor, hearing him (for this is the sweetest thing), both praises him and says, "Truly your words are fitting, nor would you say that a younger man could speak so fittingly" — and yet Nestor is made by him supreme in rhetoric and in finding and judging speeches, both in the Iliad and in the Odyssey; but nonetheless he praises him, and brilliantly. And when he came from Pylos to the other orator and king, Menelaus, Telemachus says that he delights to hear Menelaus as a god; and Menelaus in turn bears the same opinion of him as Nestor, and says, being himself already an old man, "You are of good blood, dear child, such things do you speak" — saying nothing else than this: that you are made for speeches, and on this account you say the best things, and are well esteemed among others such; so that even if you have no art about speeches, for me, he says, it is enough. Thus throughout the whole drama, as if on purpose and through all the worthy persons, Homer bears witness that it is not art that is sovereign in speeches, but the power of nature and what seems good to the god. The very father of Telemachus, then, whom he made to have come to the very height of preparation for speeches, being roused somewhat against the Phaeacian and bringing him to his senses, how does he speak and use frankness? "One man is feebler in form, but a god crowns his shape with words"

[47439] 26. — at once showing the dignity of rhetoric and its power, how great and of what kind it is, and at once attributing these very things to the god as coming from there, as though answering Plato, not Euryalus. And it seems to me that Hesiod too holds the same opinion as Homer, and differs only in the words, in these verses: "That man is best of all who himself perceives all things; and good too is he who hearkens to one that speaks well; but whoever neither himself perceives, nor, hearing another, lays it to heart — he again is a useless man." First he set the man who himself discovers the best things; last, in ignorance, the one who neither understands nor is persuaded; and between the two, as in the terms of a proportion, the one who is persuaded by him who understands — worse than the man of perception by as much as he is better than the man who neither discovers nor is persuaded. Therefore the man who himself perceives all things is the man who speaks well; or, if you please otherwise, the man who speaks well is the man who himself perceives all things. And this is clear: for, having added "whoever himself perceives all things," he has in the second clause, in speaking of the man who speaks well, transferred the same description, putting "the one who speaks well" for "the one who perceives," as being this very man, the best orator. These things being so placed, the man, I think, who has perceived is easy for anyone to identify, that he is the man who prevails by nature, whom he defined as best, whom he also addressed as the man who speaks well; while the man who is persuaded falls into the class of the learner. For, having heard the one who says the best things, he so makes use of them, having taken them from him. To discover, then, you say, O Plato, is better than to learn, and art is second to nature — reasonably, Hesiod both

[49305] 27. thinking thus and speaking thus, and not forgetful of the laurel, on receiving which he became a poet from a shepherd. Since indeed the arts themselves and the pursuits men discovered originally by surpassing in nature and prevailing. For it was not the arts that made the natures, but the strongest natures that discovered the best of the arts; so that both in order and in power the first prizes belong to nature. And if we attribute the discovery of the arts not simply to men, but say that the gods led them to it and showed it forth, how is it not plain that art must be the addition of one who greatly prevails? And surely, if this is plain to all, and all would agree that the gods did not receive their sciences from men, but men from the gods, and that the gods hold the rank of teachers and we of learners, then by so much, as it seems, is discovering better than learning, as a god is better than a man. For they have discovered all things, while we, I think, having received them, use them. Rightly, then, and justly, the neighbour of Helicon — and as was natural for one who had received these things from the inspiration of the gods to say — set the man of this sort, "who himself perceives all things," first and supreme, as a god and near to the gods, and the one who hears and learns, second. For where and how could one set the learner supreme? It is not possible, even if one wished, but it is forbidden by nature, and justly, because we say that nature prevails everywhere. For if learning were the best and the first, then learning itself would not be first. For one would have to learn from another. So that the teacher would not be first, if learning were the better and the first thing. From whom, O you who also adorned the embroidered robe, would you hear, by whom would you be persuaded, if the learner were better than the man who first discovered, and not of necessity second, if he is to learn anything at all? For everyone who learns has surely agreed that he is inferior, by the very fact of needing to learn; since if he had not first persuaded himself that he needed to, how would he learn, or how would he be persuaded by another who spoke?

[51486] 28. Is it not, then, absurd to call the man who has agreed that he is inferior the better, and this for the very reason for which he is praised — that he has agreed he is inferior? Or, in the case of gifts, is the receiver nowhere better than the giver by the very act of receiving, but giving is held to belong to the better; while in lessons the man who applies his mind is better than the one who himself perceived and provided? And surely, in the things for which the receiver is best, how is the man who has these from the beginning not first — and this both on account of time and on account of the cause? Then I will furnish the testimony of one more poet, from Boeotia and Helicon, whom Plato himself uses for the most valuable things, they say. And this man, O gods, having quite uncovered both his own nature and that of his Muse, truly cries out in a Stentorian voice to men, as if proclaiming silence: "Wise is he who knows much by nature; but those who have learned, boisterous in their full-tongued chatter, like crows scream vain things against the divine bird of Zeus." He says that the voices of those who have learned, having taken from others, are the voices of crows set against the eagle — the orator and the wise man who prevails by nature and is from a god. And elsewhere again, more briefly but no less plainly, he protests: "What comes by nature is altogether best; but many have rushed to win glory by virtues that are taught of men" — saying both things very consistently. For since the best is found among the few, and the inferior among the many, he has set against the best the worse by means of the word "many," as being a thing belonging altogether to a few, while the other reaches the many. And still before this: "By nature good and wise according to their destiny have men become" — saying this too like the other phrase and the same thing. For where he said "virtues that are taught," he added "of men"; and where he honours nature, "according to their destiny," declaring these to be the truly good and wise.

[53534] 29. Reasonably; for if in speeches themselves no one is so mad as to consider those who steal the things said and pre-empted by another, and recite them as their own, better than those who are resourceful and fertile of themselves toward speeches — but he is best in whom one can find the greatest store of what is needful — how is it not ridiculous and full of all unreason to set the man who from the beginning heard and learned from others what he must say, before the man who is by nature superior? Nor does this stand outside the whole testimony: "In deeds chance prevails, not strength" — if you take strength as belonging to human fortune, and fortune as belonging to the divine portion. And yet, if poets, composing not by art, as Plato says, but obtaining inspiration as possessed by the god, instruct those who come after — not only their own contemporaries — and in instructing bear witness and determine that art is worth nothing compared with the power of nature and the things from the gods; and Plato bears witness, both in deeds and in words, through the poets — I will add, that the gods do so through both, both Plato and the poets — that rhetoric is a fine and divine thing, even if it does not come to men by art, but is a work of a nature that is bold and looks to victory. If, then, someone should maintain that no poet has said any such thing, and that Plato bears no witness for us, either through himself or through the poets — which he is plainly seen to do — yet one looking to the very reason of the matter would, without difficulty, see false accusation, not refutation, and that there is no proof or credibility in his calumny. For who does not know that in bodies too neither beauty nor stature nor grace is the work or making of art, nor comes from hands or from any rule, so to speak? But to anoint and tend these is held to belong to art, while to compose them from the beginning no art could be so clever. Therefore it befits art to hold the rank of a servant and a handmaid,

[55546] 30. and nature to be ranged in the figure of a mistress — unless we should also rank the baggage-carriers before the hoplites. But that is not worthy. For how is it not absurd to think it right to honour parents and to rise before our elders, but to suppose nature, which is so much prior, to be of less account than art — as if one were to judge shoes better than the feet, and clothing more precious than the body? And, it seems, we consider money less honourable than those who provide and acquire it, but art will be reckoned superior to the nature that discovered it and whose work it is. It would surely be unreasonable, by the very same example, in the case of possessions and estates to consider the man who himself provided and gathered them a better moneymaker than another who inherited them, but in speeches and affairs not to honour the man superior by nature, but whoever is seen to have taken his share from another — and not even to see this, that not only did natures from the beginning compose the arts, but also, within the arts themselves, those who prevailed by nature were the ones who excelled. For, as far as the art goes, all who learned the same things ought to have been alike, and, I think, the later ones always worse than the earlier, until the art came to be destroyed; for it would not have been possible to take everything precisely while receiving from another, but something must always have slipped away. But by force of nature, I think, and abundance, the victors have won their renown; and no one admires Daedalus, nor those before, in comparison with Phidias; rather, on the contrary, from small and mean beginnings the arts at the start came to greater and more perfect things. To the arts themselves, then, as it seems, it is plainly not profitable that art should be honoured before nature. For could they have advanced at all? Could they have reached their present form or won their dignity? No; but, I think, it was not the arts that raised men great, but those who were first in power that made the arts honoured, not abiding in the state in which they received them. And if this is plain to all,

[57689] 31. even if not before, yet now at least having been said — the greatest in the arts have become greatest not by their share in the art, but by surpassing the art. For this reason, of fellow-students some are worse, but others also better — Phidias, Zeuxis, Hippocrates, Demosthenes, whomever one wishes to admire. For they did not abide within fixed bounds, nor keep their own work in a small compass, nor agree to be ruled by the art, but, looking into the nature of speeches (some) and of affairs (others), they made children of those before them — and that of necessity, and according to nature itself. Since indeed of speeches and affairs, of all things, of gods and men, nature is the leader, not art; and things are as their nature is, not as the art is. But the art too belongs to nature; nature is not the work of the art. By Zeus, I for my part would say that art is both a discovery and a possession of nature. And whoever will not admit this will judge the first discoverers of the very arts to be worth nothing; and in honouring art he will dishonour the fathers of the arts. Why? Because it was not smithing that discovered smithing, nor medicine medicine, nor, simply to say, did any art discover an art; but all the arts, as I said, nature discovered. For if the arts were to discover the arts, it would not have been possible to make a beginning. For, no arts yet existing, it would not have been possible to discover an art; for how could one discover by means of what does not exist? And if, again, what comes to be by nature is inferior to art, then all the first discoverers of the arts were the most inferior of all; for all discovered the arts by nature in the beginning. Therefore both in the case of the original discoverers and in the case of those who surpass, nature prevails. And surely, if one were to examine what it is by which a general differs from a soldier, and a ruler in general from a private man, he would find this coming to light: that it belongs to the ruler to command, and to the ruled, having heard, to act. Therefore he commands,

[59767] 32. who has discovered, while he who has heard learns. For if a man has not discovered what must be done, how could he command another what must be done? For if he himself, having heard from another, were to command what must be done, he will be obeying before he commands. But this, so long as he is ruler, is among the impossibilities. For commanding belonged to the ruler, not obeying — no more than it belongs to the teacher to obey his pupils. By this argument too, then, nature is shown to hold the place of the ruler, and the art that comes from learning the place of the servant who obeys his superior. And surely this also was in the earlier arguments, that the gods discovered and showed forth each thing, and we men, receiving from the gods, make use, employing one set of men as interpreters of one thing, another of another. What argument, then, would better preserve what comes to be, or which is more just to trust, than the one by which we set down that the gods discovered each thing and still even now give signs; and again, that it is the proper mark of rule to discover and to command, but to hear and to learn the mark of the inferior? For neither, when the gods have discovered all things, is it shameful to assign discovery to the ruler, if indeed the gods rule all things; nor, since commanding belongs to rule, is it shameful to refer discovery to the gods, if indeed it is the mark of the discoverer to give the sign, and the superior always discovers. So be it. And in what does a master differ from a servant, by the gods? Would not everyone say that it is for the master to command, and for the slave to obey? Therefore the one knows of himself what must be done, while the other, having heard, learns. And what does the Lacedaemonian poet say, the praiser and counsellor of maidens? "Many things let the man say, but the woman find joy in what she hears." Many things, he says, let the man say, but let the woman rejoice in whatever she hears. Is it not, then, plain that the man, having himself discovered and foreknown, will say many things, while she, for whom it is fitting to be ruled,

[61889] 33. will be content with what is said? For she will surely not, waiting to hear from the woman, then himself tell the woman what must be done; nor, as Hesiod bade, "that he may teach her noble ways," will he follow her words. But if he is to teach, he will command; and if he commands, he will bring the woman nearest to his own nature, as the better the worse. By how much, then, a god is better than a man, a ruler than a private man, a master than a servant, a man than a woman, and more perfect — by so much is nature better and more competent than art; or else everything would be turned utterly upside down. Then one might see the same thing from the contrary arguments. For if all who follow the arts were agreed to be excellent, or if every art altogether were a good thing, perhaps one might have thought these arguments a refutation. But as it is, who does not know that art is to many a reproach? For instance, the tanners and cobblers and fullers and saddlers — who would count them fortunate for their art? And surely "the tale is not mine," said Plato, playing on Euripides' line, but yours, O Plato, and, by Zeus, of your own workshop, that these arts are mechanical and those who follow them servile. Is it not, then, absurd, and a manifest false accusation, to think that those who know the arts I named, and a thousand others, share in nothing good besides the art, but, if a man pursues something not by art, to censure him for that very thing as deprived of one of the secure goods — and that you yourselves should at once make no account of art, but even reproach the many with it, and at once exalt this very thing as purely good, censuring whatever does not come to be by art? And surely, choose one of two things, rhetoric might justly say: either honour the handicraftsmen too as good and noble men, or do not censure the orators,

[63746] 34. if they have no art about the things of which they speak. Can rhetoric, then, furnish anyone to speak on her behalf, or is it tit for tat? She could not, I think, the Homeric Idomeneus would say. The things, then, which, even if we should not grant her to be an art, one could say on her behalf — taking away many of those that come to mind — are so many and of such a kind. But perhaps someone will think that, these things being thus demonstrated, we are pressing for the inferior part henceforth, if we try to teach that it is also an art. But I neither retract any of the things said, nor do I concede to Plato that rhetoric has no share of art; rather, as far as she has of art — for I will use Plato's own words — this I will pursue. And what I did in the foregoing, this I will do here too: following the very things Plato has said, I will show that she has a share of art. And yet what else could one wish? For he says, indeed, in disparaging her, that she guesses and brings forward her speeches in whatever way she may guess. And yet how is it not contradictory to say that she guesses, but to say, for this very reason, that she uses no reason? For all who guess, in applying themselves to the matter, surely guess by reason. For it is not possible to guess without using reason; rather, it is the reason of the matter that makes one guess. For instance, those who aim at things seen from afar and hit them, referring, I think, to the nature of the thing, thus aim, using this reason, and as it were aiming at this as a target. For those who miss do not even aim at all, but do the very opposite of aiming. For to aim is just this — to hit the mark of the matter. Therefore one does not err by the fact of aiming, but, in missing, one did not aim. Reasonably; for no one errs while using reason, but he at once stumbled and did not preserve the reason. For reason had this power, not to miss; and this is so true that the most prudent of men,

[65705] 35. and those who partake of reason most, aim best. So that, if aiming belongs to rhetoric, then rhetoric most of all preserves reason. This, then, is shown thus to clash with the very things he has said. But I wonder that he neither recognized nor guessed that, even apart from composing the contraries and using as a sign of its not being an art what is rather a sign of its being an art, by this one thing alone he will give a handle, if he grants that aiming belongs to rhetoric. For, by the gods, if someone asked him, putting it thus in his own manner: "Do you know, O Plato, an art of archery, so to call it, or do you so name it? For you have gone through the whole science of statecraft and discovered its parts precisely." "I do," he would say, "both know it and so name it." "What, then, is this, and what does it profess?" "To hit the mark in the shooting of arrows." "Good. Therefore, whenever it aims, then it hits." "Of course." "Is it, then, not an art because it aims, or is there even an art of this, of aiming?" "I think there is an art of this." "So be it. And what of the pilot's art? For it seems to me to do the very same thing as archery." Yes, by the reason it uses. For it aims — not, I think, so as to hit with an arrow, but so as to save from the sea. For all that the pilot must learn in his training he knows and has heard. But he saves the ship, to put it all in a word, not by these things, but by those whereby he disposes the present circumstance well. And this is impossible for him without aiming. For consider, first, if you please, those who ferry to Aegina, that they see Aegina; toward what they see, then, they aim. Then those bound for Pontus; or, if you please, those bound for Egypt and Sicily, which was never strange to you; these you will find guessing altogether. For first

[67528] 36. there is need of the very point — where the mark is at which to aim — and what at that moment came from the eyes, this must be inferred by reasoning; and then, when it appears again, to aim afresh toward what is seen. For consider Odysseus, having heard from Calypso that he must sail keeping the Bear on his left hand. Surely he must henceforth himself reason out the particulars, and the channels through which the ship goes; for you might cross many seas, and come to land in many places and harbours, keeping the Bear on the left — and so too on the right — so as to reach Pharos; nor can one pass a strait by a book, but one must of necessity aim at the particulars. For come, what have they learned, who now bring the rudders inward, and again outward, on the same day? Is it not by aiming at what is seen, or at what is going to be seen? And for what reason do they often inquire of those they meet, where in the sea they are, or off what land? "Not the precise pilots," you will say. And what man is precise or sufficient? Then no one is a craftsman by this argument. And if this is so, what is terrible in there being no sufficient craftsman who is an orator either? And surely, if piloting is an art, even if it is not preserved in the man called a pilot, what prevents rhetoric too from being an art, even if it is not preserved among those who claim to be orators? And if, indeed, you are speaking of those pilots from whom one inquires something and seeks of another — for surely not about Poseidon, nor about the Nereids, nor about the Dioscuri — yet you grant them to be pilots, as man to men, and to have the pilot's art: to all these it belongs to aim, who, even before setting sail, straightway sit down aiming about the winds; for they did not hear from Zeus on Ida or Gargarus, but, I think, from beginning to end they aim, whether they will reach the harbours before the winds, virtually all of them, so to speak.

[69468] 37. So that the image of your "part," "a dream of a shadow," according to Pindar, turns to your own refutation. By Zeus, and the counterpart of justice — medicine, and, if you please, gymnastic too, the second good for the body — do they not aim at the nature of bodies? By Zeus, yes, whether you say so or not. Or does the trainer foreknow straightway, from the start, how each of us is in body — does he not learn from trial? And what, when he trains for that for which he makes trial — does he, like Apollo at Delphi, thus know the future precisely, and assert that he will render this man, from these means, in every way and altogether unharmed, either absolutely or for some length of time? Therefore either you call the trainer mad if he does not aim, or, if sober, he himself will agree that he aims at the best, but has no such thing to foretell or promise. So be it. And the physician, who is strong in the trust of experience and now uses these drugs and regimens, but is ignorant how each of us is in nature or constitution — does he not, aiming, apply all that he does about the patient, referring to what is probable? I think so. Or could any of them say flatly that this man, using these things, will be outside all danger and will suffer nothing unpleasant whatever? No; otherwise they would not fall so far short of the god who holds Epidaurus, you would say — and very much to my mind. But from the many and common cases, I think, they conjecture the particular ones too. And if indeed they have followed certain individual cases, they aim at trial itself, selecting what will profit each. And these things, O Plato, are demonstrated by your

[71128] 38. adamantine necessities. For that the same things are not profitable to all bodies, neither in sickness nor in health — but as the things profitable in sickness and in health are not the same, so, and still more, they are not the same for all in sicknesses, nor in their health — you will learn of the physicians themselves. But to distinguish the natures of all is impossible. For as in their shapes all men differ from one another, so too in the whole nature of the body one differs from another throughout the whole race. But surely the art bids one treat whoever happens along and is in need, even if he has just come from the ends of the earth. What, then, remains but to aim? For if he will neither know all, and will treat the one who comes, and will know at least this much — that not all need the same things — what I say is left. Or do you, having shown the contrary, go round not only standing in Olympia as a beaten image, but also having won a procession at the Great Panathenaea. Consider now also about painting, which, if you call an art, I shall no longer ask; for you do call it so in these very Gorgian arguments. Is there, then, any other chief point of this than to aim at the things ever present, and those whose imitation one must make? And surely, if not this, what else? This, at any rate, is the art that even gave the matter its very name; for the images of the painters made men say "to liken" and to use the word of other things too. But if indeed the word existed before the art, it is still more finely attested that the art consists in nothing but likening, if its very work prevails in being an image. Yet it does not, I think, liken without reason, for it would not even liken at all if it had nothing whereby to do so, but it likens according to the reason of nature. And if it pleases you to dispute this too, keep the rest for our sake, but grant that the very mingling of colours is the work of an art that aims — and not of art only, but of nature too, that is sufficient. Show these things only, and laugh at

[73181] 39. rhetoric. And surely the finest and most perfect part of the art, that by which painting or sculpture differs in excellence, is, I suppose, the mixing of colour. For it brings the likeness near to the truth. Therefore the very thing by which it is greatest, this you take away, unless you leave it the likening. And what need is there to examine the other arts that proceed through aiming? For divination itself runs the risk of being only this, to liken; and yet someone, examining and dividing thus, might say that by this and this alone a diviner differs from a layman — that likening belongs to all, but knowing belongs to the diviner. But I say that the diviner knows just this very thing, to liken, and nothing whatever besides. And of this I will furnish Plato as a witness; and if he does not appear to bear witness, let no one trust me. And the sweetest part of the testimony is that it is not in some other dramas or arguments, but in the very ones we used just now for the proof of other things, that it lies expressly: "Since the inquiry of the sensible into the future, made through birds and the other signs — since it is furnished by mind and intelligence, by human conjecture — they named oionoïstic, which the young now, dignifying it with the o, call oionistic." Therefore, when you say that the oionistic belongs to men who liken, divination does not escape, in this respect, from likening, if oionistic is a part of divination. And surely that it is also through "the other signs" you yourself add. And when you add this, you grant that all divination is likening — and very rightly, by my judgment at least. For the gods do not, I think, know the future in the same way as those men who claim to. For the gods understand what they are going to do, and matters lie before them as before their eyes. For this reason "Zeus among the gods is the most unerring prophet"; but men judge matters as though in darkness — this bears witness. For the second place is his, and the end he himself holds. But men judge matters as though in darkness, by a sound or by something of what appears, but have nothing constant to

[75316] 40. foretell. And here is the proof: for if you do not declare your question, he has nothing to tell you about the signs he saw. But, instead of being able to speak about the future, he does not even know this very thing, on what account you have come, unless he should inquire. For matters do not lie present before him, showing themselves; rather, applying the proofs to the signs, he likens with reference to reason. And it is shown to aim at the future, the act of divining, not only in this respect — which one of the poets has already attested — but even if he answers the question, he likens the surrounding circumstances to the matter. "Victory in war" — and from what cause it came he does not know, nor anything at all about the battle, but he likens. Again, "either a plot of citizens or of certain others" — and the manner he cannot tell, but he conjectures as one does dreams. And the wisdom of the Egyptians, who that has met with it does not know? That whatever they either threaten about the future or promise, the manner and the places and the measure they cannot determine, but say either wealth, or poverty, or grief, or joy, or death, or actions, or such things, but the particulars themselves they have not grasped, but liken some to the magnitude of what appears, some to the customs of each people, some to similarities — and there are things very far separated from one another. But everywhere they call upon ingenuity, since to it alone, and to it alone, belongs likening, but not speaking simply. Nothing, then, but likening does it appear, in truth, throughout. Why, then, do you wonder if rhetoric aims? For it appears disposed like divination, except in so far as divination is finished when it has guessed, while rhetoric not only aims at affairs, but also acts, through

[77118] 41. its servants, whatever it finds best. So that it holds both the function of divination and that of generalship — which Plato will not say has nothing to do with statecraft. How, then, is rhetoric "an image of a part of statecraft," unless thus? But surely, thus, it is no image. So be it. And what do the generals themselves do, O wondrous man? Nothing else, I think, than aim — at least the best and most prudent of them — both at the mind of the enemy and at the nature of their own soldiers, and, I think, at places and occasions too. Are they, then, worth nothing to make use of? I do not think so. But surely, if through so many arts as I have named — for I leave aside the greater number — aiming appears to lead the way in their works, and to be the thing through which all proceed, how is it right to censure rhetoric for this? Or how is it right to bring this, which is virtually the one thing common to the arts, as a refutation, that rhetoric has no share of art? For it is nothing else than to destroy her by the very tokens by which one ought to recognize and accept her, when one undertakes to say these things. Therefore it is not because she aims that she has no share of art; rather, even if for no one of all the rest, by this one thing she has a share — by aiming — if Plato has spoken the truth in saying that she does aim. And what shall one say of the rest, when that much-honoured thing itself, whether one must call it science or wisdom, do you not, by the gods, yourself confess that you liken about the greatest matters, when somewhere you say that it is not possible to assert, but you leave the precise truth to the god — doing well, and truly philosophizing? "But shall I," tell me this, "be persuaded that Zeus is no better than the sophist of Soli?" Good man, consider whether all human things may be matter only for likening, while knowledge, according to Homer, is on the floor of Zeus alone. That it is, then, altogether a sophism, this

[79094] 42. assertion that the orators counsel the people what seems good to them, and aim at this alone — even if a child would not refute it, yet anyone of sense would. For to me the very opposite of all this appears: that neither in the nature of rhetoric is there anything more than not at once letting come to pass what seems good to the multitudes, nor do the orators look to anything more than the best, nor do the peoples themselves escape this — that the orators are better than they at reckoning about affairs, and indeed about the whole condition and fortune of life. And this is plain from the very honours they assign them. For if this were true, which Plato charges, and the orators did not lead the peoples, but were of the peoples, then, first, what reverence and honour would they have from the peoples? Where would they obtain the seats of honour, or the things above the many? For no one admires servants as better than himself, nor does he add his own judgment to the man who first formed an opinion about affairs. Then, what herald or embassy would ever come to need a man who was an orator, if it had been shown that counselling the people what seems good to the multitudes belongs to the orators? For what city, in sending an embassy, would choose to court a man worth nothing, or what envoy, on arrival, would ever have approached him for the sake of persuading the people, if he knew that the sum of the orator's life was to counsel whatever the people wished, and to wait for that man's voice as children, I think, wait for their teachers'? The case would have been the reverse of what it is with choruses, if the many were not going to wait for the orator, but the orator held back until the people gave their sign. And who, defending a private or public suit, would have sought one of the orators by whom he might win, if the orator was going to say what seemed good to the judges, and nothing else whatever? Thus those most in danger, and contending about the greatest matters, would most of all have neglected the orators. For there are those who are surely most in danger, for whom the dispositions of the hearers are difficult, and those who are prejudged by slanders. And if

[81295] 43. the orators had made it their business to say what seemed good to the hearers, and exalted these things — Heracles! — a man might have carried his ruin from home, if anyone brought an orator to such a matter, just as if a man should bring in the executioner along with himself. Is it so, then, and do those who most expect to die, and on whom lies the greatest fear that they will not obtain a fair hearing, neglect the orators in any special degree? It is not so. Plato will not say things so paradoxical. Rather, they come to their doors, beg, grovel, thinking rhetoric a remedy for all things — death, exile, the fears themselves, the anger of judges, the contentiousness of the people, all. Why? Because they know that the orators do not practise saying what seems good to those sitting in judgment — for they could not even be said to practise this, if they were going to do that — but they know that the orators from afar attend to the matters and practise speaking as the order of the matters demands, aiming at the nature of these, not at the nature of the hearers; or if also at the nature of the hearers, yet not so as to serve their desires, nor to say all that they wish to hear, but to be able to persuade them by saying what is better to say — just as we see physicians too aiming at the nature of bodies, yet not so as simply to gratify desires, but so as not to apply the best thing at random, but in such a way as the patient will best accept it. To this extent I too say that the orator aims at the hearers, and if you say this, I agree; but not, I think, as a slave to the multitudes, nor for the sake of gratification does he observe their natures, but, as Demosthenes says, "that he may say the best things to the purpose." "I, for my part," he says, "am not at a loss what to say about the present matters, but in what manner I ought to speak to you about them." Then he uses frankness, and very

[83218] 44. brilliantly, as I think. "For I am persuaded, from what I have seen and heard while present, that most matters have escaped you through your not wishing to do what is needful, not through your not understanding." If this is aiming, O Plato — to converse while watching the natures — we do not escape the charges, all the orators will say. But if you say that they yield to the multitudes and do what they are bidden, but do not bid, you have taken the handmaid for the mistress, and you seem to be censuring the public slaves, not the orators. But neither do the public slaves think highly of themselves because they serve the wishes of the city, and for the orators the very cause of their pride is this: that they do not say what seems good to the peoples, but what they themselves think best. And if they were servants of the desire of the crowds and declaimed what seemed good to those sitting in judgment, it would not even be possible for them to use frankness, much less to think above the rest. But, I think, they are conscious to themselves that they do not serve pleasures, but bring desires to soberness; that they do not look to the many, but the many look to them; that they are not ruled by the private men, but rule the many; and they have received their title from them, as a token instead of any other, a witness of their authority — I mean the title of "demagogues," not because they are led by the peoples, O you who turn everything upside down, but because they lead the peoples; just as we call them "pedagogues," I think, not because they have submitted to the children, but because they lead them. For whatever you say fits the orator to be called — ruler, champion, teacher: all these are names of the orator. For what teachers are to children, that the orators are to the peoples: they show what must be done, and instruct them by their counsels and decrees. And nature has so ordered these things. The chorus-leader does not serve the desires of the chorus-singers, but if he gratifies them in anything, he watches, along with his gratification, that nothing be sung amiss.

[85323] 45. But the chorus-singers do not prompt him with the cues, nor does he, as they bid, apply the melody and the rhythm; nor does he learn from them what he must teach them — no more than the pilot learns from the sailors what must be done. Rather, the sailors hear what he commands, and the pilot says, not whatever seems good to the sailors, but whatever he, being himself in command of the sailors on the ship, judges. Everywhere all things look to the leaders, and their wishes lead the way. And the wishes of the many follow, some willingly, some unwillingly. The chorus-leader leads the chorus, the pilot the sailors, the general the soldiers, the orator the people. All rulers, then, are by nature superior to those under them; but if a man, having authority, also gratifies — persuading, not compelling — and, besides preserving his own rank, aims also at the desire of those under him, this is the man who is truly the statesman, and whom Homer said was "gentle as a father." And I think he made the same man the best orator too, to whom he attributed this. Do not, then, say this as a reproach against the orators, that they gratify, but only if they gratify apart from the best; if they aim at the best together with the gratification, then in this respect render to rhetoric her fitting praise, that you may be seen requiting her with like for like. But if you say that they simply gratify and serve desires, what is the proof? For I, from the very facts, furnish the other view. For if the orators were not going to be so admired, either by the peoples or by the private men or the citizens or the strangers, nor themselves at all to enjoy the dignities they now enjoy — in a word, if they were neither going to be esteemed, nor to make money, nor to have power, nor to speak — how is it possible to accept such a charge against them, through which these results would have followed? Then again, he has charged them with what is wholly

[87271] 46. impossible. For perhaps it is not easy to gratify even the Centaurs, if one were addressing them — I do not mean all in common, but not even, I think, one by one, if their nature was double; but to know and serve the wishes of a people to the end — what device is there? And where is it possible? For there is no one people, nor of one desire — nor, I think, will there ever be; but, like streams, one is borne from one quarter and another from another, divided among all things — by ages, by pursuits, by natures, by fortune, by desires — one knowing one thing, another another, if indeed one ought to call "knowing" the knowing nothing whatever about the truth. And, by Zeus, some are present now, others next, like the leaves, which seem to be the same and of the same trees, but are never what they were before. By what desires, then, is the orator going to be a slave, or whose opinions is he to speak, or whom is he to aim at, who are so strangely disposed that they cannot themselves know what they wish? But they are so far from thinking the same things as one another that none of them, so to speak, thinks the same things to the end about the same matters even with himself, but all, using the orator as a guide of the hand, are always in need. At whom, then, tell me, will he look? For I will ask the same question again. And how will he serve their desires? For when he must serve many, and these are not of the same mind, and it is impossible to gratify all from the same things, how will the orator serve their desires? For at the same time he will gratify the one set and grieve the other. So that he will speak no more toward pleasure than toward displeasure. How, then, do you call these men servants? For it is not possible. And that Plato himself has agreed that the orators do not say what seems good to the many, one may, I suppose, point this out, that even a child attending would detect it — I say "detect," that I may not say "refute." For he grants this much, that rhetoric is the

[89283] 47. craftsman of persuasion; and whether of belief or of teaching I do not now dispute — but at least he attributes persuading to her. When, then, persuading belongs to rhetoric, the orators do not say what seems good to the many. For if they say what already seems good, they do not persuade; for no one who has formed his own opinion is persuaded by another about this. But by this is distinguished the deliberating for oneself from being persuaded. But if indeed this too must be said, those who do what seems good to themselves are persuaded by themselves, not by the orators. And no one persuades who has not prevailed by speaking his own judgment. So that the very opposite of Plato's argument follows, if the orators say what seems good to the many. For what those who wish say, this they are persuaded to say. Therefore, if rhetoric is the craftsman of persuasion, and persuading belongs to the orators, the orators do not flatter; for they do not serve the many, but persuade them. But if the orators say what seems good to the many, rhetoric is not the craftsman of persuasion; for it presents men persuaded by the many, not persuading. In view of this, choose on which side the falsehood lies. For Plato refutes Plato for us — and, what is finest, not from afar, but from the same place and in the same arguments interwoven. That rhetoric, then, is neither irrational, nor such, so to speak, as merely to aim; nor, if it has a share of art, is this to be made a windfall; nor is it among the many arts I just went through, but, having the greatest share of reason — or rather wholly consisting in reasonings — and being the greatest and first of human things and the most perfect, and the very limit, if one may say so, of what one could pray for

[91042] 48. — this is the thing to show. And one might know it if one considered her nature, and for what and how great things she was first discovered, and what she does and accomplishes throughout. I think, then, that all who are able would agree that men are not born in the same fashion, but in two divisions: one such as to use force and to grasp for more — which one would call the division of the stronger (I mean not the better in virtue, but the more powerful) — and the other such as to be worsted and to yield against its judgment, for want of power to prevent — which we recognize as belonging to the weaker. This, then, was what made men discover some such thing on their own behalf — or rather the gods discover it on behalf of men — which would restrain the strength, and would become for all, as it were, a pledge of the equal and the just, profitable alike to the many and to those by nature inclined to force. For not even those men were going to escape the recompense of unjust and evil deeds; rather, the weakest being first destroyed, and others by others little by little, and the rest being thus continually taken away, it remained for them, in the end, to come upon themselves — as they say the Sown Men did, if indeed the myth too hints at this. For to me, if one may digress, it seems wonderfully to wish to make this clear. He has made the beginning of their birth from a dragon's teeth, and says that the men themselves came up armed, and that Ares, instead of Hermes, had charge of that harvest. As I said, then, not even to those who surpass in powers was the seeming good fortune of the start going to profit in the end, but by the very thing in which they were stronger — or rather thought themselves to be — by this it remained for them to perish, so that the affairs of all men would utterly waste away. There was need, then, that some common remedy be found for the race, the same and profitable to all — to the strong, to the weaker, to the fair-minded — so as either to prevent some before their crimes,

[93076] 49. or to punish at the very moment, and to provide for others a security of life, and for those who honoured justice willingly the fitting gratitude. There was discovered, then, out of these things, rhetoric, and she came forth as the guardian of justice and the bond of life for men, that affairs might be judged neither by hands, nor by arms, nor by being beforehand, nor by number and magnitude, nor by any other of the inequalities, but that reason might decide the just in tranquillity. This, then, is the origin and nature of rhetoric, and this her purpose — to save all men and to thrust back violence by persuasion. And, discovered for such and so great things, she alone has made our life worth living, bringing both private households and the common affairs of cities, so far as in her lies, into concord, establishing teaching and learning as forever a fine thing for all, and being the first to teach men everywhere to flee and hate unreason and tumults.

[94045] Let us consider, then, the laws too — what it is that made them — and if anyone finds another origin of laws, not the same as that of rhetoric, let him say this is nonsense, and win. But surely all would say this: that we needed laws for no other single thing than to suffer nothing grievous from one another, and that the base and bold should not prevail over the good, but the good should be superior to the base, together with justice. These are, so to speak, the two chief points of the laws: punishment of the unjust and honour of the fair. For if each obtained his deserts, there is no way in which justice could better be preserved, nor in which the common life of men could more securely be maintained. These things, then, appear to be present in the nature of rhetoric. For those for whom it sufficed to grasp for more in silence were not, I suppose, going to need speech — neither so as to win by speaking themselves (for they were strong elsewhere), nor so as to hear others; for this very thing was their wish, to hear no one. But those for whom there was no

[95117] 50. other way to obtain equal terms had need of the speech that persuades; and this, again, was at once on behalf of justice. For the man who entrusts to himself and his resources what seems good to himself claims to prevail, of whatever sort it may be; but the man who looks to that by which he must also persuade those outside, and thinks fit to practise this, does not flee the test of what sort the things he wishes are. Rhetoric, then, appears to share the same nature with legislation, if indeed one must view the matter precisely in both cases — or rather legislation is a part of rhetoric, and in all respects, in a way, second to it. First, because for the laws themselves there was need of the speech that persuades. For if it is plain that the laws were to be enacted so that all might have their proper due, and that those superior in might were not going to counsel this, how was there not of necessity need already of the speech that would persuade? For it was not possible to compel those who were by nature inclined to this very thing, nor was this the origin of laws; for it was for the very sake of not using force that the laws had to be enacted. So it was not possible to enact them by force, but this would have been the first thing contrary to the laws. There was need, then, to persuade above all the very men who opposed, and at once by this very thing to make them better; or if not, at least the many, and those on whose behalf one was legislating. For the one set, using their own nature, were going to wrong the others toward the many; the other set, using both that of rhetoric and their own, were going to benefit even those, toward them — if indeed they were to be sober. But if, then, those did not accept it, it remained to persuade the many, and those on whose behalf one was legislating, of this very thing — that one was legislating on their own behalf. There was need, then, of speeches and persuasion. For this one reason, then, rhetoric is thus of necessity prior to laws and their leader. And secondly, what, by the gods, must one say the laws themselves are, but speeches — differing so much from the rest as they are written? If I remember anything, Aeschines agrees that Socrates too

[97345] 51. bears witness. And apart from the testimony, both of Aeschines and of Socrates, one might see it by looking at the matter itself. For they tell us, in a way, both what we must do and what we must abstain from, both in peace and in war, both singly and in common, and they govern the cities continually. Therefore the things that are in the public speeches of the orators, these the laws say, except that the laws do not leave off speaking, but play the orator through all time, since, I think, they are written. When, then, the speeches about these things belong to rhetoric, the laws are a part of rhetoric. For the being written, that comes to be, is a part belonging to speeches, if indeed some are spoken from the mouth, while others are written. And surely the decrees the orators themselves compose. Therefore, when the decrees are of the same nature as the laws and of the same polities, both belong to the orators, so that the laws at least are a part of rhetoric.

[98323] Come now, let us consider also about the judicial art, for what we needed it and what it wishes for us. Or is this also the easiest of all to see, that it succours the laws? For those who transgress the things they command, these it searches out and punishes; and not even this simply, but here too it follows the laws. For as they bid, so it chastises. So be it. What, then, does the judicial art need toward these things? Whence will it find the just, except from rhetoric? For the one refutes what is done, while the other gives its vote upon the refutations. Here too, then, rhetoric appears to wish the same things as the judicial art, but to prevail by so much as it alone securely holds them both together. For the judicial art, wishing to come, as in battle, to the aid of legislation, suffered the same thing as legislation itself. For that art needed rhetoric first, so that the laws might have an entrance to it; and the judicial art, having taken the figure of an ally to the laws, itself first needed the aid that comes from rhetoric. For it had to be able to give aid; but this was not possible without rhetoric. By so much, then, is rhetoric more august

[99493] 52. and more honourable than the judicial art, as I almost say the judge is than the executioner. For the orator refutes the crimes and hands them over to the judge, and the judge, having heard and learned, hands them over in turn to the officers, and the judge is midway between the servant and the orator. And again, when the suit has reached its end, the judicial art has nothing whatever left over, but, as legislation, having enacted the laws, is finished, so the judge is finished after the verdict. But rhetoric, taking in hand those who, either through ignorance or through ill will, are vexed at the verdicts and carry matters off into tumults or factions, restrains and admonishes them, persuading them to be content with the laws and the vote of the judges — not honouring the law of Pindar, O you who say things contrary to the nature of rhetoric, nor chanting these things: "Law, the king of all, both of mortals and immortals, leads on, justifying the most violent, with sovereign hand. I judge by the deeds of Heracles, since unbought —" For you say you do not remember the whole; and perhaps you ought not to remember even these things, at least not for rhetoric. But up to this point rhetoric too says, "Law, the king of all, both of mortals and immortals"; but what follows is no longer the same — how should it be? Day and night will never agree on the same things — but quite the contrary: it leads on, honouring justice and admonishing the bold in their insolence. For if it should think fit that the most violent be the law that justifies, and that the sovereign hand of Heracles prevail — Heracles, who along with his hand cared for justice — it will perish by its own arguments. For what place is left,

[101221] 53. or use, for rhetoric or for speeches, if the hand defines the just and the man able to instruct about the matter shall have no advantage? And where is persuasion, if force prevails? And this, too, when she who has persuasion for her work has given force the advantage? And it seems to me that Pindar too, if one must say something about the song, did not say these things by way of proposal or counsel, in earnest, to men, but as if in indignation. "I judge by the deeds of Heracles" — by these very words; because elsewhere too, recalling these matters in a certain dithyramb, he says, "But you, Geryon, among us I do praise; yet what is not dearer to Zeus, I keep wholly silent." For it is not fitting, he says, when one's goods are being snatched away, to sit by the hearth and be a coward. And yet to fight against law — and that the king of men and of gods alike — was not a thing for Pindar to praise, nor to counsel kicking against the goads. He himself, at any rate, has called such a thing a "slippery path" and bids us beware of it. But what, he says, are these things to me now? For whether these things seemed good to Pindar or not, yet such a thing will not be shown to seem good to rhetoric. For one must not snatch each thing as one can and call this law, but each must obtain his just due, and one must honour the law that distributes these things, and call only such a thing law, and the contrary lawlessness. This is the doctrine of rhetoric, and with this law she dwells, and about this she persuades, watching that no one transgress, bringing the transgressors to soberness. And here is the greatest proof: for where there is law and justice, there too are rhetoric and speeches; but where the superior hand takes away the just, there you would see nothing administered by rhetoric. But the laws, the trial, and speeches are, as it were, of one portion and nature. There being these three powers, as I said in digressing, rhetoric alone occupies all the places. For being prior to

[103227] 54. legislation, in respect of the need of it, and prior again to the judicial art, since that too was needed, having taken the legislative art first as the middle, and then again the judicial art likewise, enclosing each on both sides, she becomes first and middle and last — at once setting herself in the middle of both, and at once setting both in the middle of herself — so that they might most of all abide together, using rhetoric as a bond. Is rhetoric, then, "an image of a part of statecraft," or are the parts of statecraft, as you say, held together by rhetoric? For to me, in truth, he appears in these matters not to be censuring rhetoric, nor to be showing an image of a part of statecraft, but, as it were, having taken some image of rhetoric, to be busy about this, and not even to touch rhetoric herself — like the Trojans of Stesichorus, who held the image of Helen as though it were Helen herself. But he would differ so much, that the image is not even like rhetoric. But surely they say there are four parts of virtue: prudence, temperance, justice, courage. Rhetoric, then, was discovered in prudence and on behalf of justice; and temperance and courage of those who possess her save the cities — temperance, since they choose the orderly life before disorder, and courage, because they do not yield to opponents. For if they yield, they will not guard rhetoric, so that, as long as they guard her, they do not yield. Therefore it is not the case that, there being four parts of flattery, rhetoric is to justice what cookery is to medicine; rather, there being four parts of virtue, all have been wrought through her, and what gymnastic and medicine are in the body — I mean both together — that rhetoric appears to be in the soul and in the affairs of cities. For the things uncertain whether they will even come to be

[105071] 55. she foresees, whenever she addresses the people; and the things how they may not come to be she foresees, whenever she legislates; and some things she preserves so far as she can; and the things done she sets right, whenever she hands over the wrongdoers to the judges. What, then, if Archelaus, having killed his own master and uncle, seized the rule, or, having cast that man's seven-year-old son into the well, said to Cleopatra that he had fallen in chasing a goose, or raved in some madness at the mill — what are these things to rhetoric, O you who have moved every argument and all but the very stones in truth? What do these irrelevant episodes mean for you? "For I, for my part, did not persuade these things," rhetoric would say. "Nor, if anyone obeyed me, would he have accomplished these things, or anything else whatever, by slaughtering and strangling; but, having persuaded and openly demonstrated, would have laid claim to what belonged to himself. At least in lesser matters," she says, "I use this method, and I give the inheritances not to those who have snatched them, but to those who have demonstrated their right. And Archelaus himself," she says, "I would so far from ever having thought worthy of these things, that I would straightway have brought him to where he would have paid a fair penalty — and that perhaps even before he strangled the boy, while the first murders were still in his hands — if rhetoric had had any place in Macedonia. But as it is, in my absence, he did the wrong, and they had the misfortune, both those who were destroyed and those who received such a ruler. So that, if from no other quarter, at least from the evils of Archelaus learn how fine a thing rhetoric is, and how necessary, for a city and a nation that is going to be saved, and not to be wretchedly

[106890] 56. enslaved to the accursed." These things, I think, rhetoric would persuade more, saying things proper to herself and just and belonging to her. But if Plato thinks to refute her by these things, it is time, I think, to bring against her also the deeds of Gyges the Lydian — these are even stranger — that, having killed his master, he held the rule; and she was privy and an accomplice, being the wife of the one and the mistress of the other. Why, then, do we not also tell those tales — that Cyrus, having crossed the Araxes, joined battle with the Massagetae, and Darius, having bridged the Bosporus, crossed against the Scythians, and Xerxes, having bridged the Hellespont, against Greece, and Ninus was taken by the Medes, and Sardanapalus was burned alive, having himself mounted the pyre? And what are these things to the purpose? Or when would one cease accusing rhetoric, if all the calamities that ever befell either private men or cities he should reckon to rhetoric? And yet, about Archelaus, one might also say this: that this man was the one who called Socrates to himself, none of the orators; but I let this pass. But, I think, it is ridiculous. For as long as a man does not show rhetoric to be the cause of these things, nor these things to befall through her nature, he does not grant that rhetoric erred; and this is to refute what is in question. And besides, it is silly, if he should think it permitted to himself to attach to rhetoric all licence and the things that are not her works, but does not see the opposite argument,