WORK: Orationes 45  (slug: aelius-aristides-orationes-45-9670fd)

CHAPTER: 01-orationes-45



[108444] 57. nor will suppose that the man who speaks on her behalf and exalts her will be able to bring to rhetoric all the good things that were ever done among men. We, then, demonstrate for what rhetoric was discovered, so that, if this is a fine thing, we may consider rhetoric good also; but if it is shameful and to be fled, we may use the same names and reckonings about rhetoric too. She appears, then, from the beginning to have been composed and considered on behalf of justice — just as from these things, as I said, this name, "the laws," got its force. For there was need, for those worsted by the hands, of speech and of law as helper. Therefore, whatever crimes a man may pick out and bring into the midst, besides accomplishing nothing to the purpose, he will bring them as a contribution to the arguments for rhetoric, not against her. For these and such things were the very reasons she was discovered — to hate and prevent them. "By Zeus, but some who champion rhetoric play the false accuser." And by this very thing rhetoric is more august. How? Because some of those who champion medicine too have, I think, killed certain men with a drug, and perhaps another in some other way; but not on this account is medicine an evil thing, which is so far from killing men that it is, so to speak, a remedy against death, so far as in itself lies. Therefore whoever most hates and is displeased with those who kill, this man most welcomes and honours those who save. Therefore in the case of rhetoric too, if she is by nature such as to make men insolent and flatterers, then of necessity she is shameful and base and illiberal and unbefitting a good and noble man; but if she was shown forth for the sake of saving men by speech and saving the just, for the sake of this she was instituted — what medicine is in the body, this rhetoric is in the soul, as our argument proceeded onward

[110335] 58. in order — for I now leave gymnastic aside. So that whoever most is displeased with the false accusers or flatterers, it most befits him to honour her who was instituted on behalf of the best and is a remedy against these very things. For just as the man who kills while professing medicine is not at once both a physician and a killer, but, so long as he is a physician, will in no way join in these deeds, but, even if another strikes the blow, will himself heal — but at once he both kills and has destroyed the art along with it — so here too men are not at once orators and false accusers and flatterers, but, so long as they are orators, neither of these, nor anything else shameful at all among them, nor anything near it, but they refute the wrongdoers and teach the ignorant about affairs; and at once they will be outside both these things and rhetoric. They will not, then, bring reproach upon rhetoric whenever they err. For they will err from her by just so much as they err from the just; since the pilot's art too is, I suppose, the art of saving those who sail, and yet one of those who sit at the stern might lead out into the open sea and sink it and do some other such thing. But neither must one censure the pilot's art for this, nor do men say that the pilot, by going on board, is the most opposed of all things to the safety of those who sail, nor does anyone, I think, put the scuttlers into one class with the pilots. For the pilot must, I think, know both the things that will harm the ship and the things that will preserve it, just as I think the physician too must know both the things dangerous to the body and the things that save it; but the art wishes to use the good in either case — reasonably, and according to its very name. And so far

[112113] 59. is anyone who does mischief in these matters from preserving the name of the art, that even if he err unwillingly, Plato says, we do not use precise speech when we say that the physician erred, or the pilot. For so long as the art prevails, there is no error, for it is not possible to err according to it; for to err is not the art. Utterly, then, if a man should do on purpose the contrary of what the art wishes, this man we shall say does wrong by his share of the art, or does reproach to the art — rather, that he does double reproach to the art, but the art does not do it. And what need is there of other examples than the one of which we made mention a little before and showed Plato in agreement? The laws are surely enacted for the sake of the safety of the cities and the establishing of justice for all, and legislation, both according to him and according to us and according to all men, is to be reckoned among the good and fine things and along with justice — this very thing, the "justly," not escaping it; and Plato sets it down so even before. If, then, someone should ask us, putting it thus: "But how many have already brought forward laws that were in no way sound and had every dreadful feature? And how many have been convicted in indictments for illegal proposals? Or how many laws, being in force, have been repealed as not better to use? What, then? Will you say that legislation is not in every way a fine thing, on account of such laws, or that all the laws ever written or to be written are fine and just, since legislation must in every way be a fine thing?" Shall we say that he asks unanswerable things, and shall we cover ourselves up? Or whose is it to find a moderate answer, one that will say that legislation and the laws that truly are laws are a fine and just thing? For it was for this that they first came to men; but such things are not laws so much as, in Demosthenes' word, lawlessness, both the things the laws forbid and on whose behalf

[114102] 60. they were discovered, that they should not come to be? And I, for my part, would add this, that "O you who ask in this way, you do not frighten me by this, that some who wrote laws have already been convicted of illegal proposals." Rather, this too bears witness for me. For those convicted of illegal proposals are no longer laws, to speak precisely; for they would not be laws and at the same time contrary to the laws. So that it befits these writings themselves to be called lawless, not lawful. Let these things be my answer, on behalf of rhetoric too, against Plato. And the answer we would then have made in common, let this now be made by me for the present case. They would not be at once both flatterers and orators, nor at once false accusers and orators, if rhetoric truly came in for the sake of justice and the safety of men, as the laws did. But so long as medicine saves the sick, and the pilot's art saves those who sail, and the laws those who use them, the speeches of rhetoric save those whom they ought, and guard the just; since even this thing called by us philosophy, if anyone wished to censure it, he could bring forward many things in his speeches — as, for instance, if he should accuse Diagoras and Anaxagoras and, picking out certain others, men who were strange either later or earlier; of whom some, I suppose, corrupted certain men, and some blasphemed about the gods, and some said certain other speeches which it would have been better not to say at all, and some brought in more self-will than prudence. But would it not be better to say thus: that, if certain men using philosophy as a screen have become base and no better than the many — or, by Zeus, even cleverer at doing mischief — philosophy is not on this account to be dishonoured, so long as philosophy is not the doing of such things, but one must use these very proofs against those men, that they have erred from philosophy.

[116031] 61. Nor, I think, if certain men flatter or play the false accuser, does this make rhetoric worse; rather, these things must be thought to belong to men who have erred from rhetoric, just as those others from philosophy, who, under the screen of the fairest thing, procure for themselves the licence to do mischief. And it would be absurd if we shall judge the works of the cobblers and the carpenters not from the things in which they fail, but from the things in which they succeed as best may be, but rhetoric we shall judge not only not from those who accomplished her most beautifully, but even from those who do the very contraries of what rhetoric wishes. "Yes; but it is better to be wronged than to do wrong." Let this be so. Is it, then, just as it is better, so also altogether to be chosen? No. At any rate he says he wishes neither — plainly because he considers being wronged too an evil, rightly, I think, both knowing and saying it. Therefore, if Plato himself should answer us, it would be of the greatest worth to the argument. And this too is available. How? As Socrates has been made by him to answer. For the matter stands disposed thus. Polus asks Socrates, "Would you, then, wish rather to be wronged than to do wrong?" And he replies, "I, for my part, would wish neither; but if it were necessary either to be wronged or to do wrong, I would choose rather to be wronged." Therefore, when he says he wishes neither, it is plain that, considering being wronged too an evil, he says he does not wish it, but that being wronged is better than doing wrong — yet not better than that neither doing wrong nor being wronged — rightly, I think, both knowing and saying it. If, then, rhetoric prevented being wronged but compelled to do wrong, not even so, perhaps, would it be altogether evil, being evil in preventing being wronged, but worse, perhaps, than the better, if indeed being wronged is

[117945] 62. better than doing wrong. But if it neither compels the one and prevents the other, then in respect of the one it is so far neither good nor evil — for let us grant this for the present — but in respect of the other it is properly good, and better or worse by just so much as it has partaken of the better and not of the worse, if indeed it is better neither to do wrong nor to be wronged than to do one of those two things. And surely the man who has resolved not to do wrong does not at the same time both himself abstain from mischief and escape being wronged. For this very thing was doing wrong — to treat ill the man one ought not. So that, so long as there is doing of mischief among men, he will be wronged. But the man who has the guard against being wronged at the same time also somehow prevents wrongdoing. For just as one man is at once wronged and another has done the wrong, so the man who has the power of not being wronged has the same power of not allowing wrongdoing. So that, if he sets not being wronged down as belonging to rhetoric, but not doing wrong as belonging to philosophy, philosophy is worse than rhetoric by just so much as doing wrong is worse than being wronged. But when, again, he sets before this the neither doing wrong nor being wronged, by this rhetoric in turn becomes better than philosophy, since indeed together with being wronged it does away with doing wrong also. Since the laws too, in preventing being wronged, at the same time, I suppose, prevent wrongdoing. For it is not possible, the wronged not existing, that the wrongdoers should exist, there being no one against whom this comes. So that rhetoric, in preventing being wronged, prevents wrongdoing too by the very same thing by which it prevents being wronged. But if, indeed, we are showing rhetoric to have been discovered wholly for the aid of justice, and to hold purely the same rank as the laws, then not only, as it seems, will the orator not flee being wronged while confirming the doing of wrong, but he will prevent nothing so much as the doing of wrong. For he will take thought not only for what concerns himself, but that no other man either may suffer ill, if indeed for the things for the sake of which the laws exist, for these too rhetoric has been shown to have been discovered.

[120253] 63. But surely the man who compels others to do justice has, far and away first, prepared himself for it. For it is not possible to come to the aid of justice, while oneself being first the one to overthrow the just. Therefore the orator will not only not do wrong himself, but he will not permit another either; nor, again, will he only not be wronged himself, but no other either, so far as in him lies. And if he will neither do wrong nor permit another, then in every way rhetoric is a fine and noble thing — both by that account by which doing wrong is shameful, and by that by which being wronged is better than doing wrong, and by that by which it is altogether best neither to do wrong nor to be wronged; and the man who is truly an orator has been shown to be, simply to say, so much better than a good man, by as much as the one furnishes only what concerns himself, while the other prepares others too to become such. For the good and noble man is not in every way an orator, but the orator is a good and noble man, who indeed leads others too to these things. But if, indeed, Plato insists on this, that rhetoric provides no great use, nor one worthy of earnest or of speech, because being wronged is not so great an evil as doing wrong, what prevents him from striking out all the laws too by these same arguments? For they wish nothing else than this: most of all that no one suffer ill from anyone, but if not, that justice come to those who have suffered from those who did it or were responsible. So that not only does rhetoric depart from the cities, banished by Plato, but, as though a club had been condemned, she will be driven out along with the laws that have the same wishes; and then we will send rhetoric away and revile her, when it is well for us to send the laws away along with her. When, then, would this come to be? What is the occasion

[122123] 64. for it? Let one of Plato's companions answer, since we cannot bring himself forward. And surely not even here will he stand for us wholly outside testimony, but he appears bearing witness even more in these passages than in those he has just gone through. "For I will not discourse about the other laws and constitutions, nor about those which so-and-so enacted; but" — if anyone should ask him: "O divine man, you who discover all wonderful things, if being wronged is no matter, and the power that prevents this is worth no account, nor all that it is and does any good thing, but so dishonourable and illiberal as to be a part of flattery and of shadow, for what reason, in founding this city in the book, do you set up for it a constitution from which it shall suffer nothing whatever, and bid the warlike class be settled apart from the rest, assigning it the first honour, that the city may suffer nothing, nor be wronged by any kind of enemies? For if it sufficed not to do wrong, what do you fear, if you have prepared the city at least for this? And if, indeed, it is worse for the wrongdoers when they do not pay the penalty, and one must, according to you, become accuser even of oneself whenever one does wrong, and of one's children and one's own father, but leave one's enemies alone — why do you not pray together with the enemies that they come upon you and take the city, and, by Zeus, cut down all of military age, and that too at the altars, and lead away into slavery children and women beyond, if you please, Gadeira, and, having plundered the temples, raze them all, and not even leave the tombs unharmed by their greed, that, having done the greatest wrongs, they may be among the greatest evils in not paying the penalty? But you are so far from joining in these things that you prevent them, you take offence, you have devised a life in arms, that nothing of the kind may happen; and if any traitor arise among you, this man you bid not crown nor proclaim, but you think the same about these things as the rest of men. And yet, according to these arguments, whom rather than the

[124232] 65. traitors ought one to honour, because they prepare their own people and the country and the temples and all that is, to be under the enemy, that those men, having done the greatest wrongs, may be entangled in the greatest evils? Tell me, by Zeus of portents, what must we think about these things?" So be it, O noble man; and why, again, did you enact for us so many laws besides — laws that fix honours for those who have lived well, and tell what those who do any wrong must suffer? And you play the orator about each of them in earnest, and honour the preambles, and set forth a double pattern, like the modellers — you who despise speeches. For if, my friend, taking justice and not permitting wrongdoing were not one of the earnest things, for what reason do you busy yourself with these and consider how no one may be wronged? Therefore either all these things, so many in number, must be in error, this one of them being right, or else those things stand refuted by these. And surely, in the things we say, there is the consent of others too, and Plato besides; but the things he has said here are refuted not only by the arguments of the matters, but also by Plato's own arguments and wishes. Those things, then, being agreed to be right, both the opinion of the rest bears witness and the vote is correct; but if we should grant these things to prevail, the consenting of any of the rest is absent. And it is stronger to have the consent of all, and of Plato, than the consent of none, and not even of Plato, as he elsewhere says. Therefore we shall not flee the testimony from him on account of that from the rest, but to that of the rest we shall add the testimony from him.

[125923] 66. I hold, then, that in these things too I furnish the testimony of fact. For to contend with speeches against speeches, and to declare one's opponent to be bearing witness to other earnest speeches, is to furnish the testimony of fact. But nevertheless I wish to go still further, so that, since he honours the putting of a single matter to the vote, even by him against whom the speeches are made, I may show him to be on my side both in word and in deed. Come, then, let there be added in these matters too a question, as if someone asked him, when he was sailing to Sicily the second or third time, whether as a fellow-voyager or even as the pilot himself: "But you, O Plato, for what reason do you sail to Sicily?" Or, if not then, yet if someone, when he had returned home, asked him the causes of his journey and wandering, and what indeed he suffered that a third time he busied himself about Charybdis — around which Odysseus passed not more than twice — what would he have answered him? For if we grant that the best is true — as Plato must grant — there is left him about the matters in dispute no other answer than this. Why? Because, I think, he would say — or rather he did say — that he sailed for the sake of Dion, a companion and guest-friend, wishing to settle his affairs with Dionysius and not to overlook them. Then, O you who sail well and go abroad justly, you, for the sake of a Syracusan guest-friend, a common enemy of your own fatherland — for there was no seat of honour for Athenians at Syracuse, but things which one cannot even speak of without tears, these the companions and fellow-citizens of Dion had suffered at their hands a little while before — yet, since once you received him as a friend, considering him so, you sailed for his sake in your old age over so great a sea, and that too to a man at whose hands you would again have to be in danger, and whose offered alliance you knew your own fatherland had not received; and you did not flee the seeming to consort with a tyrant, as having for consolation the figure of your pursuit, which was that Dion should remain at home and keep control of his property. But when a man, dwelling in his own land and among his own

[128134] 67. fellow-citizens and parents and brothers, has the guard so that they shall not be wronged, and saves both them and himself — and, by Zeus, if he is able to prevent this very thing, a man who is going to become a tyrant and like Dionysius, and to take away by speech his deeds and to confirm for all the security that comes from the laws — shall we then say that this is no earnest matter, and that one ought not to praise such a thing, whether one must call it an art or not an art, because, by Zeus, this one thing was a great evil, doing wrong, while being wronged was no matter at all? Does one, then, even more greatly defend oneself against one's enemy by allowing him to do wrong, and by considering by what means no other either shall take justice from him? And surely, up to these arguments one might say that these things are riddles; but these having been brought forward — and by Plato — and both refuted and resolved, not in the customary and same manner as other riddles, becoming clear from unclear, but truly clear as to where the rottenness of them lay. Come, then, let us consider these things too. For I think we have, as it were, the deposition of an absent witness. It is from the long Letter. "With this purpose and daring I set out from home — not the purpose some supposed, but ashamed before myself, most of all, lest I should ever seem to myself to be simply and wholly a mere word, and never willingly to lay hold of any deed; and lest I should risk betraying, first, the guest-friendship and companionship of Dion, who was truly in no small dangers. If, then, he should suffer anything, or, cast out by Dionysius and his other enemies, should come to us in exile and ask, saying, 'O Plato, I have come to you an exile, not wanting hoplites nor lacking horsemen to ward off

[129939] 68. my enemies, but wanting speeches and persuasion, by which I knew you above all able, turning young men toward good and just things, to establish them each time in friendship and companionship with one another. For want of these, on your part, I have now left Syracuse and am here. And the lesser reproach it brings to you; but philosophy, which you always praise and say is dishonoured by the rest of men — how is it not now betrayed, so far as in you lies, along with me? And if we happened to be dwelling in Megara, you would surely have come to my aid in the things to which I summoned you, or you would have thought yourself the basest of all men; but as it is, do you think that, by pleading the length of the journey and the greatness of the voyage and the toil, you will ever escape a reputation for baseness? Far from it.' When these things had been said, what fitting answer should I have had against them? There is none." These things no other has written about him, nor conjecturing his judgment, but he who best knew, himself about himself, says he came for the sake of these things, ashamed at the words which Dion might have spoken to him. And I, for my part, believe it; for I should be mad if I did not. Therefore in these passages there is: "I have come to you, O Plato, not wanting hoplites nor bereft of horsemen, but of speeches and persuasion; and these I thought, more than anything, to be with you." Finely indeed, O Plato, both saying this yourself and thinking that Dion would say it to you. Therefore, if to be cast out or to suffer anything was for Dion conspicuously a dreadful thing, but to act so that he should not be cast out a fine and just thing, and, being so disposed, he needed speeches and persuasion, while you sailed because you had these — you have agreed to everything: both that one must be earnest that someone, so far as is possible, may not be wronged; and that the power of speeches to persuade is not a paltry thing; and that those who persuade about these things are worthy not only of praise among men, but also blameless before the gods,

[132033] 69. if indeed those who fall short are not even holy. And further, you have done a still greater thing in every way, if indeed not only a people, nor judges, but even tyrants one must not flee from persuading otherwise about these things, and at so great a distance abroad. The whole Letter, then — for the sake of what did he write it, or of persuasion? And surely the matter itself shows it, and Plato himself in many places of the Letter. For both the going through the things for the sake of which he came, and the further agreement that he goes through them in order that he may establish the true opinion about himself, are the work of one who persuades. Therefore he both wrote it that he might persuade, and, in writing, says that he went away for the sake of persuading, lest Dion should suffer anything bereft of speeches. How, then, do the orators do shameful things? Or by which of these is rhetoric a paltry thing? Is it by that by which it is naturally fit to aid the wronged, even if some ill repute and danger attend it? But that one must despise persuading by speech? But you yourself, as one who would persuade by speech, say you ran a risk in deed. "And if we happened to be dwelling in Megara," Dion says to you, "you would surely have come to my aid in the things to which I summoned you, or you would have thought yourself the basest of all men; but as it is, do you think that, by pleading the length of the journey and the greatness of the voyage and the toil, you will ever escape a reputation for baseness? Far from it." What, then, if someone, turning it about thus, should say to you yourself: "And do you think one must sail to Sicily and suffer anything whatever for the sake of persuading someone that one of one's intimates ought to remain at home; but if a man, not even so far as from Athens to Megara, but not even needing to go anywhere at all, but staying at home, handles the power of saving his own people thereby, do you not think this man has escaped all reputation for baseness? Long ago, even by your own showing, if indeed any of the things said before are of any use." How, then, shall the man who does not aid by speech at once bear a reputation for baseness, and at once the man who does aid not escape a reputation for baseness? You do not, then, say this when you call rhetoric, to which these things belong, flattery.

[134402] 70. "What fitting answer should I have had against these things?" he says. And to the things we now ask, what answer, by the gods? But I wish to make a small distinction, lest anyone suppose at all that I am accusing Plato by these arguments, or speaking ill with an occasion at hand. For I myself neither make it a charge, I suppose, if Plato thought he ought to go anywhere and in any way for any cause whatever, nor do I think the man who brings forward any such thing to be of sound mind, nor do I busy myself at all with anything outside what comes to the argument — let no prize be worth so much — but the things he himself did and for the sake of which he did them, which he himself has clearly stated, these I say accord with the arguments on behalf of rhetoric; and I am so far from reproaching him by these things that, if one must say this too, even in these very things I think to exalt him, if, these things being contrary to those, I do not slander his deeds and acts, but, from his life and works which are on our side and which we deem worthy of being, I show that those words of his stand otherwise than one might believe. When, then, he saw Dion preparing and acting so that he might take justice for what he had suffered, does he appear writing to him to let it go and count it as nothing, and that, if he hates Dionysius and supposes him ill-disposed, he must overlook it and consent that, doing the greatest wrongs, he be among the extreme evils — or, far the contrary, urging him on and thinking fit that he be assiduous, that he might have as many as possible to act with him against that man; and setting down Dionysius as in every way an enemy, counselling him to consider how he will defend himself, and himself joining in the work so far as in him lay, only declining to sail and campaign with him — because, since Dionysius, having him, had then felt shame and not killed him, it was not

[136319] 71. fitting to go against that man? And yet, if one ought to let one's enemies, and those one hates beyond measure, go on doing wrong, and rhetoric, which makes one take justice from them and does not let them proceed as far as they can, is paltry and useless, then he ought surely most of all to have prevented Dion — being his companion and pupil — and to have reminded him of what he once heard, if he did hear it; or, if not, then at least to teach him on the spot, by the facts, that he must bear in silence and consider how not only he himself shall be deprived of his fatherland and his property by Dionysius, but also many others shall suffer these and other such things to the end, and Dionysius shall not cease wronging all men; and to pray with him that Dionysius become tyrant not only of Sicily, but also of Carthage and Libya, if possible, and, by Zeus, of all Europe, and, if there were any device, of Asia too; and that he himself not only consider nothing about the overthrow of the tyrant, but that no one else either attack him, either to kill him or to cast him out, but, on the contrary, take thought for the guarding of Dionysius' person, that the wretch might be immortal, and, wronging all men in all things, be in all evils at all times. These things, most of all, he ought to have taught Dion beforehand and admonished him, if he trusted these arguments; or, if not, at least to appear not joining in his deliberation about vengeance — which, far from doing, he has become for us a witness in deed about the things we doubted, that he does not talk nonsense. I wish, then, to show him bearing witness, in a way, with his whole household. For Socrates, drawn up in line at Potidaea, and again at Delium, retreating when the rout occurred, plainly to all even from very far off, that whoever should lay hold of this man would defend himself most vigorously — how is this man not clearly bearing witness that one must not allow those who

[138281] 72. attempt to do wrong? No one, surely, will gainsay it. For it is not the things he said later — when he thought it already timely to die, and that it was hard to do away with the many slanders gathered from long ago and by many — that are the strong proofs of his judgment, but the things he plainly did when he was not in a position to prevent. Wherefore indeed he too, and his companion, retired safely, he says: "for they hardly even touch such men in war, but pursue rather those who flee headlong." For this much more has accrued to him from these things, that again, with the Socrates of Plato, Plato himself bears witness to the argument: "such men they do not much touch, but pursue rather those who flee headlong." Clearly, then, in the cities too, those who watch for such things do not much touch the men so disposed as to defend themselves, but pursue those who yield. So that, if it is reasonable to praise the brave in wars, then the men of this sort here too. So that, if for no other reason, on account of the false accusers rhetoric is a fine thing. And surely, if men do not dare to wrong such persons, both good results follow, and consistent with the arguments just made — that he himself is not wronged, and that he does not allow another to be wronged. And he who went up even to the plain of Babylon with Cyrus, when he was marching against his brother who had first done wrong — Xenophon — how is not he too, of his own household, a witness for us to Plato in the present arguments? For one cannot say this: that in arms, and on behalf of others' interests, it is reasonable to defend oneself against those who attempt to do

[139934] 73. wrong, but if a man should do this same thing by speech, to disparage it, even if he proceed on behalf of what he himself has suffered; nor, still less, can one say this: that to defend oneself with arms belongs to the fitting things for those who have lived in speeches, but that to defend oneself by the very speeches must be set down as unreason. No one would say these things. And surely, by as much as prudence is finer than courage, by so much is rhetoric finer than valour in war. For, if one must put it in sum, rhetoric is nothing else than prudence that has taken to itself the power of speeches, so that one may not only oneself do the best things, but also be able to persuade others. I hold, then, that these things too have proofs of the truth sufficient — if not, indeed, more than sufficient.

[140748] But I go now to the very colophon, as one might say, of Plato's words. For I wish him to appear bearing witness not only from the things by which he is refuted, but as if, standing beside us, he himself bore witness with his own voice: "For those who live happily it is necessary first to do no wrong to others and to be wronged by none. Of these two, the one is not very hard, but to acquire the power of not being wronged is wholly hard; and it is not possible to have this perfectly otherwise than by becoming perfectly good." Hurrah, hurrah for the testimony! These are the things I needed. Plato says these things — the partner in the epigram, and through whom the race of Ariston is truly divine. Perfectly, then, O divine man, rhetoric is a fine thing, and not for everyone either to take or to possess. For you appear to grant this too, that it is ranged on the side of not being wronged. Therefore, when it did not compel doing wrong, but did not permit being wronged — and, as followed from the argument, permits neither of these, neither doing wrong nor being wronged —

[141830] 74. then, if the definition of philosophy too is the same, rhetoric appears to be a kind of philosophy. But if it suffices for philosophy not to do wrong, rhetoric is more perfect; for it adds the harder thing to acquire, and the greater — that he himself shall not be wronged by others. How, then, is the same thing at once perfectly good and the greatest of goods, and at once the extreme of evils and flattery? And how do the orators have the least power, if indeed that of which it is wholly hard to acquire the power is theirs in abundance? I, for my part, cannot reconcile it. Happy, then, not wretched, by Plato's argument, are the orators, if indeed the perfectly good man is happy, and this is not possible to acquire without becoming perfectly good. Then he wishes to refute rhetoric, but he accuses the tyrants and the dynasts, mixing things that do not mix, as if Heracles — may the example be gracious — having been ordered to slay the lion in Nemea, then, grappling with an ass and throttling it, thought he was strangling the lion and doing the very thing he set out to do. But the example falls so far short, that this man does not put one thing in the place of another in using such argument, but even falls into the contraries. For who does not know that rhetoric and tyranny are as far apart from one another as persuading is from compelling? And surely no one would be ashamed to say that these things have a contrary nature. So that, if to use force and to grasp for more is dreadful, then to persuade and to champion justice is fine and fitting. Therefore rhetoric is not so much an evil as tyranny is; rather, if tyranny is an evil, rhetoric is a good thing from the same considerations; for the one everywhere seeks to use force, while the other has honoured persuading. So that he does the like, in thinking to refute that, as if someone

[143694] 75. blaming the darkness in the night should think he was accusing the other strange features of the day. And at one moment he says rhetoric is flattery, and again he sets the dynasts and the orators in the same class — not only saying that neither belongs to this power, but, besides its not belonging, that it is entirely alien to it; nay, even putting together two charges that are the very contraries. For how do the orators at once flatter, and at once stand among the dynasts? For the flatterers, surely the greatest and most perfect of them, are wholly the servants of the tyrants themselves; and there are some, I think, of ordinary men too; so that what a slave is toward a master, that a flatterer is toward a tyrant. But the tyrants, on the other hand, are so far from flattering that they thrust all aside by force, and one cannot obtain even moderate things from them, much less the service that is beyond what is fitting; so that the tyrant has all but exceeded even the measure of the master. For nothing is more abject than a flatterer, nor more given to choosing to be a slave; but nothing could you call more savage than a tyrant, nor more given to wishing to play the master. So that, if rhetoric is flattery, the charges against the tyrants do not concern her; but if she is with tyranny, she has exceeded flattery by great bounds. Therefore the one set or the other is altogether already false. For me, then, even if I had nothing good to say about her, this is enough — if I show that even thus he does not speak the truth; but for him, even if he has rightly brought the other charge, the argument about the other is not left. But surely, that he does not rightly bring both at once, he is refuted by his own arguments clashing together; and that he does neither rightly, we have just now shown — privately showing that it is not flattery, and again that it does not share with tyranny. How, then, is he not thrice defeated — both by the argument of the two together,

[145686] 76. and by that of each separately? And the same thing is preserved for us in all. For about both together he is thrust aside by his own arguments, and again, in respect of each, he bears witness himself in turn — both by the fact that persuading appeared with him to be one of the useful things, and by the fact that, accusing those who use force and are insolent, he is seen doing so throughout the whole argument. For rhetoric is as far separated from tyranny as — if one must say this too — Plato from Dionysius. It is possible, then, to learn both from the matter itself and from what has befallen, how great is the difference of each of these, and according to how great a necessity it is. For it will appear that neither, where rhetoric is preserved, does a tyrant arise so long as it is preserved by speech, nor, again, does rhetoric survive where tyranny prevails; but the orator does everything so that no tyrant may arise, foreseeing at once his own and the common good, that no one, having taken from him the persuading-by-speech, may himself lead affairs by violence at the start; and the tyrants, considering and fearing nothing of all things more than lest someone arise able to speak and persuade, who, gathering the multitudes and becoming a counsellor and informer of what is fitting, may at once render their rule and their licence void. For this very reason they have necessarily their enmity toward one another; for the safety and power of the one set is, at the start, the not-being of the other. So that how much would the orators give, if one might so say, that someone should appear for them, as in battle — Plato, I say, or anyone whatever as helper and ally — to bring the evils of the tyrants into the midst and show them, and not even by night to cease speaking ill of them. For he who shows these things will all but spend and display the very speeches of rhetoric, and in a certain way the aid will come to the orators from their own household. And those again who desire to be tyrants — how much would they give that the tribe of orators in the cities should be disbelieved, and supposed flatterers and no better than cooks —

[147845] 77. those who attempt to persuade by speech — that the proverb may not in vain say to "reap the deserts." Then, the things that profit those who attempt to do wrong — how can these be conceded to those who honour justice? "How, then, do the orators say things contrary to one another?" — This is no longer among the things said by Plato; nevertheless, for the sake of cleansing the argument on every side, let not even this be left by us unexamined, and that too being virtually the strongest of all, as among the falsehoods which that man has stated. — Because, I think, we encounter even ourselves in our arguments, this very thing which I too have now done; but the original argument is none the more destroyed by it, since those said to philosophize too do not, I suppose, all use the same arguments, but even the most contrary to one another. But nothing prevents philosophy from being a fine thing in respect of those who attain the truth; it is not, I suppose, double or contrary to itself. How, then, would one say? Shall we say that both philosophize who say contrary things? Or that philosophizing is a fine thing in the way I said? And you might see pilots too fighting at sea against one another; but nonetheless it belongs to the pilot's art to save the ship. So, then, even when the orators say things contrary to one another, as one might put it, the original chief point of rhetoric is not hindered, but one must consider what results from the argument, remembering for what it was discovered. This, then, is the argument on behalf of rhetoric.

[149407] 78. But since he laid hold also of Miltiades and Themistocles and Cimon and Pericles, saying that they did not champion the city toward the best — there is perhaps nothing pressing now to dispute about these men. For these men, if Plato has accused them justly, would justly be considered base; but rhetoric, even if we should set these men down as the most worthless of all, is no more refuted thereby. We granting this, then, the argument on behalf of rhetoric is not lost. But if, indeed, even about these men he should be refuted as not having used the argument altogether fair-mindedly, he will be shown to be contentious on every side. This, then, is to the purpose, to speak about these men too. Come, then, by Zeus, if somehow, rising up or taking perception — as Dion is supposed by Plato to be speaking to the Syracusans — they should say these things to him: "We, O Plato, did the city of the Athenians no other good thing; for we were not knowers of your virtue and wisdom, and the gods do not give all things to all; but the things that came to us — goodwill, eagerness, faith, courage, such things — we furnished, so as to leave no surpassing to another, in such crises, O Plato, in which it was, in the prevailing, at once glory and safety and the things from our prayers, but, being worsted, not even to exist at all. And when we had taken these reckonings, and the gods graciously joining in the work, free was your fatherland and ours, and safe and unscathed from the insolence and lawlessness of the barbarians, and free too all Greece; and there came to be licence both for you to philosophize and for your companions, and to sail freely wherever you wished, and to have memory of us — and then, it was fair-minded, as for the better. For if then we, giving up, had handed ourselves over to the barbarians without a fight, what account of us would there have been among men? But neither did we ourselves suffer any such thing, nor did we endure that the others should, nor

[151401] 79. did we flatter either side — neither the King, by reason of either of these, fear or hope of gain, nor again the people of the Athenians. For it was not possible, if we wished to flatter, to save them, nor did the occasion then offer the saying of anything toward pleasure for them to hear; but we were so far from being flatterers of the multitude that, even if we had wished to flatter, it was not possible. But neither did we choose it, nor was it possible, nor did we save Greece thus, by gratifying and beguiling — like those harpers you mention — but by rousing, teaching, ourselves becoming an example to the rest of how one must endure in the very terrors and the heights of the dangers, displaying, if you grant the word, our own virtue. Why, then, do you reproach us with flattery and servility — you who, having agreed that those who do not pay back the cost of their rearing privately would be base, yourself pay us no fair return for the common salvation and rearing of the Greeks, in which both you and the rest, on account of us, have been reared in freedom?" If the men should say these things, by unrolling what labyrinths of wisdom, or by saying what of all things, would one be able to gainsay them? For all men have a prior right to speak against these things rather than Plato. Why? Because in these very things which he has written to the companions of Dion, and in which Dion, dead, is supposed by him to speak as though breathing, there are these words: "But, having received such laws, since danger holds Sicily, and you neither prevail sufficiently nor again are sufficiently overpowered, it would perhaps be just and profitable for us all to cut the matter in the middle, both for you who flee

[153127] 80. the harshness of the rule, and for those again who love to attain rule." Whose ancestors saved the greatest thing — the Greeks from the barbarians — so that it is now possible to make speeches about a constitution; but had they then perished, neither speech nor hope would have been left anywhere at all. "But of us," they would say, "not our ancestors, but we ourselves, by our own deeds and counsels and speeches, saved the Greeks from the barbarians — not the part of them dwelling in Sicily, but all of them together, and those reckoned the one half of the whole inhabited world, from the time when, raising themselves against the barbarians, they thrust them back, so that it is now possible for you to make speeches about a constitution, and even about us ourselves; but had they then perished, neither speech nor hope would have been left anywhere at all." "Now, then," Dion says, "let there be for the one freedom under a kingly rule, and for the other a responsible kingly rule, the laws being masters both of the other citizens and of the kings themselves, if they do anything lawless. And over all these, with guileless and sound mind, with the gods set up a king: first my own son, for the sake of a double gratitude, that from me and that from my father — for he freed the city from the barbarians in that time, and I from tyrants now twice, of which you yourselves have become witnesses. Second, make king the one who possesses the same name as my father, son of Dionysius, for the sake both of the present aid and of his holy character; who, having been born of a tyrant father, willingly frees the city, gaining for himself and his race an everlasting honour instead of an ephemeral and unjust tyranny. And third, one must invite to become king of Syracuse, willing of the willing city, the one now commander of the enemy's camp, Dionysius son of Dionysius, if he is willing of his own accord to pass into a king's estate — fearing the chances, and pitying

[155105] 81. his fatherland and the neglect of the temples and the tombs, lest through contentiousness he utterly lose all things, becoming a thing of joy to the barbarians." If, then, it is reasonable that even such gifts should be received by the descendants of those who freed the city — so that they themselves become dynasts and kings instead of those former ones — surely it is just that those who themselves freed the whole race of the Greeks should, besides being deemed worthy of nothing more, not even be allowed to seem to be free as a body. And if, indeed, it is just to make the very commander of the enemy's camp a king, if he is willing to pity his fatherland and the neglect of the temples and the tombs, and that he may not through contentiousness utterly lose all things, becoming a thing of joy to the barbarians — where shall we place those who ranged themselves not with the enemy, but against the enemies from all the earth, who, besides their own fatherland, set straight the fatherlands of many others too, and preserved temples and tombs, and none of whom became a thing of joy to the barbarians, nor did Greece on their account? Are these things paltry, or worthy of paltry gratitude, for the men? Then, those whom — if one must obey Plato's words — one must think fit to honour, and that with much greater honours than the customary, shall we, persuaded by Plato's words, call flatterers and servants and worth nothing? We should not, surely, do justice.

[156579] But the strangest thing of all is that he uses these men in his refutation that rhetoric is flattery, as being orators, but again he himself releases them from flattery. For he says they did not use it in the passages where he speaks about what they suffered. In these too, then, one of the two must be false. For if rhetoric is flattery, these men must in every way be flatterers, being orators, as he says; but if

[156996] 82. these men in no way belong to flattery, where is rhetoric flattery on their account, or what need was there of these examples? And I thought this too was not just — that, examining their purposes, one should take into account the calamities they met with. For it is not, if they did not turn out according to their wish, that they have become base, but if they did not counsel the best things for affairs. For the one is to accuse fortune, the other to refute the judgment. Come, did you, O Plato, champion toward the best either the Athenians, or any other people of those among the Greeks or the barbarians? Of those, one would gladly say. You could not say it; for you did not champion any at all. And what of your teacher and companion Socrates? Not he either. And what of Speusippus or Chaerephon? You would not say it. Is it, then, possible to declare a people good and blameless and just once for all, or is this not even possible to assert of a man? And surely, if it is possible, why in the world did you not yourself demonstrate it, nor appear, in the very deeds, a better citizen than we? But if it is impossible, why do you reproach us if we even stumbled in something, they would say again, and why do you demand an accounting of impossible things? For we were so much more profitable to the people than you, in that you neither said nor did anything worse or better, but simply shrank back; while we, so far as in us lay, did not give up, but, as a full contribution of money, we furnished to the fatherland that which comes from reckonings and speeches, and neither shrank from the multitude of those who would say the contrary, nor feared the strength of the rich, with whom he who acts on behalf of the common good must necessarily clash, nor judges, nor dangers, nor those at home, nor those abroad against the enemy, nor at all the things of

[158862] 83. fortune and the uncertainties of the future. Which things to flee is, surely, easier for anyone than to undertake. But if all should reckon this in their necessities, the affairs of the cities are gone. These things, I think, they would say, speaking moderately, as I think. So be it. What if they did not declare the Athenians the best once for all, but better in some way? What if they would have erred more greatly both about these and about others, had they not been restrained by those men's words? Then you say the physician would die of starvation, if he should contend against the cook before children or such men as cannot recognize the truth; but if Miltiades and Cimon and Pericles, leading affairs toward the best, even stumbled in some things, at this do you wonder?

[159647] I, for my part, consider how one must bear it that, while they say one must not make Alcibiades and Critias, who associated with Socrates — men who have incurred so many and so great charges both from the many and from the fair-minded, so that of Critias it is not even easy to conceive a more abominable man, who among the Thirty, the basest of the Greeks, was first — that these men, they say, must not be made a proof that Socrates corrupted the young, nor that their errors are anything whatever against Socrates, who did not himself deny that he conversed with the young; but if the people of the Athenians, in the many and great things which it managed both on its own behalf and on behalf of the Greeks, deliberated some things rightly and fittingly, but in some things also erred toward its champions — these things they think fit to reckon against the champions themselves. And Terpander was not able to make all the Lesbians musical, nor Arion, nor anyone else who made music in Lesbos; but if Themistocles and Pericles did not once for all educate the Athenians in political virtue, this, as it seems, refutes those men as being worth nothing — as if

[160810] 84. one should accuse the gods too by the same arguments, that their providence ought to have been such as to do away with injustice and ill will altogether from among men, and that no men anywhere should err in anything. But as it is, how must one think them either to exercise providence, when men do not cease offending against those they rule, or to be unjustly neglected by some? At any rate the horses recognize, by looking at them, those who have never laid a hand on them, but hate and flee those who stand over them; nay, this too the proverb has assigned even to asses, that the one who scratches gets scratched in return. Men, then, led by gods, do not believe in gods, or say and do something base about the gods concerning themselves. And the charioteer, taking horses that kick, gentles and tames them, and at last drives on them safely and with much ease wherever he wishes; but the gods have not even now done away with injustice among men after so long, and that too governing from all eternity, and besides seeing some of them sin against the gods themselves. But surely, since no one in his senses would say these things in earnest — except as we now do, for the refutation of an argument — how is Plato not utterly playing the false accuser? For if the things which not even the gods have ever done, nor was it possible to demand even of Athena the city-guardian herself, these he demands of Themistocles and Pericles, I ask him how he is not a false accuser. But, I think, the nature of the people they could not transform nor make to vanish; and this is its nature — never to become wholly good nor faultless; but whatever, in dangers, they had to foresee, in which it was at once to be benefactors of the many and of the fair-minded, or, acting with authority, to lead it ever away from the most grievous things and to turn the errors of its nature to the least — these things cannot but appear to be present in these men; and these things, besides the argument from us and the demonstrations, Plato himself sets his seal upon, and is for us here too

[162885] 85. a witness, by the same cleverness as in the passages above, ever according to the need, and for the rest, if he be shown himself praising them. How, then, could one more conspicuously or brilliantly have praised the men than as this man did, who made the funeral oration for them? In which he says he both acts as their patron and proposes them, to set in songs and the rest of poetry, having adorned them worthily of the doers — I mean their deeds. For this is the most graceful thing, that, having passed by and overlooked all else, he has come to the very things proper to these men and to their statesmanship, as most of all from these going to show forth the virtue of the dead — setting greatest of all the deeds that at Marathon, second that at Salamis, and adding as a crown that they showed the barbarians that all wealth and power yields to virtue.

[163749] Therefore, when he praises those who counselled and did these things, he praises Themistocles and Miltiades. For these were the leaders of them. And yet how is it not absurd, of those whose deeds he adorns, to disparage the statesmanship, and the things which he sets down as proofs of the virtue of those persuaded, not to consider these to belong first to the virtue of those who persuaded? For those who, chosen by the council, go through these funeral orations before the multitude, have perhaps an escape, that of necessity they adorned, and one would not make a matter of their speeches; but whoever has, on purpose and by himself, composed about them, plainly would not have, unless he considered both the men and the deeds worthy of speech. For he does not say he has said these things to flatter the Athenians, nor, even if he should say so, will we believe him. For if, again,

[164637] 86. he had undertaken it for the sake of showing the grace and power of speech, how is it possible for him to censure rhetoric, in which this very thing consisted? About these men, then, he has so borne witness — that they did not lead the citizens toward the worst, nor continued filling up their desires, but became to them leaders of such deeds as not even Plato would be ashamed to adorn, and to add virtue to the things accomplished; not as if they had become, in their nature, like Mithaecus the cook and Thearion the baker, but as it is hard even for others to speak of them fittingly. But toward the once-for-all argument, how again, and where, does this man bear witness? In this very Gorgias, in the words of Socrates and Callicles. For having come to the very thing that resolves the argument, and the judgment having become clear, he splits about it, and the one asks thus, the other answers, intermingled: "Do you think the orators always speak toward the best, aiming at this, how the citizens shall be as good as possible through their speeches; or do these too, set on gratifying the citizens and, for the sake of their own private interest, making light of the common, consort with the peoples as with children, trying only to gratify them, but caring nothing whether they will be better or worse on this account?" "This is no longer a simple thing you ask. For there are some who, caring for the citizens, say what they say, and there are some too such as you describe." Enough. For if this too is double — the one of these would be flattery and shameful public speaking, the other a fine thing. Therefore from us too it is enough. For if it is double, and the orators do not always say the best things, but there are times when they say the best, or, by Zeus, some speak in the one way, some in the other, the argument defining rhetoric to be flattery is in brief resolved. And still more clearly, at the end of the dialogue, he has revealed and declared the whole; for it is not

[166637] 87. by us that these things have been interpolated: "For indeed, O Callicles, from the same source come the men who become exceedingly base; yet nothing prevents good men too from arising among these, and very worthy of admiration are those who do arise. For it is hard, O Callicles, and worthy of much praise, having come into great licence to do wrong, to live justly through one's life; and few such men arise, since both here and elsewhere they have arisen, and I think they will be too — good and noble men in this virtue of handling justly whatever one is entrusted with. And one indeed has become very renowned even among the rest of the Greeks, Aristides son of Lysimachus; but the many, O best of men, become base among the dynasts." Here he has gone so much further, that he has not only agreed that it is possible for them to arise, but has even named one himself, and "there have been others too," he says, "both here and elsewhere." I, then, take away this "others too," and "if anyone elsewhere"; but him whom he says became very renowned, and not only among the citizens but also among the rest of the Greeks, this man I set down alone. For these things lie embedded in the middle of the myth not, it seems to me, unconsidered, nor paltrily, nor as if let slip, but so as to be hidden as much as possible, and that, if anyone found and used them, he himself might not seem to have passed them by, but they might be there. So he found a certain middle rank, and at the same time, toward the end of the whole argument, set down things which, had he set them at the beginning, he was not going to be able, I think, to use for what followed. But not for this reason will we let it pass us by, so long as the argument is about the same man and the same things — I will add, that they appear present in these very passages too. Therefore, if in every way another, among all men, neither at Athens nor

[168548] 88. anywhere else, was a renowned orator, nor outside the charge of flattering, but there has been one at Athens, why must the matter be all the more reproached as of necessity paltry? For it was not whether it is easy or not to become truly an orator that was set before us to consider — since this even we, if you please, bear witness to; and even if we should acquire the voice of Stentor, we would cry out that it is not easy; and even if the Nile, O blessed one, should get a voice at its seven mouths, as the Scamander has, according to Homer — but whether it is possible or not, and is of such a nature as can come to pass, this was the thing from the argument. For come, by Zeus, if before Aristides was born he made these arguments against rhetoric, eager in every way to show it something paltry and worthy of flight, saying that it was impossible that a man should ever become good or just who had laid hold of such speeches, would he not have lied? The very appearing of Aristides as such a man shows it — if Plato has not spoken falsely about him. Therefore it is dreadful, if before Aristides was born one had to expect that someone would come to be, and not to consider it absolutely impossible, but, since this man stands as a manifest example, neither to bring the charge as if this man had come to be, nor as if it were possible at all. And surely this too is not equal: that, no good man at all having arisen, one should make this a proof against rhetoric, as inescapable; but that, when it is agreed by the very man who speaks ill of her that some worthy of mention both have arisen and will arise — for this is the extraordinary thing, even to foretell about the future that they will be — then to think there is nothing more to it. Another thing, then, which is from this last testimony: that he has himself agreed that such men are worthy of far greater praise. "For it is hard," he says, "O Callicles" — therefore also, O Plato — "having come into great licence to do wrong, to live justly." If, then, to play the orator is

[170597] 89. to be able to do wrong, according to you, and it is possible also to live justly while playing the orator, and the greater proof of justice is for the man able to do wrong to keep quiet than for the man unable, how do such men not stand far from the flatterers, who surpass even the necessarily just by so much? It seems, then, that the saying of Homer applies, and "he let slip a word that were better unsaid." For, having been able not only not to speak ill of Aristides, but having of necessity set him down as outstanding, he has again undone the very charge he brought against Miltiades and Themistocles. For this would already be to accuse men, not to censure rhetoric, as the cause of their speaking or acting ill. As, then, he himself has accused those men of things not necessary, what prevents us in turn from setting against him things not necessary on their behalf? And yet, by reason of this man, they are half necessary. For he will appear not only and not as we now show, having come round into the contrary arguments against himself, but also from the very things for which he blames those men, unable to praise this one; or, if he rightly praises this one, by that very thing unable to accuse those either. How? Because, I think, he makes a token of those men's having championed the Athenians ill, the fact that they themselves suffered ill at the hands of the Athenians, as though those who had become better by them would not have erred against those by whom they were not even educated to err against others. These things he having so

[172158] 90. set down, and having brought in charioteers and such things, has here not only said nothing paltry of Aristides, but has plainly made him exceptional above the rest. And yet, if to suffer ill at the hands of the Athenians is a token of not having championed the Athenians finely, then neither did Aristides champion them finely; for he too did not, I suppose, get off unscathed, but was cast out — I will add, that this man did not even come to grief in a court of law, as Miltiades and Pericles did, nor at the hands of those he had offended on behalf of the many, but was ostracized by the very people. Therefore, if this is no token of baseness — if some orator met with misfortune at the hands of those whom he championed — then neither Miltiades nor Themistocles, nor anyone else, both stumbled and would justly be considered base; but if those men are refuted by these things, what prevents one from setting down neither Aristides as renowned nor outside the charge against those men? So that not only by the arguments against rhetoric, but also by those privately against the men, Aristides — honoured by him contrary to those whom he reviles — appears to come to the aid of them, like an episode advancing beyond expectation. Then he brings in the pilot, and "for what reason," he says, "does he not think great thoughts, nor equal to the orator, saving men too from death — both them and their property?" But I see that this also is available to ask in return: "For what reason, then, do you yourself not yield to the pilot? For if, for the sake of philosophy being dishonourably led by the many, you say you sailed to Sicily as helper to Dion, no less did the pilot who carried you save that man, and that too across the greatest of seas; but he can say so much more than you, by as much as he saved the very man who was going to save Dion." But I let these things pass. But how is it not truly absurd, if the pilot himself does not think fit to be of equal pride with the orator, nor

[174158] 91. disputes it, but you use this example, as though by this you would somehow make the orators humbler, if all yield to them. And surely that it is not through folly that the pilot withdraws before the orator — nor could anyone, admonishing him, say to him, as one yielding unworthily in a contest: "Sir, see what you do; the orator will go off with the crown; it is no great feat of rhetoric to show this." For he both knows it and needs no one to teach him, partaking of so much sense, that he himself is ruler of the sailors, but servant and minister of those who sail. And of the occasions he has so much as belongs to him, to give the signal to those resolved to sail, and, by Zeus, to rouse those moored on a shore when the wind comes on; but as to when it is better to sail and when to stay at home, and whither and on whose behalf to sail, he is no more able to see it than another, nor sovereign to counsel. But the case of the orator is not such; rather, as the pilots rule the sailors, so again the orators rule the pilots, whenever there is need of the best of ships. And by so much are the orators more sovereign than the pilots, as those are than the sailors — by as much as the one set are masters of the sailors when they sail, but the others of the pilots themselves whether they sail or not; or rather the orators are masters of both, of the pilots and of those who sail. For they teach and persuade from the beginning when and whither one must sail; and again, when there is need of this, they prevent it. So that it is not equal to serve for hire and to send off victorious; nor does the pilot think he must consider the having saved the ship, nor those in it, but must besides examine the figure of the matter — just as the executioner does not think fit to be of greater pride than the judge, nor equal,

[175986] 92. because, forsooth, he himself kills; or, if not for that reason, yet that he too does it — but he knows that he himself, being a servant, does this of necessity, while the other judges what is just with authority, on purpose. And further, the pilot has his strength from one half. For saving alone is his; but no one has yet killed anyone by the account of the art, but if some are destroyed when a shipwreck befalls, he begs off and does not exalt himself. But the orator knows not only how to save, but also to kill and cast out whom it is better; so that perfect from both is the power of the orator. And the pilot does not even save according to desert those whom he saves, but, as the example itself says, he thinks it not improbable that some are such for whom it is better to die than to live; while the orator fills out the part of saving too together with justice. Therefore the example does not turn out alike, when, there being two, the one is sovereign of both together with justice, while the other has even the one only from a half. For these reasons the pilot, having exacted two obols if from Aegina, but if from Egypt, you say, or from Pontus, two drachmas if very much, having disembarked, walks beside the sea and his ship in modest fashion. For he reckons, you say, that it is uncertain whom of them he has benefited and whom he has harmed, and for these reasons it is not the custom for the pilot to exalt himself, though saving us. Do you see what you say? "It is not the custom," you say. But for the orator it is the custom; therefore it is also just. But the pilot knows those things, and besides those, whether he reckons these too I could not say; but it is possible

[177685] 93. both for a pilot and for anyone to perceive that the pilot who has at most saved a crowd together has not saved above a thousand; but the freight of the orator, which he saves, is not measured by an Egyptian ship, nor measured at all by a fleet, but harbours themselves and cities — not of ten thousand men only, instead of ten-thousand-bearing ships, but even hard to measure — fall under the fortune and patronage of rhetoric. And the pilot, having put into port, has nothing to do with his art, but for the orator there is no place exempt. "The engineer will overwhelm us with his speeches," he says. With what speeches, O head of Gorgias? For so long as he is simply an engineer, he is so far from being able to adorn his art with speech, that he cannot even furnish the products of his art unless the orators prevail; but if he is going to overwhelm with speeches, what is the power that presides over these? Therefore, when rhetoric is useful even to the engineer, if indeed he is going to be able to say anything about his art, how is rhetoric not in every way useful? Less strange, perhaps, than these things, but consistent nonetheless, he does in leading the trainers as more honoured than physicians. For if you do not mean by this gymnastic, but simply that which moves the body in any way at all, all men share in gymnastic; for all are moved somehow. And yet I should wonder if all are to be conceded better than physicians and more skilled in the use of the body. But if he speaks of that over which the trainers preside, how is it possible to bring this into the same class with medicine? For it is open to all to see this, that without trainers many kinds of

[179366] 94. men are led and saved, but that there should be medicine and not for all is the whole, so to speak, of difference. But, that argument may not take up argument for us — it being satisfactory if we suffice even for the urgent matters — I leave aside for the present the difference about this. "And the science of swimming," he says, "saves from death; so that why do we not exalt this too?" Because, O best of men — for neither will we draw back through shame from speaking of what is plain — the man who best knows how to swim is sufficient if he saves himself. But no one has ever yet saved another while swimming to him — except that the dolphin is said to have saved Arion of Methymna. But the orator has practised being able to save not himself only, nor one other, but friends and city and allies. And whoever is the best diver does not swim more than three or four plethra further — unless you should mention Scylla; nor, when he has come out of the sea or lake or river, is swimming of any use to him; but for the orator it is possible to traverse lakes and seas and rivers by his art; and whether staying at home or sailing, sitting or walking, he is the same. Do we, then, requite like with like? And I have not yet said the most sovereign thing, but now I will answer besides, that, O wondrous man, even swine and the meanest dogs of all know how to swim, and much more competently than a man, and they say the deer swim over a very great stretch of sea, holding to one another, the same one always becoming, in succession, first and last. But the nature and power of speech the god who fashioned all things has not implanted in hares and apes, nor in deer, nor, I think, in lions, nor in any of the other animals — neither in those in the sea, nor in those on the land, nor in those that fly above — but in two races only has this been set: in the prior and most perfect, the best of all, and in the second, the best of all the rest, by reason of this one thing which

[181349] 95. rhetoric, taking up, leads and adorns, increasing both him who has it and those who use it, increasing what is fitting to increase according to the nature of man. And yet, if Plato showed as much on behalf of rhetoric's being flattery as we now show on behalf of the whole contrary, I do not know how he the better confirmed his argument. But if he thinks to shame her worth by the paltriness of his examples, the things upon these I, for my part, may no longer utter; but one might, preserving Homer's verse — requiting like for like, "word for word" — suppose this: "What of it? Do not the nurses too say these things to the little children, and the schoolmasters and the pedagogues? — That you must not stuff yourself; that you must walk in the streets in orderly fashion, and rise before your elders, and love your parents, and not make an uproar, nor play at dice, nor, if you please, cross your feet — but nonetheless the nurses do not on this account think great thoughts, nor claim to be before the philosophers." So that, whomever you should set down as most valuable is worth perhaps two or three minae. And the pedagogues, even talking half-barbarously, admonish these things, the most of them, and sometimes serve as porters to their own masters instead of pedagogues, whenever they have given up the trade; and, by Zeus, they are not vexed if they shall have less than the orators, nor do they say this: "Why in the world is it that they themselves, shouting every day and sometimes cuffing and admonishing not just enough to clear their conscience, have not drawn up their brows, nor push into the seat of honour, nor have they even now received the reputation of knowing the greatest of human affairs; but the philosophers exalt themselves and put on airs and lay claim to the first places and carry themselves as great men, and that too saying these things among themselves, and neither yield to the orators nor think they ought to be of equal mind with the pedagogues?" But neither do these things have a sound argument, and those

[183402] 96. resemble these. I would have written the art too, were it not boyish. But nevertheless, in the arguments above, I tried to show that rhetoric pervades all the parts of virtue — being discovered in prudence, and discovered on behalf of justice, and guarded by temperance and courage. And this one may see according to these arguments of hers too. For to play the orator is, I suppose, to discover what is needful and to arrange it and to render what is fitting with order and power. And the discovery appears to be in accordance with prudence, if indeed it is impossible for one who falls short of prudence to discover anything whatever of the useful; and temperance is in accordance with the handling and the harmony of the leading and the probable; and in place of justice, again, set "the fitting." And this is to preserve what kind and how much suits each matter. But surely nothing partakes of courage straightway so much as speech wishes to. For nothing so banishes and disdains the lowly and ignoble as speech does. So be it. These things being so, by laying hold of which of the things I have named is it possible to censure rhetoric? Or who would proceed better and more purely from the probabilities, as a man, than he who is able to make speeches of what kind and how many and toward what kind and to whom one must; or how, apart from such a power, is it possible to converse rightly with either many or few? Or how to consort with a brother — younger or older, I mean — or how with parents, or how with companions, or how with those who know, or how with the ignorant, or with enemies, or with allies, or with the luxurious, or with the needy, or, if one should subdivide a thousand other cases? For the man who has examined the fitting in speeches everywhere, and knows the occasion, and is able to carry these through as he knows them — this is the only man able to use all the things I have named; this is the man who, admonishing, accomplishes; this the man who, accusing, is believed; this the man everywhere superior to the man who falls short in these things. And surely, the man who knows what one must say knows what one must keep silent, and when

[185575] 97. it is better to speak and when to let be — just as whoever knows when it is the right time to sail does not fail to know when also to lie at anchor; and whoever understands the right time for speech and for silence will err in neither of these. But the man who neither speaks nor keeps silent never does so from the probabilities, at least according to the art. It belongs, then, no more to the philosopher than to the orator to know when one must keep silent. And surely, whoever knows what it is fitting to say knows what it is fitting to do. For there is no one who, knowing how to say what it is fitting to do, is ignorant of what it is fitting to do; nor anyone who, ignorant of what it is fitting to do, is able to say it. And surely the man who knows for another what must be done knows also, I suppose, what must be done for himself — just as whoever does not fail to stop another's thirst does not fail in his own. The same man, then, appears, by the argument, both able to say what one must and to do it, and the same man errs about both according to the probable.

[186655] For these reasons, then, the ancients too joined the powers and did not distinguish them. Homer said that Phoenix was sent by Peleus to Achilles "to be a speaker of words and a doer of deeds," as though the same man knows both what one must say and what it is better to do. And even before this, earlier, he himself joined them, saying, "knowing not yet of equal war, nor of assemblies, where men become conspicuous" — making clear the practical part from one kind, that of war, and the part of speech from that of the assemblies; but, mentioning both, he added the "where men become conspicuous" to the assemblies, not to war, as the orator being the better when he speaks about what must be done than when he himself does the deed. Reasonably. For by as much as it is better to rule than to serve, by so much is it better to say what is needful than to do it. For the one, I think, becomes a counsellor to many, while the other becomes another single man's substitute. As, then, the master-builders must necessarily be superior to the carpenters, being nonetheless concerned with the very things that belong to the experience of the carpenters,

[187803] 98. so the poet set those who excel in the assemblies and in speeches above those who serve in these, and called them "conspicuous," very rightly so calling them. For he who acts among many does not become manifest; for many are the sharers; but he who speaks into the midst draws all to himself, and all look to him; "and he speaks securely, with gentle reverence, and is conspicuous among the assembled." For the argument comes round, all but of itself, to other, nearly similar things; in which Homer clearly bears witness that the orator does not speak as a flatterer, nor submissively, nor admiring this man or that, nor pursuing a momentary pleasure, becoming now one thing, now another, as the cooks do, for the sake of another's pleasure, nor figuring himself as a slave of those who at any time have power, but "he speaks securely," he says. And "securely" is "without stumbling." But it is impossible to speak without stumbling for one who does not speak soundly. And he says the cause of this is "with gentle reverence" — not taking into his soul and imprinting the most shameless character, that of the flatterer, but "reverencing." For of such a man the speeches too must necessarily be orderly, and, having order and arrangement, prevail. Hesiod, again, says that even kings become partakers of speeches by a divine portion and gift, saying that Calliope "attends also upon reverend kings. Whomever the daughters of great Zeus honour and behold being born of Zeus-nurtured kings, on his tongue they pour sweet dew, and from his mouth flow gentle words; and the peoples all look to him as he decides cases with straight judgments; and speaking unerringly, he quickly and skilfully puts a stop even to a great quarrel" — saying nearly not only the same kind of things, but the very same things outright as Homer, or rather much more sovereignly and brilliantly pleading for rhetoric, since he sets not only the same man to do what is needful as the man who says what is needful,

[189795] 99. but also says that the best of kings become such by partaking of rhetoric. And he adds: "For therefore are kings prudent, because, when the peoples are wronged in the assembly, they accomplish redress with ease, persuading with soft words" — bearing witness in these to two things: that rhetoric sits beside the kingly art, and that the title of "prudent" and the speaking finely belong to the same man. For he who in the earlier verses made Calliope follow upon the most reverend of the kings and make them able to speak, and here added "for therefore are kings prudent," so as to settle the differences of the people, shows that in the rank in which he before set the speeches, in this same he sets temperance; and again, that the orators are not from folly but prudent — setting prudence and temperance as the beginning of rhetoric, and these in turn joining to one another, both the kingly art and the judicial — Hesiod speaking rightly and justly requiting the Muses, from whom he had received the very power to speak about these things. Therefore the prudent say what is needful about these things, and the kings who know how to speak are prudent, not only that they themselves may do what is needful, but that they may prepare others too. It is, then, the work of rhetoric both to think rightly, and not only oneself doing what one ought, but to furnish others too, by persuading, what they must do, and in general to be kingly. Nor does the proverb depart from these things, which says that as the character is, such is the speech too; and again the other likewise. So with the arguments from us — or rather with those which the argument itself sets down — and with the testimony from the facts and that from the most honoured poets and the credit of the proverbs, the truth is on our side.

[191599] And if one must tell a tale too, I fear, indeed, lest some comic man, in mockery, say that we are convicted of trespass even against the old wives. But I will tell no mere tale, ending in itself, but here too the credit from the facts will be present

[191851] 100. — that I may truly requite the speech of Amphion too, and remember to mention Zethus, if, not as in Euripides one man shall make both speeches, but according to those very men let us divide it. For, men having lately come to be, there was much tumult and confusion over the earth among the other animals too. For neither did they themselves have what to do for themselves — for there was nothing to bring them together, but the greater led the lesser — nor were they able to hold out against the other animals; for in all things they fell short of all, now of these, now of those: in speed of all the winged — the very thing Homer said the Pygmies suffer at the hands of the cranes, all the men of that time suffered at the hands of all the strong birds — and in strength they were far behind the lions and the boars and many others; so that they perished in silence. And surely in the structure of the body they fell short not only of the sheep but even of the snails, no one of them being self-sufficient. The race being thus destroyed and slipping away little by little, Prometheus — ever somehow being a friend of man — goes up as an ambassador on behalf of men, not sent by men, for it was not yet known to send ambassadors, but himself of his own accord. And Zeus, both admiring Prometheus speaking justly and at the same time having of himself taken a reckoning of the matter, bids Hermes, one of his own children, go to men with rhetoric. Now Prometheus had before woven together for each, for all, the senses and the other members of the body; but he did not bid Hermes divide it as a distribution of the festival-money, that all in turn might share in rhetoric, as in eyes and hands and feet, but, having selected the best and noblest and

[193606] 101. strongest in their natures, to put the gift into the hands of these, that they might have, at once, the power to save both themselves and the rest. And rhetoric having thus come to men from the gods, men were able to flee the harsh life among the beasts, and they ceased being all enemies to one another in a circle, and found the beginning of fellowship. And coming down from the mountains, some to one part of the inhabited world, some to another, they drew together — at first in the open air, but after this, speech having now prevailed, they both built a city and divided, not as before at random, but into arrangements of fellowships; and they set up as leaders of the cities laws and rulers, and held a constitution as custom, and brought up thank-offerings to the gods, making the first-fruits those from speeches, in which the gods, the argument holds, even now most rejoice, because from this it first became theirs to know the gods. Thus man was raised great from the weak and rotten thing of the beginning, and, before despised as no matter, is from that time sovereign over the things on the earth, to use as he wishes — having made speech his bulwark instead of any other defence. And let our tale have this ending, having taken, I think, no dishonourable head. And that these things are not a mere tale, nor a dream, but a waking truth, and the very account of the matters themselves, is plain from the matters themselves. Therefore not only did the power of rhetoric, from the beginning, distinguish and establish these things, but rhetoric even now holds together and adorns the cities long since inhabited, seeking ever what is suitable to the present orders. For just as I said just now, legislation, having enacted the laws, is straightway finished, and the judicial art, after the vote, busies itself no further; but she, like some sleepless guard, does not break off her watch, but both was with those arts from the beginning, leading and teaching beforehand, and again by herself goes over each matter, proposing,

[195649] 102. acting as patron, ever composing the present. And not even if all wrongs and errors should depart from among men is she any the more useless — as there would, I suppose, be no need of laws or judges, this having come to pass; but so long as there is the using, both among themselves toward one another and toward the rest, the works are preserved for rhetoric. And not only do we, surpassing the other animals by the nature of speech, stand so far before them, but among the other animals, nor among those of the same kind, does one differ so much in any of his own peculiar things as man differs from man by reason of speech. Not even among men, then, do the other powers so far excel or hold out. For the man who prevails in wealth prevails perhaps over one and two, but, three or four together mingling their substances, he would not be richer; and if over four, yet not over twice as many; and if even over many times as many, yet not over all in the city; and if even over all in his own, yet surely not over those of the neighbouring town; and if over those too, yet not over both together; and much more, I think, not over those in all Greece together; and over those in all the continent it is altogether impossible. But the man who prevails by speech is alike before each man and before all gathered together, and as much as he prevails, it abides continuous for him, and he does not lose it. For it is not possible to club together, as with money, nor to fill up the deficit by a common subscription. And the man who excels in strength, even if he should be superior to one, by two would be held down, both Archilochus and the proverb say. And if, then, he should surpass both, it is easy to find how many would become manifestly superior. "United is the virtue of men," said Homer, naming that according to strength. But surely speeches better

[197510] 103. could not all together furnish than the one excelling in each case, nor is this judged by united virtue, but one and many are of equal power, each preserving the portion that falls to him of the loss, as in beauty. For until the superior comes forward from him, the fellowship and the multitude are worth nothing, not even if you lead the army of Darius. By which greatest thing is shown how great is the kinship of speech with the beautiful, and that this is in the soul which beauty is in the body. And yet, even about this part one might say that beauty time easily refutes — indeed the very name of "bloom" is allotted to it along with it; but speeches advance together with time, and nothing so shows the best of them as time, just as Sophocles said the just man appears only with time. The addition I take away — that not only with time, at least speeches, but also they are naturally fit to take hold at once, and of these alone has it befallen that their bloom is immortal. And the man who possesses money, whomever he thinks he ought to do good to, he does it by taking away from what he has, so that he renders his remainder less by what he has given out; and if, indeed, he should continue persistently in such ambition, quickly, I suppose, he will further need someone to relieve him of this; but the possession and power of speeches is not spent by the use, but, if one may say so, is most of all naturally fit to increase by this. And the cause is that money we take from below, from the mines and the quarries and from sullen labours, but speeches come to us from those who lose nothing by the things wherewith they do us good. Reasonably, then, do these alone partake of the divine nature. And surely, if one should do away with diseases from among men by speech, one might say there is no need of medicine, just as there is no need of a pilot for one not sailing;

[199397] 104. but for rhetoric, not only if all the errors of private men, but even if all wars should depart from among men, affairs are not without resource, nor has her power fallen as when a root is withdrawn. For still more do the festivals and the graces of peace need the order that comes from her; and, by Zeus, both the honours of gods and of heroes, and all the eulogies justly owed to good men. For she comes upon all these and adorns them, and appears fitting to all alike. And if, indeed, she should share with any of the other arts and powers — Heracles! — it is impossible to say how she shows forth what is hers. For instance, if a physician should add rhetoric, he will thus most of all know the grace of medicine itself. For if the power to persuade should be added to the other things present to him by his art, what prevents him from treating beforehand most cases by rhetoric, before laying hold of the instruments of medicine, using the wisest of remedies, as someone said? And, again, having come together with generalship, it is naturally fit to save the things of generalship far more. These things indeed Homer everywhere clearly shows, saying, "so speaking he roused the strength and spirit of each," and "so he spoke, and they rushed yet more upon the Argives," and "and to them straightway war became sweeter than to return in the hollow ships to their dear native land." Such things he always attributes to speeches. And most clearly of all he confirms it, all but by a herald, having made Agamemnon, when the Aiantes furnished their ranks bristling "with shields and helmets and spears," pray to receive the spirit of them all: "may such a spirit be in the breasts of all"; but of Nestor, who counselled the army best, to receive ten such, not worse, as counsellors: "for such, he said, may ten counsellors be mine among the Achaeans; then quickly would the city of King Priam bow, taken and sacked beneath our hands" —

[201340] 105. setting rhetoric so much more sovereign than generalship, as ten men are fewer in number than a hundred thousand. Reasonably. For he had not taken the proof from afar, but: if then, when the Achaeans were set in motion to rise up and were already drawing out the props of the ships and shouting over the sea, these two orators had not restrained them, what more was there of the tacticians, what of shields and spears and a multitude of ships and money and gear? But truly, what the baggage-carriers are to the hoplites, this all the equipment then appeared to be toward the rhetoric that presided over all these. And the pilot again, having added a part of this power, knowing both to frighten when it is the time and again to prepare them to take courage, by how much does he excel toward the very affairs of the pilot's art? Therefore rhetoric is both privately everywhere wonderful, and to whatever she is added she furnishes so great a turn of the scale. And I, for my part, say that even beauty and rhetoric, coming together, will be judged by the rhetoric, and that no one will gladly look upon such a man more than gladly hear him speaking. And this too Homer seems to bear witness: "not then did we so admire the form of Odysseus, when we beheld it," as he said — the closeness of the thoughts and the words and the grandeur of the voice, likening his rhetoric to a sign from heaven. And he bears witness in the passages we mentioned just now: "one man is feebler in form, but a god crowns his shape with words" — not idly nor simply saying "crowns," but showing that it not only fills up the deficiencies, but besides makes him prevail, since indeed the crown is a token of victory. The man, then, who is ugly but able to speak finely he sets before the most beautiful but unable to speak; and the man at once beautiful and an orator he reasonably and consistently says

[203226] 106. is more admired by reason of his speeches. And Pindar made so great a hyperbole that, at the wedding of Zeus, he says that the gods themselves, when Zeus asked if they needed anything, requested that he make for himself certain gods who should adorn these great deeds and all that array of his with speeches and music. And these things not only poets, but all men too agree: that other things hold either entertainment or use, for the most part, but this one thing most of all fills both, and along with its benefits has a wonderful grace; so that, even when men come into wars with one another, they receive and send off the ambassadors that come from those who did the deeds with their own hands, having regard for the tribe of orators, exempting the nature of speech, reverencing that from the beginning it came in for the salvation and common need of the race. And the disposition in arms is useless in peace, but the power in speeches is not dishonourable in wars, but is both useful to citizens and reverend to enemies, and often, in the very crisis of arms, prevails over arms. And the poets seem to me, for this reason, to call Hermes — the leader and patron of this wisdom — by the name common to the gods alone. For in common they name them all "givers of good things," but privately this one only thus; and "the guileless" too, and "the helper," because the gift from him is nothing evil, but provides good things in order, all of them, to men — in wars, in peace, on land, on sea, in hardships, in gladnesses, everywhere. And it seems to me that even the race of daemons, if one must believe Plato, in carrying the things from men to the gods and the things from the gods to men, uses this. So that one might rightly, in this respect too, call rhetoric the bond of the whole.

[205020] 107. And this too is the greatest thing to say on behalf of this power: that nothing is at once so common to the many and has so far escaped the condition and nature of the many; and being always, so to speak, among men, it is most hard to find in its perfection. For just as the lions and all that are more honoured of animals are by nature rarer than the rest, so too among men nothing is so rare as a man worthy to be called an orator; but with hard satisfaction one, and a second, like the Indian bird, springs up in the Egyptian cycles of the sun. And the many, having hit upon certain parts of the art, need Homer to address them, as that man said "he was an under-charioteer," and again "an under-servant of Poseidon" — the one is some beginning, the other the very end of a verse. So far are the truly orators by nature from being like Mithaecus and Thearion. And whatever other kinds of speeches there are — that we may not pass this by either — I have felt toward the speeches of rhetoric the same as cakes toward the real foods and meats. So that, of those concerned with each, these are most esteemed who contribute the most of rhetoric, and of these themselves most he who comes nearest to rhetoric. Homer and the things of Homer are these; Sophocles and the things of Sophocles these. And what does Plato himself say to us? For we are not ignorant of him, but ready to set him in the fairest place of the chorus. What, then, is rhetoric herself by herself, and the orator? For I would not shrink from saying that the man best in speeches is the man who is best. If, then, such a man too should arise, of a kind to have rhetoric but not easily to enter into the popular assemblies, nor to dispute about the constitution, seeing affairs

[206770] 108. otherwise disposed, and that too being not among the last in reputation and honours and the timely ambitions, but to use speeches by himself for himself, having honoured their nature and the beauty in them, and having inscribed a god as leader and patron of his life and of his speeches — not even for this man is it hard to answer Plato; rather, this man would be supplied with the very finest and most just of speeches: that, "O wondrous man, I from the beginning honoured this power and made it of more account than all gains and affairs, not that I might flatter the people, nor that I might aim at the many, nor for the sake of money — nay, whoever looks to this and is of those who take, this man I call a hireling, not an orator, and I say I have left room for many others to dispute about happiness, if one prides oneself on this — but, led by the very speeches and considering it fitting for a man to possess fine speeches as a possession, thus I work according to my own power. Why, then, do you reproach me with flattery, who am so far from flattering that I do not even consider how others shall flatter me? Nor, if I shall not be admired by the many, does it matter to me at all; but as the wine-lover does not consider it a loss if no one shares his drinking, and the lover of boys and the lover of women do not pursue their desire with reference to the testimony of others, but are content if they have those in whom they take joy, so I too, consorting with speeches and using these instead of others, take delight — a delight and a pleasure perhaps more befitting a free man; so that, even if none of my neighbours is privy to it, I do not count it a loss. But you, indeed, even the man who has

[208487] 109. the science of medicine you call a physician, even if he does not make his art public; and a statesman the man who has this science, even if he is doing his own affairs ... to be such. For these reasons it is not possible to say that I, rather than you, practise flattery — being so disposed, how can one say it, or how that he is a patron of any of the shameful things — who, if for no other reason, by these very things which he honours and pursues, must of necessity be most freed of all from all shameful things. For it is a thing to be content with, if a man, overlooking and setting far off all else, and having set up before him this one pleasure, but having been a slave to no other, should then be able, with a god as helper, to attain this. For what Thucydides said about naval matters, this man will say about rhetoric and speeches much more fittingly: that it is not possible to practise these things as a by-work, as it may chance, but rather that nothing else must become a by-work to these. Not only, then, must he be pure of flattery in himself and have nothing whatever counterfeit in his soul, but he must also be far from all flatterers and all shameful gatherings and associations. "Why, then," he will say, "do you not, O best of men, make a recantation, if you have any care for the truth?" Therefore both according to the original arguments and according to these second ones, and wherever one might turn, rhetoric is a fine and noble possession and a work of a man, and one that has a just ground of pride both for him who possesses it and for all who use it, and not only among men but also among the gods, having from the beginning obtained the greatest regard and honour, and rightly obtaining it through all time.

[210235] It remains for me to show one thing: that Plato himself utters the same things about rhetoric as I do. For he says, in the Statesman, I suppose, these very words: "Accordingly, then, it seems that now too, for us, the other things, and all that is alien and not friendly to the science of statecraft, have been separated off, and there are left

[210581] 110. the honourable and kindred things. And of these are, I suppose, generalship and the judicial art and all the rhetoric that, sharing with the kingly art, persuading what is just, helps to steer the actions in the cities." Which things Hesiod, a little before, appeared to us to say, these Plato outright, and all but breaking the metre, agrees to in these passages, declaring rhetoric the partner of the kingly art on behalf of justice. And in the Apology of Socrates he again says these very things: "For this is the virtue of a judge, but of an orator to speak the truth." Tell me, by the gods, whether Plato or anyone else wishes to speak for him: is there anything more alien to the flatterer than to speak the truth? What, then? To the man who speaks the truth, is anything more hateful than the flatterer? And surely this very thing is flattery — not to speak the truth. Therefore the recantation is now manifest. For what here he says is flattery, there he plainly defines thus not to be flattery, but to champion the speaking of the truth. The same things, then, as Plato we now say about rhetoric, seeming to say the contrary. If, then, I bring the argument still closer than these things, it would surely be a luxury of demonstration, and no one would any longer take up either the conception or the hope of stronger refutations. For not only does Plato himself, but in these very arguments, in this paradoxical treatise, expressly agree that it belongs to rhetoric to do the fairest things, and that she does not hold the same place as any of the shameful things, adding at the end this brief and easily-remembered thing: "and one must use rhetoric thus, toward the just always." So be it, O noble man: is there anywhere where it is possible to use flattery toward the just always? There is not, ever. And surely, using rhetoric on behalf of a fine thing, we would be doing some fine thing by her. Therefore rhetoric is a fine thing, coming to be along with justice. And surely flattery is plainly a shameful thing

[212612] 111. always. Therefore this is that very Plato, the son of Ariston, who says that rhetoric is not flattery, nor holds the same nature. And I pass over "the fairest stream of all streams," and "the speeches that come from the temperate mouth," and all the other such things, elsewhere, by which he has spoken of rhetoric, adorning her.

[212948] But if anyone should suppose, about Plato, that he has not spoken ill of this rhetoric on whose behalf we now make our speeches, but, there being two, censures the one — first, the things said by us are none the more shown to be paltry, but this very thing too bears witness that all these things have been finely and fittingly accomplished. For just as he justly censures the base one, what prevents us, praising the contrary one, from acting rightly? And next, this excuse does not do away with our refutations, but even thus he would appear to have said things contrary to himself, if, thinking rhetoric double, he then made his accusation as of one single and simple thing. For it is plain that, if this is true, it befitted him to censure the one and praise the other, dividing them, as he appears to have done in the arguments about love, and to have thought the good one worthy of much greater eulogies than the calumnies he thought the other worthy of. But I wonder what in the world he would have done, knowing this to be the only rhetoric about which he goes through these things, when, there being two, as he might say, and differing so greatly, he appears to have made so great an effort to speak ill of her once for all. For why is rhetoric more base than good, if it is double? Therefore we have not come to equal handholds, but the matter of the equal turns against him. Then, what prevents me too, holding to these very same arguments, from saying that

[214418] 112. dialectic also is double and not simply one, but the one such as to deceive and beguile and waste time and lead the tongue to nothing sound at all — cold and ignoble and knavish and deceitful and illiberal — and the other such as to furnish graceful and clever men? And indeed someone might say — whether rightly or not — that dialectic runs the risk of being a part of rhetoric, like the questions of the whole argument. But let these things be apart. The same argument, then, holds about all philosophy too, and about the parts of virtue, if one should wish, dividing, first to name two wisdoms — the one by which we understand the best things, the other by which men do mischief; then a double temperance, the one worthy of earnest and political, the other of the sluggish and supine; and again a justice, the one upright and the other lowly; and a double courage, the one with mind and sense, the other being recklessness and madness. But, I think, all these are the names of those who confound; and there is divided wisdom and mischief, temperance and dullness, justice and silliness, courage and rashness; but neither is fine nor fitting — neither to belittle the vices by the name of virtue, nor to disparage the virtues, setting beside each the things of vice. So, then, it is reasonable to examine rhetoric too according to those who rightly handle it and truly attain it, but not according to those who have made it a screen of their own greed or baseness — according to the very account of the matter, even if no one has attained it — and to divide false accusation and flattery from rhetoric, just as juggling and

[216050] 113. quackery from all philosophy. Therefore it is flattery, not rhetoric, that Plato has accused in these passages, and false accusation, not rhetoric. Neither, then, whether he has spoken ill of the truly real rhetoric, nor whether of the seeming one, is this to the argument, that he rightly spoke well of rhetoric, if indeed to speak ill of the seeming rhetoric is something else. For he ought to have said that such a thing is not rhetoric, not that rhetoric is shameful — just as he himself somewhere says that, "if they are children of gods, they are not lovers of money; but if lovers of money, not children of gods. But both ought not to be said." Therefore here too the argument plainly does not allow both; since this very thing too we now do on behalf of Plato himself. For if he most of all so thought — as I, for one, do not gainsay, but he has reserved the pure and truly real rhetoric — it is worth while that the many not be cheated nor be ignorant of this very thing, nor, attending as to a clean vote, deliberate more quickly than is profitable about matters so great. About this very part, again, he himself bears witness thus: "Do you not know that in every pursuit the many are paltry and worth nothing, but the earnest are few and worth everything? Does not gymnastic seem to you a fine thing, and money-making and rhetoric and generalship?" "To me, certainly, in every way." "What, then? In each of these do you not see the many laughable in respect of each task?" "By Zeus, you speak very truly." "What, then? On this account will you yourself flee all pursuits and not entrust your son to them?" Therefore one must not, O Plato, judge rhetoric from those who handle it ill, but from those who champion it best — or it would be ridiculous, or rather monstrous, if, by those examples by which you do not think fit to consider philosophy paltry,

[217920] 114. these shall not suffice for rhetoric, and that too when she is among the very examples which you yourself agree not to judge base. So be it. Who are those who rightly attain her — this too we will show from Plato's words: "The being able, O Phaedrus, so as to become a perfect contestant, is reasonable, and perhaps even necessary, to have as in other things; if it is in you by nature to be rhetorical, you will be a renowned orator, having taken to it knowledge and practice; but in whatever of these you fall short, in that you will be imperfect. But so much of it as is art" — but I leave the rest that follows.