WORK: Orationes 13  (slug: aelius-aristides-orationes-13-05ae1f)

CHAPTER: 01-orationes-13



[110036] 148. if the lawgivers extended their gatherings for this very reason — and, by Zeus, even overstepped the very name of the sacred month, adding more time, that we might be in one another's company as long as possible — and we, instead of using this, should find fault. As, then, we are not vexed at meeting the exercises of the games day by day, but enjoy as a gain the spectacle ever present, so it is fitting to feel about the speeches too — and these too among the things allotted to the festival; assuredly you will not meet with things always stale among what is left over, nor commune with things less honourable than those.

[110668] But, that I may not, in begging off beyond what is necessary, lengthen by this very thing, I will turn now to the next and continuous part of the speeches. For when Greece had become her own again and all had departed — ships, horses, the foot, satraps, king — first there were festivals and processions to the gods such as no one remembers to have taken place either before or after in a free Greece. For it was not a law that gathered them, nor a fixed cycle of time, but out of the events themselves it was given to each man and to cities to be of good cheer and to wear garlands and to call the gods to witness the happiness at hand. And on the one hand an altar of Zeus the Deliverer was set up — a thank-offering to the god himself and a memorial to those who had succeeded, on the very spot of the deeds, carrying a common exhortation to the Greeks both to concord and to despise the barbarians; on the other, the common shrine of the Greeks at Delphi was adorned with fair and fitting inscriptions, and the cities took on not only the ornament that comes from virtue, but also that from building, and the wealth of the barbarians was distributed among the better men. And indeed here too the city will appear to have excelled by as much as in the very deeds. For first

[111946] 149. she adorned the acropolis with memorials of the deeds, and added to the beauty of nature a rival ornament from wealth and art, so that the whole was, in place of a dedication — or rather in place of a statue. And next she hung up other honours for the gods, beyond all Greek power, some at home, some abroad; and she herself passed her ancient bounds in every direction, worthily of the deeds, and made an addition to her circuit. To put it briefly, she alone was made uninhabited through virtue, and she alone, out of virtue, was inhabited again and took on what was before uninhabited, becoming, in deeds and glory and ornament, fairer and greater. But here I have fallen, as it were unwillingly, along the road of the discourse rather than by foresight; for it was not toward these things that I was hastening, but I wished to show this: that if the fairest thing for men, and at the same time the most profitable and that which conquers in pleasure, is the visits and converse of the gods, and this then blossomed to so great a height among the Greeks, one would most justly assign it to this one city — first by reason of the honour of the gods truly itself; for we all repay the gods as the causes of our goods, and the city appears to have been, of what then came to men, in the highest degree the cause of what resulted; and next by so far excelling in the very dedications and thank-offerings. For these symbols of her piety are proofs of beauty and greatness. Yet she did not think this enough — to give thanks to the gods for what had happened and to seek nothing further, nor to sit upon her trophies, as though distrusting herself; but, judging her present possessions a stepping-stone to what was to come, she contended against herself, deliberating nobly and as befitted the occasion: for in the second times she thought fit to do the second things. And these were

[113832] 150. to march out in turn against those who had first made war upon her, and to remove the fears and the dangers into their country. And this is most worthy of admiration among those deeds — the figure of the war and its constitution. For of two other kinds of war — the one, if one begins from the beginning; the other, if one defends oneself — the former is not attended by justice, while from the latter the addition of necessity takes away the ambition, since by nature deliberate choice is separated from necessity. Now, I think, the one who does what is just under necessity is better than the one who transgresses willingly; yet not the whole, so to speak, becomes his own. And so then the disgrace of the former war fell upon the barbarians, and what was owed met them from the Greeks; so that they had conquered, but the part that comes of abundance was not present. But what one might call a third figure of war — to march out in turn against those who first plotted, using the freedom of those who begin and the justice of those who defend — this, then, the city resolved to show the barbarians, both on her own behalf and on behalf of the other Greeks: that it does not rest with them, when they come, to make the Greeks brave, nor that these things were done by them through chance and necessity, but because they thought it not honourable for the others to rule first; "and now, when rule has come round to the rank of the just, you will know well and nobly whom you have stirred up." Thus I say that, for a demonstration of justice and of true courage, the second deeds — that I may say nothing offensive — were wrought by the city no less clearly than the former. And besides this, she reckoned that the safety and preservation of the Greeks lay not in keeping them shut up at their hearth, nor in doing nothing either through them or themselves on their own behalf, but in thrusting the barbarians as far as possible from Greece; so she thought there would be the best and purest peace for all — reckoning rightly and seeing things as they are by nature. For nearly those alone are purely at peace who have shown that they are not at all in need of keeping peace.

[116014] 151. Such was the reasoning of the city, containing all that one might call fairest in human nature. Having so resolved — and what should I say first, or what last? — they won the battle at Mycale by no small margin, and searched the coasts of Europe, in case any of the invaders were still hidden, and drove some from the Strymon, some from Sestos, some from Byzantium. They went over all, purging it as it were of pollution, and they cast anchor no less than men sailing on trade. And the journey of Triptolemus, told to have been through the air, in the part where he had left off, they imitated. For he, doing good to all in common; they, going against those from whom vengeance had to be taken, punishing — thinking that this too profited the common race of mankind, to bring the insolent and those who think beyond their nature to fitting penalties. Having so resolved, at once they sailed round Asia, and at once they sailed up by the receiving rivers, and at once they were heard, at once they were seen; and they displayed a wonderful and truly armed war-dance. So densely and intensely did they rush upon the matters that even the Lacedaemonians, present at the first of the deeds, then departed, as men unable to follow the winged. And this same thing those of the other Greeks too who had first sailed out with them did — they grew dizzy and departed; while those who held the men from Asia, whom the king had before led against them and Greece, these they used as sufficient. And the king's own affairs were a starting-point for them against the king. For roadsteads and walls and stockades and everything received them, and arms and ships became theirs. And they left no part of their own virtue untried, fighting at sea, at once against Phoenicians and Cilicians and Cyprians in the midst of the Egyptian sea and capturing whole fleets, and at the same moment against the whole Persian

[117916] 152. empire risking themselves on land, destroying and capturing numbers of nations in place of a number of bodies. And already two trophies came in one day, and a sea-battle was matched with a land-battle. And they so surpassed the king that they made his empire and its places more renowned by their victories. The Eurymedon, at any rate, is sung not least because of these men. And they showed that one need not cross by yoking the straits with a flax-bound raft, nor wrestle against the highest of the mountains, as though it were something nobler, but, excelling in courage and judgment, prevail everywhere — with the fairest provisions of all, I think, and purely from home; for these alone, of what men have, are theirs through to the end, while the rest lie common before all, so to speak, gifts of fortune — or, if you will, of virtue. For they belong to the worse too from the beginning, but they are kept, reasonably, by the better. So they tested the whole empire, and shook it, and brought matters to such a pass — those enrolled in the Persian to such contempt, and the city to such confidence in all toward her — that the Libyans about Pharos were stirred, the Egyptians revolted along with them, and the king, though he seemed to fare in the rest as he wished concerning them, lost no small part of Egypt, the marsh-land — though before he had twice already taken all of it. And the matter of the triremes from Athens was like a kind of bolt from heaven. For alone of men who have lived in a commonwealth, they reckoned their own land as though it were another's, and another's land as not theirs, but as belonging to those who held it in wickedness. They lived the life of guards — and not of guards stationed in one place, nor patrols of some single spot, but those men one must call patrols of the whole Greek world; and they chose as enemies not the weakest, but those most able to endure the most, moved by two things: one, that nothing of the extreme — so far as concerns the judgment and preparation of the barbarians —

[119960] 153. had been left undone to the Greeks but their not having suffered it, for which they must take vengeance, and in no small way; the other, that toward the rest of time there should be safety for Greece — until the king came to know that, in lifting his hand against the city, he was doing something like what one would do who, raised up against a great oncoming flame, wrestled with fuel. For there was nothing that he did not suffer, but he was consumed of himself, and perceived that he held the land as a fortress against his own safety; and he advanced upon the road, reckoning the third thing nobler than the first — or rather, more necessary. For at first he had desired to take Greece in addition, and the rest of Europe; but he perceived that he was in love with the impossible. Second was for him to preserve the empire he had; not even this did the city allow. He came to make safety itself the thing of greater worth, and he withdrew before the city by so much, from land and sea, not as the saying is "to back water," nor as to "give ground," but he gave up all the lower region, no fewer than myriads of stades of Asia — the whole being like a great empire — so that not only were the islands and the Greeks of every kind in them free, but those who dwelt in his own country were further from his dominion and rule than before were those of the old Greece. For he held before the region as far as the Peneus — and yet I have taken away the marvel, as though I were saying something marvellous; he held all as far as Attica, until he met those from Attica on the sea: so far had he passed the navel of the earth and of Greece, Delphi. But from the contests and expeditions of the city he came down to this, that he agreed to sail no longer within two bounds — setting the Chelidonian isles to the south and the Cyanean to the north — and to keep off the sea by five hundred stades on every side; so that this circle is, in place of any other, a crown above the head of the Greeks, and the king's guard set up from his own country.

[122007] 154. Such was the war the city made against the barbarians, both on her own land and in theirs; and such, again, the peace she made, showing by both that it was not in pursuit of wealth, nor for the pleasure of gain, that she went on, but hunting this one thing: secure freedom for the Greeks from the barbarians. And yet what fairer chief-point of peace or of war could one name, whether against Greeks or against barbarians, than that with which the city then sealed her deeds? And these so many and such things she went through with many oppositions from the Greeks, all as it were pulling against her — the Lacedaemonians standing aloof in purpose, the Boeotians warring against her, the Aeginetans fighting against her at sea (whom one thing kept from being first at sea — the city, by far the victor); and besides these, the Corinthians stirred up through the Megarians and warring both by land and by sea, the Epidaurians and Sicyonians being counted with the Corinthians, the Naxians and Thasians and Carystians ill-advised about the alliance, the Phocians calling, the Lacedaemonians again calling, and a wonderful circle of affairs throughout Greece; so that, even if these alone had sufficed and we had only her Greek deeds of that time to relate, with no Median splendours present anywhere, they would suffice to fill the years for a narrative. For which one must especially rejoice with the city, not only for her strength, but for her greatness of spirit; for that, while at war and in rivalry of the Greeks against her, she gave up none the more her forethought on behalf of the Greeks, but warred against the king on behalf of the common interests through all land and sea — how great a greatness of spirit must one add to this? Apart from being so divided and reaching all things as if each alone — to furnish, of judgment, courage; and of

[123865] 155. preparation, surpassing measure, for one to admire? For she so ordered her affairs against the barbarians, as one having all leisure from all else, and to those of the Greeks who troubled her it was no more possible to make use of the occasion, but she met these too in such a way as to be able to count off these victories, five and more together, like other things reckoned all at once. They conquered the Peloponnesians at sea off Cecryphaleia; they conquered the Aeginetans off Aegina, and the Peloponnesians again. For the Megarians they set up walls down to the sea, and at once preserved their freedom and their land; they conquered the Corinthians before Megara, and before twelve days had passed they conquered them again in another battle, when they were ignobly snatching away the trophy. And these things are not yet great; but it shall be told, even though I am pressed — for the addition will show the whole. For the powers of the city were away: the one for the need of the Egyptians, ships more than then were all the ships among the Greeks together, well-nigh; the other was set down before Aegina — which the more stirred their adversaries to set out for Megara. For they thought there was leisure of the Athenians for the deed against themselves; and if even the second engagement should be won, then she would have to break off another siege, that of Aegina, for there was no other place from which they would come henceforth. But these so laughed the sophism to scorn that the men at Aegina were no more moved than those in Egypt who had heard nothing, but the rest of the age — the oldest and the youngest — go to the help of Megara, and in two battles in succession appeared stronger than the prime of the Corinthians and Peloponnesians; so that those men now exactly conceded, and had nothing more to say, not even that they had not justly added these present things. And it seems to me that, by the goodwill and zeal of some god toward the city, this second affair was contrived, as in

[125882] 156. a drama. For if they had departed as men struck once, there might perhaps have been some later rejoinder for them; but to be reproached by their own people, and, reproached, to go out again, and, setting up a trophy greater than the former, to add to their suffering — this made them themselves set their seal upon the victory, so that the deed should not seem to be judged by fortune rather than by the account of the better, both now and before. So they did not make trial of a third — though they themselves forced the contestants together at the Isthmus.

[126447] Are these things, then, all we can tell of those men? Surely we should rob them of many great things. They sailed round the Peloponnese — not to speak of it simply as naval circumnavigations, but so as to master the strategic points of the country, and to defeat in trifling fashion those who stood against them, general after general. They crossed to the opposite mainland, all that they met giving way. Again, when the Lacedaemonians came over against the Phocians, the Crisaean gulf was closed, and they met them at the borders. And apart from these, before Megara, they were in Geraneia; so that the Lacedaemonians had no resource, but were at a loss, standing among the Boeotians, where they might be saved: so did the city enfold them. And at last they engage at Tanagra in Boeotia, and when both proved men worthy of the daring, the Lacedaemonians seemed in this one point to have had the better — how shall I say it becomingly? For I shrink from saying that they were not destroyed. For this was the limit: for the Athenians, to close the pass; for the Lacedaemonians, to be saved home. And this deed comes near to being the only one in which flight has been a symbol of victory, since those who in the battle too were the stronger, and in the whole, without many of the earlier proofs, the things that followed at once showed. For there are three witnesses who attested on the spot that the victory was the Athenians':

[127876] 157. Athenians, Lacedaemonians, Boeotians. For the Lacedaemonians were content to withdraw, the Athenians went forward hard upon the battle, and the Boeotians did not hold out, but, beaten at Oenophyta, bowed down, and with them the Phocians and Locrians, by a single victory. And from these the city took this penalty in return for their having sided with the barbarian in the common dangers of Greece. And there is another deed of hers worth telling, and this too shouting and showing aloud from afar whose it was. For when the earthquake about Laconia took place, and the perioikoi stood round the Lacedaemonians, and all the affairs in the Peloponnese were truly shaken as in an earthquake, the Lacedaemonians had no sooner called than the people was at hand under arms — bold in courage, but full of fear on their behalf as on behalf of its own safety; which both dissolved the present terrors for Lacedaemon and made ready to take vengeance on them hereafter. So nowhere is it possible to embrace the deeds or the darings of the city more than the character of her deeds, which marks the doers more exactly than a trophy. The expedition for the Milesians, and the sea-battles off Samos, and the chastened revolt of the Euboeans, and many other things, one may indeed pass over. And at last, having mastered all, she makes a peace worth recalling. For she did not make her treaty in the same manner toward the Greeks as toward the barbarians, but reversed it. For from those she took away all the lower country and the sea within the bounds I mentioned; but to the Greeks, what she had become mistress of in the war, this she gave back — Megara, Troezen, Pegae, all Achaea. By which it is clear that she made the peace while in the position of victor; for there was nothing she received in return, but she brought forth one and the same as a symbol of two things, both of surpassing in the war and of her inborn goodness — holding that against the barbarians one must war to

[129857] 158. the utmost of one's power, but against the Greeks simply up to the point of superiority. Having so carried through the contest against the barbarians, and so again the contest against the Greeks, such a peace she made toward those, and such toward these, becoming superior to both together and apart. And indeed she alone of all cities, by her own dangers, procured a benefit common to the whole race; and she alone, out of common benefactions, acquired the leadership and altered the custom. For it was not from enslaving the cities that she got her rule, but from making them free; so that it came about that the same time brought to the Greeks the gain of freedom, and to the city the gain of rule. For they alone ruled the willing, and this people alone, like a single ruler chosen out of all, prevailed — forcing the barbarians with arms, and not persuading their kindred, but persuaded by them to rule, holding rule as a symbol of justice, not of injustice. And if one must put it with a distinction, she alone of cities got her rule with the barbarians unwilling, the Greeks asking for it.

[130960] When matters had thus advanced, for a while there was quiet, and the cities enjoyed the happiness they had; but of the common fortune of men, which moves all things, both the Greeks and the city had their share. For the one party did not keep gratitude through to the end for the good they had received, but envied the excesses of her deeds; and she, against those for whom she had undergone everything, clashed — showing by two things how unwillingly: by at first restraining them while they were still being stirred, and asking that the differences be judged by argument; and by, when forced to war, seeking nothing more when she had conquered, but letting go those who had contended with her about the leadership, and leading them out of prison no more unpleasantly than

[131735] 159. she had thrown them in at the beginning when she prevailed. But what should one make of these things now? For I am ashamed even to leave out the sea-battles at Naupactus, which they won by no small margin and against no slightly greater numbers, but sailing as upon a windfall; and other victories on the Thracian coast, and how they rescued Corcyra, and the deeds about Ambracia, the greatest of the Greek deeds of that time — and these done by virtue, not by need; and the things at Pylos itself, sea-battles from land and land-battles afterward on the island; and, before these were done, other Lacedaemonians brought from Cythera, and trophies of Corinthians, and many other things, rivals both to tell and to admire. But the occasion does not bear it; it seems to me a thing of greater good fortune to hold it in. And further, as we said, we did not undertake to relate what the city has done as a bare history — for then the discourse would stretch into the next quadrennial festival — but to tell the most renowned of her deeds in the wars, and of the goods belonging to the city to leave out nothing, so far as possible. And these things consist not in our telling each thing through all, but in our leaving out no kind of praise. And as it seemed good to the deity that these things should not yet suffice for Greece, but that the cities should still be tossed both by land and by sea, and that some enemies should come from abroad, while others sailed abroad in their misfortunes — what Greek or what barbarian is there who could name others equal to those from this city? To whom it occurred to sail for the freedom of the Leontines, and they thought fit to risk themselves for that of the Egestaeans, and they purposed to cross against the Carthaginians, in return for the Carthaginians' having first crossed against the Greeks in Sicily; and they manned triremes and merchantmen, as though sending them out from all Greece. And the land-battles and horse-battles are perhaps less to be amazed at, because of the city's constant habit of

[133791] 160. conquering, and because the portion of the better has been given to the city as a kind of prize in most things; but that, even when affairs went against her, she fell away none the more, but — with hoplites absent, with cavalry absent, equal to whom in number or virtue it was impossible to find; and with so many ships and missiles and equipment and arts and allies and, so to speak, all her furnishing removed elsewhere, as though all Sicily were just then being colonized, the acropolis emptied of well-nigh ten thousand talents, the Lacedaemonians and Boeotians and the rest now making their invasions not from the Peloponnese but from the heart of Attica, from Decelea, and the household slaves having removed, no fewer than to seem the full complement of a nation, and with impunity for desertion to whoever wished, and so great a war about the city — that she should display so great an abundance of endurance and at once of strength and of ambition as to send out another expedition to match the former, and rival generals, and think fit to besiege the Lacedaemonians there with the alliance — to what human soul can one compare these things, and what good fortune should one not rather admire? And when the great disaster had come — for I will not be silent, but this too seems to me to show the city still greater — she bore herself toward the remaining affairs as though she had taken all Sicily. For she did not resemble one stripped of power, but one who had just acquired it. And the easiness of her ways and her moderation and the order of her conduct, which they chose for the sake of conceding nothing shameful, no one could worthily tell. And when all the Greeks stood round them, and their existing enemies then for the first time took hope and were spurred on by fortune, and those from Sicily came upon them, and the alliance changed, well-nigh all of it, and islands and mainland and all, so to speak, became enemies and surrounded them on every side, and an unexpected piece of folly besides came about, so that even the king was

[135850] 161. called against the city by those who had been saved from him by the city's deeds — and he joined in, very gladly, and warred with bodies and ships and gold, and what starting-point of land or sea did he not furnish for the war? — there was no one who, looking on from outside, would not have expected the city to be snatched up now at last, held fast in so common a war of barbarians and Greeks; but they so turned matters about, as though all these things were for them, not against them, or as though the enemy were their own generals. And, greatest of all, when even the constitution was shaken and certain of those at home were estranged from them, having no place where they had to stand except Samos — as in the Median danger they had Salamis — but coming, these too, in some other fashion to the same point as those of that time, and abandoning the city in its greatest part, they set right matters at home and mastered those abroad and parted the Hellespont with trophies, pursuing some in one direction, some in another, as though making rather practice-exercises among themselves than sea-battles against those they met. (It has been said, and I considered it, that this has been said before by another.) And at last, falling in at Cyzicus together with the Lacedaemonians and the men from Greece and the barbarians from Asia and Pharnabazus, they take the ships, all but as many as they destroyed; and when Pharnabazus tried to heal the disaster and brought up his cavalry, the one party fighting from foot on horseback, the other from the ships, they overpower all at once — fleet, cavalry, the archers from Sicily, those from the Peloponnese, the king's provision, the hopes of the Lacedaemonians; and the war was now empty for their adversaries, and everything was gone, as truly as from a shipwreck. So that the city which had been so far surpassed by faction did not even conceive the name

[137762] 162. of peace in those times, while those who set out from so many and so great advantages, when struck, took refuge at once in peace. I have always, for my part, blamed those who reproach the city of the Lacedaemonians and think fit to do this on behalf of yours; for they make themselves hateful to those, and do not, as they suppose, adorn you. But, if one must say something paradoxical, they seem to me to do the opposite of what they wish; for they exalt those men more than they praise the city, and I think more thanks would come to them from those men for the slander than from you for the praises. For those men are not penalized by being called second to the city, but gain by being judged against the city; while you they do not glorify by declaring you the stronger, but by the very setting-side-by-side they seem not to know you; so that it is not unlikely that you should feel more displeased than the Lacedaemonians, whenever they contend in this way.

[138731] But since I have come to be in this part of the discourse, in which the cities are compared with one another, it is necessary perhaps to endure this too, that we may show not only in the contests how much the stronger the city is, but in the whole. For the Lacedaemonians will appear to have lost three hundred men and not endured it, but to have given way at once — which gives the city greater ambition than to have won the battle; for in that she became superior to those who stood against her, but here she became superior in things in which the rest gave up, almost all, as in games, when everyone yields. But she, having had so great a disaster afterward in Sicily, not only did not cower, nor gladly take refuge in peace, but so disposed her enemies that they would gladly have seen anyone able to persuade the city to keep peace. And when they heard of Conon's siege in Mytilene, they were not dismayed, but, sailing to Arginusae with fewer ships than anyone would have guessed, fewer

[139725] 163. nevertheless than their adversaries, they ranged themselves with their whole fleet against the enemy's, as though someone else always furnished them the triremes, and made their trials in the Carian rather than in their own bodies; and they took no thought either of the multitude of those arrayed against them, or of Callicratidas' reputation, or of islands held, or of fortune by now, so to speak, estranged; they were not beaten by the storm, nor did they take thought how much of the war was left, but, as though it were enough to look upon the sea, they rout the Lacedaemonians, master all the Peloponnesians, take some triremes and sink others, fighting at once against the thunderbolt and the enemy, and so changed the siege; and, greatest of all, they rescue the man who alone afterward sufficed to dissolve the dominion of the Lacedaemonians. And those, as though all conquered at sea, again begged for peace; so the city was wont then not only to conquer those present in the contests, but also to amaze the rest and to conquer through all. And indeed she will appear both to have won the greatest victories of any, and to have borne her misfortunes so that one would rather admire the city's good courage in dangers than the deeds of the conquerors; so that it occurs even to me to say this: that, conquering in her good fortunes, she has excelled no less in those in which she failed, since no one has borne misfortunes in like manner. Of her conquering in what she achieved — apart from what she did against those who opposed her in politics — there are two indissoluble signs: for what she did by herself surpasses what was done privately by any, so far as not to be missed; and what was done when they were on the same footing all together fall short. And indeed in difficulties too she has become superior to the conquerors; for they gave way, but she has been shown to hold out against fortune. Therefore she carries off both victories by no small margin, and conquers

[141717] 164. the cities alike in what she achieved and in what she failed.

[141785] And indeed she herself has mastered nations and cities at once, but no one has mastered her except with many allies. And further, she has been compelled to war against all together who came against her or stirred against her, while of her adversaries most have held out against a part of her, and few or none have made trial of her power gathered together. So the city of the Athenians has conquered many things many times, yet she herself is, equally, unconquered. And, greatest of all, no one has mastered her — for no one has brought her judgment to terms, but all such misfortunes have been those of an army — while she herself has enslaved the judgments of her adversaries together with their deeds: making Xerxes flee from his affairs as a thing to be prayed for, and laying the Lacedaemonians low — those who heard of it no less than those present in the battles and stumbling. And one might know that the case of these cities is not equal nor alike, either in the greatness of the deeds or in the darings or in anything whatever of their possessions. For the Lacedaemonians, having met misfortune at Leuctra, did not recover, but it was for them like a man's death. For they refused to make peace with the Thebans, thinking it a becoming misfortune to yield to the city of the Athenians alone; but mingled with the rest of the Peloponnesians, they were no more able to save others than they needed the rest to save them — and yet the city sufficed them for the greatest thing, not to be snatched up once for all, as by the onset of a hurricane or some whirlwind. But the city, cheated in the sea-battle at the Hellespont, and stripped of her ships and her walls, and after this using faction within herself, and with the Lacedaemonians doing nothing moderate, took from them, through one man, the rule of the sea, and herself stood at the head of Greek affairs, as though just coming forward from the Median wars. So not only did she bear the reverses of war more nobly than others bore their good fortunes, but also her

[143815] 165. troubles at home she so handled that she is a measure of self-restraint for all men, and no one has been able, even later, to find anything better than what was done by them. She showed it both in the overturning of the constitution under the Four Hundred, which she dissolved without a sound, and in the war against the Thirty, which became no greater against more than after those men. And indeed of self-restraint and daring at once no men have brought forth clearer tokens — those who, being a little more than fifty, the first to resolve these things, undertook to risk themselves at once against the dominion of the Lacedaemonians by land and sea and against those in the city itself, thinking they must either live in freedom or not look upon the sun, which had become a witness of cowardice for them. And when they had contended against those from the town, and ranged themselves against the Lacedaemonians, and held the Piraeus, and become for men a pattern of hope in dangers, the people, now gathered together, came at once to blows and well-nigh to words, as though each side would war on behalf of the other, not on its own behalf; so that one could not determine whether it belonged to the enemy to curse the faction, or to the well-disposed to join in praying for the city, since it was dissolved in this fashion. For it sickened by the nature of all men, but was healed by its own; so that this too has brought it emulation rather than misfortune. And I wish to say only this much further about those men: that in daring they surpassed not only the Lacedaemonians, but well-nigh even their ancestors at Marathon. For those, even if far inferior to their adversaries, yet took courage being in a body of considerable number; but these, the whole being a little more than those against whom they fought the tyrants, seized Phyle. And those, while the city flourished, conquered strangers and barbarians; these, when she had fared otherwise, conquered the Lacedaemonians, rulers of the Greeks, and those from the town, their own. And having conquered

[145885] 166. their enemies by good courage, they conquered their own people by fairness. Using both — the courage in the contests and, after the deeds, the resolving of what must be resolved — they so recovered the city that, if one wished not to relate everything, one could conceal the misfortune that befell in the war: so did they both choose and accomplish what followed in keeping with the deeds above. And yet, by how great an abundance must one think this city surpasses that one, to which, when she was stripped of all, the Lacedaemonians were so far inferior?

[146448] But what is no less worthy than any of their deeds to tell and to honour: when the Lacedaemonians demanded what they had lent the Thirty against the people, then, when they had come to terms, the people paid it off jointly, that they might confirm the compact by deed. And indeed how the Lacedaemonians dealt with one another we could not tell — for they hid it; but the city, besides so settling its own affairs with many witnesses, became a pattern for the rest. The multitude of the Argives, at any rate, when later it sickened, she healed by deed and word; for, sending to them and reminding them of her own affairs, she reconciled them. They appear, then, to have administered alike their own affairs and the common affairs of the Greeks, alone of all; for they thought they must rescue the Greeks not only from enemies, but also relieve them when sick among themselves; and they themselves, prepared both against the wars abroad and against the troubles at home, were seen to be beyond hope. Not, then, that those coming from elsewhere and far younger were arrayed against autochthonous and older men; nor that the city taught others; nor that, though taking forethought for nothing but war, the city won more in other things than in this — not these alone show the inequality, but also that in the very affairs and occasions of war she appears to prevail so far,

[147819] 167. whether things go well or otherwise, as the things said make clear and as one may see from what we shall add. For I feel toward the deeds of the city as men feel toward those in their prime: for the deed that ever shows itself appears to me the fairest, and I set this down according to the discourse. These things, then, some god would judge well; but I, as I promised, will go through the most renowned of the rest, from which one may at once reckon the judgment and the power of the city. One war, and a first strange and wonderful one, she undertook on behalf of the Thebans. For when the Lacedaemonians, judging the rest mere play, as though you were exhausted, began their dominion from their own allies and proclaimed a garrison against the Thebans, both things astounded the Greeks; for the city had never used bitterer enemies, nor again had the Lacedaemonians used allies at once more eager and more able against that very city, not only at the beginning and the middle of the war, but even at the last, when it was over. Yet the people did not rejoice at what was happening, nor again blame the inopportuneness in that they had as yet neither ships nor wall; but, as though where the Lacedaemonians moved, there they had to be those who met them, throwing the city into the midst of the dangers of war, beside the very memorials of their misfortunes, they went out to Haliartus against Lysander and Pausanias and rescued Boeotia. And then indeed Lysander exactly perceived that he had not, as he supposed, conquered the city of the Athenians, but had only dreamed, much as children dream; for she had at once recovered from her misfortunes, while he was not administering the affairs of the Greeks, but lay among the rest. And not long after, a penalty Greek and befitting the city overtook the Corinthians too, and these also flee to the city — whom anyone would have guessed, from the circumstances, that, do them whatever harm she might, she could never think she had taken sufficient vengeance; but they, judging concerning these as concerning the Thebans, go to the help of Corinth, as one would on behalf of one's own land; and, the war being

[149985] 168. great and continuous at Corinth, having faced danger in front in many battles, and walled them in, and guarded both them and the city through all, they added that noblest thing: for, holding Acrocorinth and being able to seize the city when they wished, they did not take it nor resolve to, showing by deed that they were warring for the cause of those they championed, not doing anything privately for themselves. And at last they brought the Lacedaemonians to such a strait that they take refuge again with the king of the Persians and through him make the much-talked-of peace, giving up the Greeks dwelling in Asia — about whom I make no accusation; but if one should ask them whether they conceded these things willingly or by compulsion, if they shall say willingly, they must say they betrayed them — and who would believe it? but if unwillingly and by necessity, they admit, surely, that they were beaten by the city in the whole; for they would not, if they had any resource in their affairs, have then deliberately taken on such shame. So that, by the only argument left to them, they themselves bear witness that the city then had the advantage in the war — and that no small one. And since I have mentioned the peace, I wish here again to go back a little. For of the two things by which cities are judged, war and peace, and both of these having come to the Greeks against the barbarians, in war the city so excelled that what she alone accomplished is the greatest of the deeds — or, if one set it among the later, she so far surpassed those who shared as if she had contended by herself. And apart from these, she is witnessed by the three occasions: for the first deeds of the war she accomplished alone; in the second, having risked herself in front even against the king, she carried off the prizes of valour; and the last are her own — the sea-battles and land-battles about Cyprus and Pamphylia, and the long course; so that she alone and first conquered the barbarians, and

[151986] 169. having joined with others, she conquered her fellow-combatants no less than her adversaries — and she alone remained. But indeed, how great the difference of the peace! For the city's peace lays commands upon the king and says that he too must do what is bidden; for it does not let him sail within the Chelidonian and Cyanean isles, and "if you pride yourself on your cavalry, you shall none the more drive as far as the sea, but you shall keep off the sea," it says, "by a day's ride of the very cavalry, and you shall obey concerning the Greeks alike, both those in Greece and those in your own land." These things the city's peace says; the other says that the Greeks dwelling in Asia shall obey the king, and that he shall do concerning them whatever he wishes, and it has added that he should define what is just for the rest. Is the chief-point equal, or the difference small? Is it not the whole opposite?

[152906] Again, the dealings with the Greeks and the resolving of the wars among them. The city, then, sent back with peace the Lacedaemonians she had taken, doing them no harm, as though it were enough to have conquered by virtue; but those of the Lacedaemonians in the Hellespont — for so it is decent to say — whom they took in the sea-battle, the Athenians being outwitted, they slaughtered out of hand; and I add nothing more, and that with the pattern at hand from home, how the city is toward the unfortunate; yet not even so did they imitate it — so far were they from being able to have shown it first themselves. And further, those thought nothing enough, but went as far as the demolition of the walls; while the city, having conquered all the Peloponnesians in the upper times, when she recovered Euboea, did not advance further, but gave back willingly even what she had gained beforehand in the war — Megara, Nisaea, Troezen, Achaea, Pegae. And it seems to me that the matter of the captives, and everything of the kind altogether, is a sign of a twofold virtue in the city, not, as one might say, merely of humanity. For those, I think, with whom such things

[154072] 170. succeed beyond hope or power, cling to their present fortune, as those unable to hunt do not let go what is unexpectedly caught, nor, even if one should think fit to ransom it, would they value it at its worth, but, adding their own incapacity, they exact more. But she, I think, conscious that she was the stronger in the whole, never haggled, hoping for what was absent on equal terms with what was present; so she gave back everything to the enemy more easily than they demanded their own. And indeed which single Lacedaemonian mastered the city, not a man could say — where they did not even master her acting in common, alone; while one Athenian man took from the Lacedaemonians the rule of the sea, alone of men having been general at once with the king and for the city — or rather for the Greeks. For doing no wrong whatever to the one who trusted him, he walled the city and freed the Greeks, conquering the Lacedaemonians by island and by city. Now the very rule of the sea the city acquired from her conquests over the barbarians, the natural enemies; they from the city's misfortunes. Having acquired the rule, the one so ordered each thing that he who administered it was called just by the Greeks themselves, alone of the Greeks, on this account, and there is no need of any further symbol of the title which the city then acquired through him; the others so disposed those who gave themselves up that they made the noblest defence of all men on behalf of the charges that arose against the city from some at certain seasons; and the cause was not cruelty, nor what one might say of those readily accustomed to censure, but the not reaching, in their natures, as far as the equal. And indeed the one held their rule more than seventy years, the others did not preserve it even for three Olympiads; so that it truly could not have been otherwise, unless they had received it at the first when the Olympians brought it forward.

[156018] 171. These are the very things at which I am vexed when men wish to compare. Perhaps, then, I too seem to some to do an absurd thing — finding fault, yet myself having advanced into the like discourse, and having said the very things for the sake of which I say one ought not to speak. Yet from these very things one would most see that the favour is not wonderful which they think to lay up for the city, nor are such things to be contended for on purpose. So that if anyone thinks fit that these things should be unspoken by us too, well-nigh for this reason it has been said; and apart from this, the speeches have come about without slander and for the sake of the need that fell in the way. For there was no other way to show what I had set out to show, so that out of the very things I was fleeing, from these I was led to speak. For the Lacedaemonians seem to me to feel toward the city what Teucer in Homer feels toward Ajax. For he too, fighting in front of the rest, withdraws to Ajax and through him appears, and likewise is also hidden; and the Lacedaemonians, who excel the Greeks and fight in front in their needs, are to be compared as children to the city. And the proof: of all their possessions and deeds, the greatest are those they have shared with the city; and of these, what they did apart they failed in, but what they did with those from the city they accomplished most gloriously of men. So through the city they are both shown and again hidden. Yet I have been led against my own intention into these speeches, so that I would have wished even the trophies I am about to mention to stand dedicated to the city from others, and that it should not be necessary to add to most of them "from the Lacedaemonians." But as it is, the very facts lead this way, so that it will be said not for the sake of comparison, but that the deeds may not be wholly passed over; for there are some I have left out — and there is need, it seems, of no ordinary course.

[157994] 172. They conquered, then, at Lechaeum, and destroyed well-nigh the whole army; they took the forts in Corinth and drove out the Lacedaemonians established there and razed the walls; they went into Arcadia and as far as Laconia, and shut up those in Phlius, and set up a trophy of those who came out against them, and again over the Mantineans and Sicyonians in the plain and over the allies; they sailed along as far as Byzantium, and made the whole region about Thrace their own, and conquered the remaining harmosts and garrisons at Methymna and off Abydos. And they had so great a superiority that they even reconciled the kings of the Thracians. And when the unexpected disaster about the Cadmea took place, they alone of the Greeks kept both the justice of the shameful peace and the noble and truly just things of the Greeks, marching out against the Lacedaemonians — of both of which what greater thing can one say concerning the city? For they conceded the peace last of the Greeks, and not before they knew that they must war not only against the Lacedaemonians and at the same time the king and Seuthes and Dionysius and the Peloponnesians — for against this they were prepared — but also against their own allies; so betrayed were they; and not even so did they endure it with all the votes, but they condemned those who had persuaded them, holding it against their own nature and not lawful that any Greek whatever should consent to obey the king before the trophies. And when, even against this peace, they went into Thebes — of those whose name on such occasions I shrink from speaking — not only first of the Greeks, but also alone, they laid hold of the matters as though seizing a windfall, and displayed not one kind of benefaction, but left out no kind of benefaction: receiving the exiles, and arranging the deed for them and rehearsing it beforehand like a drama in their midst, and giving exemption and citizenship and a share in all things,

[159960] 173. as to those who had removed from Corinth and Thasos and Byzantium. Then, when there was need also of help through arms, they went out, well-nigh all of them, as though about to share in a procession and not in dangers, imitating their former going-out, and in purpose even surpassing it. For then they went out though they had no alliance with the Thebans; but in these times, even when the pillars about the alliance had been thrown down by the Thebans, yet they did not reckon up their folly against the need, nor were they more angry with those who justly faced danger than with those who unjustly attacked. And, using such brilliant reasoning, they set a fitting end upon it. For they conquered by no small margin, nor so as merely to frighten the Lacedaemonians, but, casting out the garrison and the harmosts under truce, they brought the city back up to its original rank. And this contest they took up on behalf of the freedom of the Thebans; the next, on behalf of their very preservation. For when the Lacedaemonians were spurred on by what had happened, and came on with the whole alliance, they ranged themselves before the city of the Thebans, setting against them generals more fearful to them than those that they furnished with Agesilaus, and becoming through all the saviours of the city. And all sorts of things stand round me, as in a history of those same times, which not only is it not easy to go through all, but not even all of one general in order. Which of them, passing by, shall I mention? The sea-battle at Naxos, so great a deed? Or the contests about Corcyra? Or the things done on the Thracian coast on behalf of the Greece there? Or those in Acarnania? Or those everywhere? Or, leaving aside all the rest, shall I tell that which I hold greatest and most wonderful and alone truly worthy of the Athenians to have done — that, when the Thebans, having mastered the Lacedaemonians at Leuctra, planned to destroy them, and

[161919] 174. matters had been left in such a state for the Lacedaemonians that either some hand of a god had to be held over them, or the city had to inherit the dangers that were theirs, willingly — and yet a herald had come at the very beginning from the Thebans, crowned as for good tidings, and the whole Peloponnese had come, giving itself up, bidding them lead for the destruction of Sparta, and threatening, if not, to join the Thebans — yet they, at the herald's words, so wept as though hearing of some misfortune of their own, and sent him off as one come from the barbarians, cheated of his hope most utterly; and they chose the desolation of the Lacedaemonians instead of the voluntary alliance of the Peloponnesians and the friendship of the conquerors, not remembering what they themselves had suffered, but thinking it their own business to dissolve what the Lacedaemonians would suffer if overlooked. And what is most worthy of admiration in their nature, and to be reckoned greater than human: for, when it was possible for them to have the Lacedaemonians follow them both by land and by sea, or to overlook them thrust headlong down — allies, perioikoi, household slaves, all risen up — they received them on equal terms; and when the power of the Thebans was advancing like a flame against the city of the Lacedaemonians and the rest of the Peloponnese, they alone, of Greeks and barbarians, standing in front, prevented it. From which they were so regarded by all that the city became the council-chamber of the whole alliance.

[163460] I marvel, then, at those who dare to bring forward against the city the cases of the Melians and Scionaeans — where on earth or sea are they when they make these accusations? Have they heard only these of the deeds of the city of such a character, or would they not have wished both these and all else that belongs to the city to belong to their own fatherlands? For if they shall say they would not wish it, let them show in turn what they pride themselves on; but if they would not flee the choice, were some god to offer it them, let them stop putting their hand to arguments greater than themselves. And further,

[164078] 175. do they accuse the city or what befell? For if the city, they know nothing, it seems, of the greatest things, but the things by which the city is known have escaped them; and if they blame what befell, then, thinking the things the city chose unlike the others, they so blame her that, out of the very things by which they disparage the matter, they praise the city. For then the wickedness of a city or of a private man is shown, when either the blameworthy things alone belong to one, or when one convicts him of more or greater bad things than fair ones — let it be added. But when, examining through all, one finds one and two, you are, without knowing it, praising by what you let pass — especially if you make the judgment not even of a private man, but of a city, and that the oldest of the Greek cities, and the one to which most of what is fitting has befallen. But if one must answer about these too, I will not say how those who later were able dealt with these very same matters; for I have not set out to grieve any of the Greeks, but the discourse is dedicated to the race of the Greeks as a common ambition; nor, if I show others having done greater and more terrible things, is this a defence on behalf of the city, but rather a confession taking refuge in pardon; I have no need, then, of such a defence. But it seems to me that those who bring forward such arguments have altogether been ignorant of the nature of affairs, and dwell, as it were, outside the inhabited world. For how could one say they reason moderately about realities, or how they ought to discourse about empire, if they have first been ignorant of this — its nature? For all empire, surely, belongs to the stronger and is contrary to the very law of equality; or else, how is it equal, or where is it just, either to levy tribute from another's land, or to lay laws on those who need none, or to judge their affairs, or to command, or to make war, or to acquire what does not belong to one? For in general none of these things

[166099] 176. comes about on terms of equality. So that if anyone is precise about justice and wishes to be a sophist rather than to concede to the nature of things, he might as well strike out simply all rule and power; for all these things are within the law of the stronger. Then, out of wisdom, let him go up as far as the gods, refuting, and saying that not even these deal with men on equal terms, but have chosen to be stronger. But, I think, these are the views of men worthy of a corner and who have not seen the sun, which takes from the other stars the power to shine. And if it is necessary that such things attend all dominion and all abundance, and this is the law of empire — not to be judged on equal terms with the subjects — then let one go off victorious when he has shown that any whatever of the other powers, whether Greek powers or barbarian kingdoms, used a smaller measure of advantage-taking than one can find with the people of the Athenians. For she will appear, in what she deliberated with surpassing nobility, to have used the character of one man, the best; and in what some bring as charges, not to have erred against the common nature of men, but to have followed the necessity of empire — and, by power having become ruler at the first, by humanity, fearing the burden of empire, to have willingly let it go, and well-nigh to have herself become the cause of the charges against her. For having used, toward all, the greatest commonness and moderation, and in a way having made men sharers rather of the constitution than holding them down by the law of dominion, she suffered the same as the kindly among masters; for it was not for her other fairness that she got thanks from some, but if she compelled anything, she conspicuously seemed to use force. And indeed, if she appears to have done these things to men holding the rank of subjects, let us grant it to those who wish to slander; but if to those who had revolted and outraged her beyond their desert, and to those who were openly enemies — which of the two is it worth accusing? I think those who furnished the necessity; since those men too seem to me, as if having this very thing as a pledge,

[168282] 177. to have been exalted, and, trusting most in this, to have erred — not in thinking they would master the city through to the end, but in thinking that, even if taken, they would suffer nothing terrible, since the Athenians are by nature savers. And it is plain: for the things they changed their minds about concerning the Mytilenaeans — what city can conquer with what she resolved at the first? For what those decided on the first day belonged to the judgment, and to the wrongs they had suffered; what they changed their minds about on the next day belonged to the city alone, and the trireme had overtaken the trireme. And I marvel if all men honour the defence of private men made by deed, while the solemn ones do not see by what and how great deeds the city has defended herself concerning these matters. And of sun and moon we do not accuse what harm they do, but admire of what goods they are the causes; yet shall we judge the city by the things in which she offended some, and not by those in which she dealt with all, nor from her whole nature? I think not. As though one should accuse the gods of the thunderbolts and the thunders, and if anything be shaken, neglecting to consider their whole and common benefactions. The city, then, made the Scionaeans homeless, but saved all the Greeks both in common and severally — and that ten thousand times. And I would gladly inquire of those who lightly think fit to accuse themselves of such great matters, whom they say she made homeless such as she prevented the Thebans from being made homeless, or whose walls she razed such as she set up for the Corinthians, or whom she destroyed such as the Lacedaemonians and the cities with them whom she preserved — by many other ancient and noble deeds, and at the last by the cavalry-battle about Mantinea, the best of the Greek ones, and, I think, of those that are remembered.

[170169] But what is, as it were, the chief-point of those times, and what set the seal upon all the city's deeds, both the earlier and those of that time —

[170318] 178. for when Dionysius, the tyrant of Sicily and ruler of many of the cities in Italy too, conceived the design of attacking Greece, weakened by the length of her wars — partly having long courted the barbarians neighbouring the Greeks, partly calling in the king of the Persians, and the matter now coming to a boil — two Athenian generals checked the attempt: the one taking all the ships sailing in from Sicily, men and all; the other defeating the Lacedaemonians at sea off Leucas and making the sea his own. For she alone of cities did not bring in a tyrant, did not admire wealth, did not security, did not exchange pleasures for justice, but, as one made by nature to live for all, so she conducted herself. And accordingly all who desired the rule of the Greeks spent their lives warring against the city. And Philip overlooked the rest of the Greeks, and some he persuaded by hopes and gifts to work with him; but against the city he continued warring from the beginning, as though filling out some necessary boundary. And she, so long as she was able, rescued some, and to others stood in the place of a fatherland, and, like a mother, toiled in advance for all on behalf of her children, and alone preserved the symbol of Greece and overshadowed the misfortunes that then held it; but when matters declined, there was nothing in Philip's way, and it was clearly shown that both the victories of the city are the victories of the Greeks, and the reverses of the city are the reverses of all the Greeks. For they did not give up the leadership to Philip before the city accepted the peace. And though I have much of the later times to tell, and strange battles and wonderful darings and extraordinary endurances, I no longer see the occasion sufficing. So much only I will add to the discourse about these things and have done: four wars, to divide them by kind, the city has made — some her own

[172225] 179. private wars, some on behalf of the common cause of Greece, some on behalf of those who in turn asked her help; and among these very suppliants are some by whom she had been wronged and against whom she had charges from before. I say, then, that this one figure of war by itself convicts all the Greek deeds together of being later. For more are those whom the city, after they had behaved senselessly toward her, saved, than those whom she remembered with resentment though they had rather done her good — I mean the Thebans from the Lacedaemonians, the Corinthians from the Lacedaemonians, the Lacedaemonians from the Thebans, the Euboeans from the Thebans, when she brought forth tokens of a twofold virtue, preserving for some their cities and the land of which she had been deprived by them, and releasing under truce those whom she had conquered; again the Euboeans from Philip, the Byzantines, the Perinthians, the Chersonesites, the Chalcidians on her own part, and ten thousand others. In return for which, if one had to make an image of the city, as of a private man, it would befit the Athenians' alone, and to be honoured like a common statue of Greece. For what the prytaneion is to the city, this the city has become to all the Greeks in common in their needs, ever furnishing themes fairer than the trophies and the inscriptions.

[173576] But what has been done apart from dangers, and yet no less than any shows what the affair of the Athenians ever was, escaped us in the earlier discourse, but now perhaps it is no worse to render. For when a compact had been made by them with the Lacedaemonians — that, if they mastered the barbarians, they should destroy those who had medized — when the dangers had passed, they forgot the enmity. And the Lacedaemonians, set on doing what had been resolved, they prevented, seeing the multitude of the cities by which Greece was going to be made smaller; so that not only to the common race of the Greeks, but even to those who from the beginning had erred both against herself and against the Greeks, the city was ever, at some time, of profit, and whatever she conquered she conquered exactly on behalf of all.

[174392] 180. And about these things enough. But what no one, so far as we know, has until now mentioned in the common praises, this I will not cease until I have said. For, just as it seems to me not lawful, when one adorns deeds with speeches, to pass over the mention of the part that concerns speeches themselves. For alone of all men, as the saying goes, you have set up a bloodless trophy — not over Boeotians, nor over Lacedaemonians, nor Corinthians, but over all your kindred — I mean, not as one would name Greeks set in distinction against barbarians, but over the common race of mankind — and you have won an honoured and great victory for all time, not like the disputed battle at Tanagra, nor, by Zeus, like that at Marathon, which conquered so greatly, but truly the one befitting man, and lasting, and which it is pious to call a child of Zeus. For all the cities and all the races of men have inclined toward you and your way of life and your tongue. And the power of the city is not held together by garrisons stationed about, but because all on purpose have chosen your ways and adopt themselves, so far as possible, into the city, praying that both their children and themselves may have a share of the noble things among you. And neither do the pillars of Heracles hinder, nor are these things bounded by the hills of Libya, nor again by whichever Bosporus you will, nor by the straits of Syria and Cilicia, but over all the earth, by some divine fortune, there comes an emulation of your wisdom and your custom, and all men have held this one tongue to be the common tongue of the race; and through you the whole inhabited world has become of one tongue. And you would see charioteers and herdsmen and those who live by the sea and all the nations, whether by cities or by countries, holding fast to your tongue and trying to lay hold of the soil, like those unable to swim. This testimony I say, men of Lacedaemon

[176321] 181. and all Greeks — and from yourselves and from the foremost among you in particular — is paid to the city still now, every day, of her victory; for they have abandoned their ancestral tongues, and would be ashamed even to converse among themselves in the old speech with witnesses present; but all have come to this one, thinking it a kind of boundary of culture. This I call the great empire of the Athenians — not two hundred triremes, or more, nor Ionia, nor the Hellespont, nor the Thracian coast, which has changed ten thousand rulers. For so great was the difference of these speeches from all others from the beginning, and it was made still more manifest in time, that not only, when the others have well-nigh died out by now, do these so flourish, but one might even say that all the speech of the others — and not only of barbarians, but of the Greeks themselves — resembles the babblings of stammering children, compared with that which comes from you. For up to two or three words one might listen and be pleased, as in a game; but for the rest there is already surfeit, and everything is found wanting; but this alone is proportioned to all festivals, to all assemblies and council-chambers, and besides suffices for all occasions and places and is equally becoming; for it alone, well-nigh, possesses the two first things, I mean solemnity and grace. And indeed, of the contest through all, and the strain and the running and the mastery, who could come near, bringing another tongue, and not depart truly like a child beaten by a man — that I may put it becomingly? For all poetry from you is the best and most perfect, both whatever excels in solemnity and whatever in graces. And if one must mention Homer too, the city shares in this ambition as well, not only through the colony-city, but because his speech too is plainly from here. And all the kinds of prose among you are the best, and those which the men from you composed; and well-nigh all who have conquered through all among the Greeks have conquered

[178354] 182. by the power of the Athenians. And if there is anything in our own case too — this is now, the gods being gracious — this also refers to you, so that one cannot convict the speeches of being foreign; for, as though nature had foreseen from the beginning how far the city would surpass the rest in deeds, she furnished her speeches worthy of it, that she might both be adorned by her own goods and, if she should need any of the others, have this too to give along with the rest. Before, then, you saved those of the Greeks who fled to you; but now you simply uphold all men and all races by the fairest of benefactions, becoming leaders of all culture and all wisdom, and purifying all men everywhere. For in the Eleusinian rite you are called, for those who come, interpreters of the holy things and guides of the mysteries; and through all time you stand, for all men, the interpreters and teachers of the sacred offerings brought into the midst. In return for which you draw all men with fitting incantations — not stirring them with the charm-wheel, but with the fairest of remedies, with speech, which the gods gave to man alone of all creatures as worth all things. So that the other cities, which each men honour, they would, I think, place after their own fatherland; but in the case of the Athenians it is reversed, and all would say they honour not yours after their own, but their own after yours, as this being the one truly their own and prior — and not a single one would feel envy. For just as it is the custom to honour the gods even before parents, as being the common parents and benefactors of all, so it is pious to honour the common fatherland of the race before one's own.

[180055] It is fitting, then, to tell also how great is the reverence that is and has been from all toward this city, and through all times always. For not only when Greece flourished was she thought worthy of the first place, but also in the changes there is none that has come to be equal to her. For Philip, prospering by the battle of Chaeronea, at once seized the city of the Thebans with a garrison, but the city of the

[180473] 183. Athenians he did not even endure to look upon, but stood in his place out of reverence for the stronger. And I am silent about Alexander, how he was ever deferential toward her. And the present empire of land and sea — may it be immortal — does not refuse to adorn Athens in the rank of teachers and nurturers, but so great is the abundance of honours that the city now fares as differently as she does not occupy herself with affairs. And the rest of her happiness is well-nigh like to what it was in those times when she held the rule of Greece — both in revenues and in precedence and in what has been conceded by all. And, most beloved of the gods of all: when the affairs of the Greeks flourished, she continued conquering both Greeks and barbarians; but in those things in which alone she seemed to have the worse in the later times, from these she came off so much more nobly and more fortunately in the end, that the cities of those others have perished, and such as are left are led by the law of empire and are subject as tributaries to tribute and the other necessities; but she was not so much diminished then, nor for so long a time, as, from then and through so long, she has been honoured up to this day, not only before those, but before all the others. And it is plain: for no one would take pride in Pella as his fatherland, nor in Aegae; but there is no Athenian of the Greeks who would not rather have been born a citizen of the existing city. And not only do private men thus prize Athens, but also the cities — those truly founded from here and by you — would more gladly say they are from you than acquire power equal to yours; and others go round in a circle, seeking somehow to trace themselves back to you. And indeed there is memory of five empires — and may there not be more; of these, in that of the Assyrians, the oldest, are the first deeds of the city, and whatever of the divine matters falls within this time; in the second the city was being raised up; the third she conquered through to the end; in the fourth she alone held out, and came off best

[182564] 184. of the others. And in the all-best and greatest, the one now established, she holds the precedence of all the Greek world, and has so fared that one would not easily join in praying that she should have the ancient state in place of the present. And one might know how much the city excels through all the ages, if, taking her possessions — all of them perhaps not possible, or rather plainly impossible, but such as can be — and dividing them, assigning one to this country and city, another to that, one should then make a contest of the discourse, as of poets or choruses; for I do not think one would easily find the winner: as if one should pride herself on having first borne the race of men, another on having first shown the crops, another on having shared with most, another on having revealed laws, another festivals, another on lying among the fairest of land and sea at once, another on glorying in the goods of wisdom, another reckoning up the deeds in wars, another how many of the Greeks she received, another the colonies she sent out, another whatever of the city's possessions one might give her — I say that thus it would most become manifest by how great a superiority the city has surpassed the rest for you. For what suffices Greece when divided, this she alone has all together. And so, as in all things she has so great an abundance, so again in each she glories in many that bear toward the same point.

[183998] For instance, of the divine matters, at once two are first and greatest, the honour from the gods and the zeal toward the gods. And again, of the honour from the gods, should one tell of the visits, by which they honoured the community, or the nurtures, by which they reared those in office like their own children? Or the trials they held? And of the trials again, those they held against one another concerning the city, or those in the city against one another about their

[184475] 185. differences, or those held here mingled, with heroes and gods, with gods as judges? And of the gifts likewise it is not easy to find the greatest. Let city contend with city about these too — the one bringing the crops of Demeter, the other those of Dionysus, and these not only from the vine, but of the other cultivated fruits; let the third tell of the gift of Athena, and that twofold; is it not enough, when the gifts from the gods are divided among many cities, for each to pride herself as having the fairest? Again, the things toward the gods: on the one hand the temples, on the other the yearly sacrifices and processions, of which some came to be first among you, others to a surpassing degree still even now. And the unspoken rites, in which those who share seem to have their affairs better even after the end of life — who would not say it enough to set against all one thing? But indeed, of converse with men, what mode of benefaction has it escaped? First, the sharing of the crops; next, the other sharing of the rites; third, the championship in the wars; fourth, the help ever coming from wisdom to all, both for private houses and for the common affairs of cities. And of wisdom itself, shall we tell of the laws, which most still use, your laws, or of the discourses? And of the discourses, those concerning rhetoric, or the dialectical, or poetry, or the rest of prose — or, if you will, what kind of poetry? For whatever you name first or last belongs to the city as the first.

[185982] Consider, then, the matters of war too: on the one hand the private contests, on the other those on behalf of others; and again the successes at home, and again likewise those abroad, against Greek and barbarian alike; and which will you tell of, the courage or the humanity that is present in the very wars? For as in one spring all that you divide flows together again into one another and mingles — into the benefactions both the wars, by the need of those who asked, and

[186458] 186. the goods from wisdom; and into the wars again both the private and those on behalf of those who asked. Again, then, of the wars, whether on their own behalf or on behalf of others, must one tell the sea-battles, or the land-battles, or the horse-battles, or the wall-battles? For in all these the city is supreme. Or, if you will, which of her deeds at sea is greatest, or which by land? Let three boundaries, then, be set for her, by which, if not herself, yet at least the rest she has indisputably surpassed: of land-battle, that at Marathon; of sea-battle, that at Salamis; of horse-battle — I am at a loss which to judge, but let it be that at Mantinea; of wall-battle no one has ever even disputed. And shall we set it down by the multitude of the trophies, or by the greatness of the deeds? Or how shall we render the worth? So both through all and through each she conquers in many ways. For she has made the most and greatest contests, and on behalf of the fairest things; and the most and fairest trophies are from Athens; and the most and fairest discourses, surpassing through all, are those of this city; and I will add, from here too the wisest and keenest and safest and most just generals, and more than all the Greeks together. And, to say it as a chief-point, by these three things the life of men is fulfilled: by abundance of necessaries, by the noble things of culture, by the equipment for war; for of the two seasons, peace and war, the one is common to both, one is set aside for the season of peace, and one makes men able to defend what they have. Of these, then, let whichever one wishes be greatest; and let it be granted that these belong to three cities, each to each: I say, then, that by whichever of them one judges, the conquering belongs to the city. For she will appear to have shown all and advanced in all things to the utmost; so by all the

[188345] 187. judges she conquers, and over all the countries besides; so that one would not hesitate to say that she must be proclaimed first and second and third among the Greeks, as in the chariot-races — if indeed the chariot too is anciently from Athens, not from Sicily. Well, let these things be as they are.

[188653] But the matters of her greatness and her other equipment — who would not say they are worthy of her whole fortune and of the great name of the Athenians? On the one hand the very circuit of the town, the greatest of the Greek towns and the fairest anywhere. And I am silent about the walls that once came down to the sea, a day's road in their whole length, and other circuits by the sea answering to those about the city. But the demes one may surely behold, some of which are more splendidly furnished than cities elsewhere; and all the ornament, both from nature and from art, rivalling both in the city and in the country. Of the natural things, this air, choice out of much, and so many harbours, each one worth many. And further, the very position of the acropolis, and that which strikes one everywhere as gracious, like a breeze. And what is worthy of note in these very things: for other cities, however they may stand as to climate, are tolerably outdone by their own country; but, though the air of all Attica is thus, the air over the city is the best and purest. And one might know her from afar by the air over her head, as by a kind of radiance.

[189815] And the things from nature are such, with much of what exists left out. But of the things of art, what should one set greatest, or what tell first? For the temples here are the same — the greatest and fairest anywhere — and statues, apart from the heavenly ones, the first of the first art, both old and new; and besides these, treasuries of books such as nowhere else on earth

[190194] 188. plainly, and very much a proper ornament of Athens, and, as befits the present license and manner of living, baths surpassing in solemnity and luxury, and race-courses and gymnasia; so that, if one should take away from the city the Erichthonii, the Cecropes, the things of myth, the things of the crops, the trophies on land and sea, the discourses, the men — all the things through which she has passed her age — and should consider her like the cities that now pride themselves on themselves, she would suffice to conquer by the things that are seen. And indeed some she has had, others she has, and she has neither been robbed of the memory of the things in which she excelled, nor again has she been left behind in her present happiness, if anyone cares to recall these too; but she alone of cities conquers her old things by the old, her new by the new, or, if you will, her old by the new and her new by the old — by her own, I mean, the things of others. And one might see her surpassings from this too: for all who have shared even some small part with the city pride themselves as the best of the rest; but she falls short of no ambition of any whatever, and has no one to share her own through to the end. For instance, the Argives think fit to be the oldest of the Greeks — so too the city of the Athenians; and altogether the old things of the Argives are not like those of the Athenians, nor would a single common judge say so. The Arcadians are autochthonous — after the Athenians, that is; and they are again conquered in the second things, by the discovery and gift of the crops. And it is plain from the Greeks bringing their first-fruits hither, not there. The Lacedaemonians are best in the matters of war — but so too the city of the Athenians; and at any rate the second place is set among them in ambition. The birth of the gods is a grace and honour to Thebes; of these, the one revealed his gift in Attica, and the other the Athenians first of the Greeks led in as a god, apart from the fellowships toward him through Theseus.

[192252] 189. But indeed all remember the last strength of the Thebans — of this the city is the cause, and when she had to do the opposite, she did not fear. One might praise the Corinthians for justice; the city, then, has not only wished what is just, but has continued to arbitrate for the rest. The most renowned of all are the contests throughout Greece; and of these the oldest is that of the Panathenaia, or, if you will, that of the Eleusinia. Then the city's gift sets them all in motion — I mean, surely, the city's gift from Athena. The Samothracians glory in their rites, and these are the most named of all, except the Eleusinian; but Delos too is dedicated to the gods — and it belongs to the city. And the very fact that the road to Delphi is a work of the city, and that the Pythian mission is ancestral to the Athenians alone — what could you say but that all these things belong to the gods, who wish in every way to honour Athens and to lay the city's hand, as it were, on all the fair things? And further, there are some of the cities in Asia that pride themselves on the size of their temples, others on the construction of baths better than the need; and these things belong to the city to excess, as though she had been settled but lately. And the fairest thing: for what the rest are zealous to show in statues, of these you possess the temples and the theatres. Statues are admired, and of these too it prevails that the first is yours in the city — apart from the fact that the rest everywhere too belong, in a way, fittingly to the city. For of all the best things, it seems, she is the fatherland, and the leader of all wisdom and art, so that she surpasses not only in her statues, but in her statue-makers themselves.

[193993] But indeed, of the seven men — that we may not pass this over either — who became renowned for wisdom, one was from the city; and of the two best lawgivers, the one was this very man. And we have received that to two men of old a vote was given from the gods — to Lycurgus the Lacedaemonian and to

[194292] 190. Socrates, who was from you; so that the city shares both in the ambition over common matters and in that over the highest, and there is none of the renowned to whom the name of Athens is not attached. If, then, one should ask which of the law-courts among the Greeks is most honoured and most holy, all would say that on the Areopagus. And what customs did men use most common and most popular? Those of the city of the Athenians, alike for Athenians and for all — one must say, if they are willing to tell the truth. And to demonstrate it through all needs much discourse and time; but you alone of all men held these three customs: to speak each year, at the burials, praises of those who had died on behalf of the city, and to rear their children at public expense until manhood, and then to send them off to their ancestral homes with full panoply; and to rear at public expense the incapable among the citizens. So that, honouring both ability and inability, you showed how each was fitting. And whence are decrees more brilliant or more humane? Of these the ones contained in what has been said I omit, but let one stand for me as a sample, so to speak, for the whole discourse about these things — the decree that prevailed against Arthmius of Zeleia; whom, when, serving the king, he brought gold into the Peloponnese, they voted an enemy of the people of the Athenians, both himself and his line, and dishonoured. And yet the things of all the others together fall short of this one alone. And embassies — most she received, and most she sent out. And whether this is altogether agreed, well; but if not, by the addition it becomes greater, for she sent out most on behalf of those in need. Now all the embassies by which she either persuaded the Greeks in common from time to time not to war with one another, or, sending out, consoled those in need, it is necessary to leave out for their multitude. But here too of two

[196229] 191. I will make mention: for she stopped the Argives from faction among themselves, and reconciled the Cretans warring with one another. And of piety together with gentleness and high spirit, what fairer token could one tell? For when the Corinthians once voted not to receive the sacred mission from here at the festival, and even by an embassy forbade the city to send it, they adorned the envoys and the hoplites together and sent them out; and when they were at Eleusis, the Corinthians came making terms, and they sent the mission and brought the hoplites back. And indeed of the mysteries, some have been honoured as ancient, some as necessary, some as known to most. By all the votes the Eleusinia bear off the prize. And about the rest the discourse is not ours; but you alone of the Greeks hold each year a festival no meaner than any quadrennial one, and you receive at the Eleusinion more than others receive in their whole city; and all ever vie to make the present feast conquer in throng of men. But indeed Heracles and the Dioscuri all surely hold to be gods; and to these, while they consorted with men, the city first of all strangers shows the rites; so that those to whom we now do sacred rites, she is plainly the one who made them objects of worship. And of contests of the first rank this one city still now holds the most of all. And, to put it shortly, all things either are among you alone, or are also from you, and one of three things has come about: for some things began from you, others are fairest among you, others most in number. There are, then, some who, having nothing plain to show or to tell of their own deeds, nor anything on which they might justly pride themselves, take refuge in the Trojan times and dispute over ambition — not even so saying anything common to themselves, but hanging upon the glory of one man — like the Phthiotians and Pylians and Ithacans, like certain land-paupers making themselves out through one of the rich. But the city, besides

[198231] 192. needing no such refuge, is not deprived of this seasoning either. But the common poet of the Greeks, in the catalogue of the ships and cities, says that the Athenian general came to the height in marshalling "horses and shield-bearing men." And, what is worth more and pure of praise: the others whom he praises, he praises according to the condition of the body, or in some other way as best, as it may chance, of the Achaeans, or of the so-and-so; he says at any rate "of themselves and of the horses that followed the Atreidae," and elsewhere he says, speaking of those then before Ilium, that one was best in archery. And Nestor says to certain of the brilliant men of his own day, "for already in time past I have consorted with better men than you" — and next he counts off many, as being again like to one another and none conspicuously surpassing them. But of Menestheus the poet uses no such addition, but, cutting away all these things at one stroke, says, "to him no man yet upon the earth was like." And a little above these things he tells of Erechtheus, how the goddess reared him, but the earth bore him. So perhaps it is not unfitting that the others, whom he defined as best in each kind with an addition — either of times or of races — he proclaims as themselves; but the one whom, of those sprung from the earth itself, he praises as best, this one he praises as best of all who have sprung in the earth. And again, setting down two of the Achaeans best in the matters of war, he means, surely, by the one of them the namesake from Salamis. And this too, surely, is told as a solemn thing concerning the constitution of the Lacedaemonians, that the god arranged their laws at the beginning; but this same god is plainly seen to have divided the tribes for the city and the clans, and to have ordained for each the fitting sacrifices, just as also he defined for them kings and magistrates and well-nigh the whole rest of the constitution. So that the god would be no less the lawgiver of the city than of them.

[200267] 193. And I wish to make mention also of the constitution itself, briefly, so far as I am able; for all praise it, but no one well-nigh has searched out all that is in it. And I call it both simple and not simple. For of the three constitutions — to divide them at the highest — by whichever one would set it down, one sets the city. For at the beginning she will appear to have used kingships, for not a few generations, not only of the Erechtheidae, but of those later who were shown worthy; and democracy, again, both known to a child and the purest and greatest of all, is the one that has come to be among you. And indeed, looking to the council from the Areopagus, I think all would say that one could not take a fairer image of aristocracy, nor one that better preserves the name. So all the patterns of constitutions have started from here; for, as though legislating for men, that each should choose what suits his own ways, so she discovered all and set them forth in common, helping nature everywhere — which we show her to have done with respect to the crops and many other things too. And what is greater still and more perfect: the kings themselves will appear to have loved community beyond the others, and to have set themselves, most of all, on equal terms in their judgments toward the many; and the people, if it found anyone among the many surpassing, willingly set him over itself and used him as a continuing ruler, and kept this same custom toward the few too, if it perceived them better than the rest, but rivals among themselves; and likewise the council, ever looking to how it might make the people greater, and never reckoning its own advantage privately, but judging this both a fair and a real advantage for itself — to stand, with good repute, for the safety of the many. So that reasonably the city is of good repute beyond all the others not only in each constitution, but also in the blending of constitutions, in the

[202220] 194. city's case. For just as this whole universe, I think, was composed of four elements, as the old saying goes, and each of these itself again shares by nature in the rest, but by its excess each kind has taken its name apart, so too the constitutions, even if they happen to be most of all distinct, naturally share somehow in one another, if indeed we are to see a kingship upright and just, or likewise a rule of the few or of the many. And one might know it, if one looked at the kingships in the city against the kingships somewhere else of the same times, whether of Greece or of the barbarians; and again the democracy at Athens against the democracies of others; and indeed the council's body against those that are sovereign and ruling somewhere else. For if one must, leaving the rest, speak about the democracy alone, all who have shared in this form will appear, in their wishes and desires, far more headlong and insolent, but in dignity and brilliance not even near to those born of the city. And indeed this the city first showed — not to set store by wealth nor to admire it. For she never exalted those who excelled in property, but thought she owed them only so much from herself as not to be wronged on this account; nor to those surpassing in virtue but inferior in money did she ever anywhere assign less — thinking it shameful, I suppose, that, while of household slaves men reckon best not the wealthiest but the most faithful, of free men, who claim that their worth is defined by money, it should be money and not what each man himself is, that he should be reckoned. And accordingly she alone of cities did not alter the ordinance, nor make what is by nature third first by law; nor, as one may see some of those who profess to philosophize speaking so about these things but in deed falling under and ever conceding to those whom they perceive more powerful — but she, both leading into office and

[204149] 195. trusting and judging worthy of all honours, was seen to honour not those of the greatest assessments, but the most decent in their natures; holding that whoever conquers in the account of virtue conquers in all things. And she showed it not least when she was strongest. For when there were at the same times conspicuous men among her — some of them wealthy beyond the first of the Greek houses, others as poor as could be — for the championship of the Greeks she chose one of these latter; and accordingly he won repute by what he was set over, and the city by what it judged. And though there are many things one might say about the constitution, the most are both already taken up beforehand, and the occasion takes them away, and there is no necessity to say all; but adding one thing I will end the discourse about this too. For the fact that the best and that which falls according to license have here coincided, and that the manner of living is most common to all, while the honours are reserved for the most decent — how is this not the mark of a truly free city and constitution, in which it is possible to live as one wishes, but to be honoured and to have power belongs not to those who wish, but to those who have been tested? And accordingly, both in the contests of wars and in their needs, they preserved the fitting thing: they were not zealous about affairs from a half or even a smaller share, but all alike, with their eagerness, vied according to their power, as men contending for a common fatherland and common prizes, and not with risk set before some and lordship, if they prevailed, before others. From which concord and trust of one another flourished throughout the city; and if anywhere they fell into difference, they recognized one another without trouble; but if courage were needed anywhere, all else was folly compared with them — not even all-round athletes who conquer in everything seem to me to prevail so completely in all things. And in what occasions would one not be the better for remembering the city? In campaigns? And whence would one take fairer

[206248] 196. examples? Or by what speeches, used, would one better exhort? But in the festivals? But she herself is the leader of these. But in the assemblies and the management of affairs in the city? And what people is itself keener and gentler, or what popular leaders more worthy to admire? But in the practice of speeches and of the rest of wisdom? But even now still all come together here; and the families of the philosophers have not died out, by the good fortune of the city — apart from the fact that those anywhere on earth must of necessity remember at once both speeches and the Athenians, and could never cast from their soul her image, looking into the speeches as into a mirror. And accordingly to all men the name and the soil of the city are so reverend as nothing else, one and the same; and neither private men nor kings honoured her by small things, but so that they themselves gloried in the excesses of the honours they displayed. And plain too is the goodwill and the vote from the very gods, both through the common seer and ancestral interpreter of the city — bidding men to sacrifice the pre-ploughing rite on behalf of the Greeks, and naming her the mother-city of the crops, and further thinking fit that she should wear the crown, as conquering through life. And an eagle in the clouds the god calls her, in comparison with the other townships. To her alone, it seems, of cities the two opposite things have befallen: for both most and fairest things have been said by men about her, and there is none who has obtained fewer. For before all others she has been admired, yet has heard nothing worthy of herself. Before, then, I admired, hearing, the prytaneion of wisdom and the hearth of Greece and the bulwark and all such things that were sung to the city; but now all these seem to me to fall short. But if one must call any city a viceroy of the gods, or kindred to them, or an image and boundary of human nature, this one, I think, would justly be so called.

[208236] 197. In return for which, men of Greece, it is fitting neither to feel envy toward the city nor, giving way, to be ashamed, but to increase her from what we have and to share her ambition. For when the Athenians conquer, the conquering is with you. For that all should be best of all is impossible. But as, when a general excels, the city shares in the glory, so, when the leading city is honoured as is fitting, all have a part in the ambition. And I think it brings no shame even to the Athenians themselves, if one offers them their acropolis as ambassador. You too, then, ought, accounting the city as a kind of acropolis or summit of Greece and of your kindred, to adorn her both in deed and in word, and to think that you share in the glory, not that you are robbed of it. The discourse too has been wrought by us as an ornament for the spectacle of the Panathenaia in place of the peplos; and may it be given as a grace of the same goddess to whom both the discourse and the city belong.