WORK: Orationes 45  (slug: aelius-aristides-orationes-45-9670fd)

CHAPTER: 01-orationes-45



[218542] If, then, the man who is going to be rhetorical must acquire nature and art and practice together, it is plain that the man who has fallen short of the art and of the best nature is imperfect in that respect. How, then, must one set this against rhetoric? If indeed the man who has not furnished all things is imperfect by reason of the deficiency, and the pursuits are judged from those who succeed, not from those who fail. But that which needs not only art, but also nature and practice — how is it possible to say of this that it is no art, or how is it just to call the man who falls short of any part whatever imperfect in that respect, but to say that the man who attains this through all things is practising flattery? On every side and through all things our votes fall out. And first Plato himself votes, and in the middle, they say, and last; and I run the risk of seeming to contradict Plato, while above all pleading along with him. And if one must play a little too, I seem to myself, after the manner of the comic poets, to be dragging him in, as one running away, to the orators, finding fault with him for preening himself. And if certain others too, shouting against rhetoric, censure her — or rather muttering, "shooting from the noise," according to Alcaeus, of whom it is not easy to bring even the names into the argument —

[219889] 115. I mean not the names by which they are called, unless someone adds this too, but those by which, using them, they do these sophistries — let this much be my answer to them: that they straightway pay the penalty to rhetoric. But toward Plato, the father and teacher of the orators, it was necessary, as it were, having first received a pledge of love, to fill the cup in return. And let him receive it nobly, because he too drank first; since one ought not even to flee the man who has thrown the first blow. And from the rest there would justly be pardon for us, if we count the gods of speech of more worth than the fair Plato. And Asclepius too, the best in all things, frees us from blame, himself also giving a vote not without honour — some things in verse, some thus in prose.