WORK: Orationes 46  (slug: aelius-aristides-orationes-46-01d156)

CHAPTER: 01-orationes-46



[109049] 174. at all. And for this very reason he alone of them all, as they say, was chosen to be painted with his hand stretched out, as he happened then to be exhorting the soldiers. So that man was a good orator not only on the Pnyx, in the assembly, but also at Marathon, and everywhere displayed the excellence of speech intact. And then, the Athenians buried those of their own who fell that day in that very place, and did not mingle them with the others who lie in the public tombs, but, deeming them to be greater in virtue than the rest, judged them worthy of a private honor as well; yet you did not blush to set the leader of these men—the man who began for all the Greeks the most necessary and at the same time the noblest things: safety, freedom, glory—among the cooks, and you think it not enough unless you also cast about him the utmost reproaches of slavery. What are you saying? Miltiades a slave—through whom Greece was not enslaved? And did he pass his life serving the Athenians—he through whom the Athenians did not serve the Persians in the most shameful tasks, and through whom Datis was unable to render to the king the service that had been laid upon him? And shall we enroll in the guild of the cosmeticians a man so grimy and dust-covered, more fittingly than any one of the wrestlers and the men of the gymnasium? We should indeed incur great absurdity. Consider this too—how great a proof it is of his temperance, and that, had he chanced to have a golden soul, he could not have applied to it a finer test. For that man, having accomplished so great a work and become for the Greeks the chief author of their freedom, and being reckoned all but greater than human, did not suffer the same thing as Pausanias, who set right the battle at Plataea; he was not lifted up by his deeds, nor grew insolent, nor thought any greater thoughts than before the battle. So orderly and decorous was he to the end. And yet Pausanias had not, surely, been the first to conquer the barbarians, but, looking to a pattern,

[111079] 175. fought the battle at Marathon as his model; nor did he have the Lacedaemonians alone, as Miltiades had the Athenians, but with the Athenians themselves present and the rest of the Greeks, to whom this was agreeable; and indeed, since the Athenians there too accomplished most of the work along with the rest, they are said both to have destroyed the cavalry of the barbarians and to have prevailed over the Greeks ranged against them, and the assault on the wall fell wholly to them. But Miltiades did not then wait for the Lacedaemonians nor for any other men, nor did he share the work, but, having those from the city—save that some of the Plataeans, they say, came running to join—he made the danger his own, but the benefit common to all, being the first and only of the Greeks to conquer six-and-forty nations all together. So that it belonged to him to inscribe that he "destroyed the host of the Medes." For the work was, so to speak, his own. And what was earlier than this, the title "leader of the Greeks," fitted him exactly; for he began the freedom for all. Yet, even having done these things, he knew how to be temperate, and no one accused him of any such thing as Pausanias was much accused of. But we might find him given to factions and tumults, like Lysander, who did those wonderful deeds at Aegospotami and was thought to have brought down the war against the Athenians, but in truth began many great evils for the Greeks. But Miltiades neither did nor planned any such thing; he was, in a way, overcome by ambition, and at times overlooked the common advantage in seeking to advance his own friends—like

[112712] 176. Agesilaus, who, being ambitious and devoted to his comrades beyond measure, took over the city of the Lacedaemonians when it ruled land and sea, and did not preserve it in that condition. And consider against whom I am measuring him: Lycurgus, Pausanias, Lysander, Agesilaus. But for these things no one could blame him; nor was he mastered by the pleasures of the body, as some have already accused Thibron the Spartan, and one might name countless others, both Greeks and barbarians. But—such are the native customs of democracy—to inform, to denounce, to confiscate, as in the case of Cleon and Cleophon and Hyperbolus and other men who were in no way orators (not, at least, if they were such men as that), but had received some phantom of rhetoric—if indeed one must call a phantom that which is in no way like the original, but in every way weaker. But he was clean of all these. How, then, was he not of advantage to the Greeks, being such a man? Or how did he not make men better, if anyone gave heed to him? These things follow of strong necessity. And if he was not learned in the heavenly bodies, like Anaxagoras—neither was Socrates wise in those matters, and that too though he had consorted with him, as they say. But Socrates was no worse than Anaxagoras—certainly not, as you yourselves would say—and so neither, perhaps, was Miltiades any worse than the sophists. And I think that even in a court of the gods Miltiades, were he tried, would be acquitted by every vote, not, as they say of Orestes, getting only half. And reasonably so; for the one slew his mother justly, but the other saved Greece justly, and paid the price of his rearing most nobly of all men, not only to his fatherland but also to the common nature of the Greek race. And indeed, city by city,

[114501] 177. different men account different founders theirs, but one might justly hold that man to be the common founder of Greece. And for my part I think that even the charge he later incurred—if I must now say something about this too—is the greatest token that he far surpassed the rest. For all men thought it right to be overcome by his virtue, and that nothing was unconquered or untaken wherever Miltiades was present. Then am I to suppose that the man so brave and prudent and temperate, who through his whole life practiced virtue—that he gave himself over to some portion of flattery? The man who, even when he was on trial, showed the jurors nothing more than his wound, who did not weep, who did not lead his children up to the stand, though he had Cimon—am I to address this man so grandly as a flatterer? And was this the chief of all his policies and of his life: flattery? And how would one not justly accuse us ourselves of flattering and of doing the work of servants, not of free men, if, pursuing the favor of another, we willingly corrupt the truth? Indeed, to Plato we might grant many other things; but if we condemn him on these charges, I for one do not see what other honor we could render him. There remains, then, Themistocles—of all men the least deserving to hold the first place by descent from the second, even if it most clearly appears that this very thing belonged to him alone of all men. But rather it is perhaps a hard task to find who is second to him. For by so much did he surpass for us the man of Marathon, the famous one, the man—say it as

[116080] 178. you like—by so much, then, did Themistocles surpass that man, beyond all who have come to my mind, by how much shall I say it admittedly?—by as much as Xerxes plainly surpassed Darius in all his preparations. And indeed the one conquered the king's satraps, the other the king himself; and after the battle of Marathon the king marched again, but after the sea-battle at Salamis he went off in flight. For by that defeat he was provoked, but by this one he gave up, so that he counted it sufficient gain if he should be saved. For he knew that the first time only a small part of his whole force had come, but now he was being defeated with almost all mankind. So neither did he himself have the heart to remain, nor did he send another thenceforth; for there was nothing he could hope for. Nay, even Mardonius, whom he left behind, he left as a man condemned to death, so to speak, and at the same time, as it seems to me, so that the Greeks might have someone to keep them occupied. For Miltiades, then, the demonstration of his courage came down to a single chief crisis, even though he employed it throughout his whole public life; but Themistocles was met by second tasks ever greater than the first, and the proverb came round upon him—for one wave left him only as another caught him up, until he came through the triple surges, conquering. And for Miltiades there was need of courage rather than wisdom for what was before him; but for Themistocles there was need of courage no less, if not even more, inasmuch as the fears too were greater; and besides this, he was answerable for many other qualities no less honorable that arose from the circumstances—understanding, indeed I might say a kind of divination, magnanimity, cleverness, mildness, endurance, adaptability to the occasions, to the affairs, to the men of the city, of Greece, and to the enemy. And it seems to me that what befell

[117987] 179. Miltiades against the barbarians resembled rather a generalship, but that the work of Themistocles, when examined among all the Greeks, was precisely a statesmanship. So great were the things done and accomplished, some on land, some on sea; concerning which it seems to me that Homer too, had he survived and wished to speak of them, would have called upon the Muses no less than over how a single Thessalian ship was set on fire; or, if you like, over who was the first of the allies or of the Trojans themselves to stand against Agamemnon. Or rather, in that case he could not, I think, have learned who was the first to stand against the king of Asia and almost of Europe as well; but from what deeds and words he was able to accomplish these things, and against how many enemy ships and against what total armament and onset of the barbarian he drew up his line, and how human affairs then stood—this, it seems to me, he would ask and beg to be told, if even in small measure he were to lay hold of its worth. What, then, prevents us too now—and let our beginning be from the gods—from examining again how the state of the crisis stood, in the same way as we examined it just now, and showing in brief in what kind of circumstances Themistocles showed himself to be what kind of man? And yet this perhaps avails nothing. For things that cannot be set forth in speech—how could one behold that man from them? Unless one reflect on this very point: that matters concerning which it is not possible even to speak as one wishes, these that man handled as he wished. For ten years in succession the whole continent was in labor, all men contending to take vengeance for the battle of Marathon, and everything was being made ready out of every land and sea. And when Egypt revolted in the interval, the king, with no great effort, was again where he had been—so easily did he reduce it. But in the tenth year all the farthest peoples came together, and nations

[119953] 180. all came, as if the inhabited world were migrating to another place; and the king set out, fearing that Greece might not contain the multitude—Greece, as it were a beginning of the whole earth—since his camp came to be wherever he wished, always. Gold and silver and bronze and iron, all were brought of equal worth, alike for land conveyances and for sea. And when the forces met at one point, the foot soldiers hid the coastline, and the ships hid the sea; and to the Greeks were reported—nothing worthy, indeed, of the evils that were coming, yet many things and of all kinds, such as had never been before. And the eclipse of the sun that occurred would not have so astounded them as the eclipse of land and sea that was taking place—owing, as it seems to me, rather to the king's desire than to his need. For he seemed truly to be sole master of land and sea, and to make and to destroy; for him Athos received the ships, and the Hellespont the foot soldiers. And besides this, walls were being built so that he might count his men by ten-thousands. And the sun was hidden by the arrows; the sea was full of ships, the land of foot soldiers, the air of missiles. To be present and to be at hand were one and the same, so that all were caught; everything shook as if Poseidon were coming down. Many of the nations were consumed for a single meal of the king. The threats of heralds did not cease as they went everywhere, demanding earth and water of whoever wished to be safe. And the oracle sent forth voices terrible and harsh to all the Greeks. They seemed likely to endure neither the rowing of the ships nor the noise of the horses. They could take courage neither in their sacrifices nor in their allies, nor even

[121683] 181. find who among men might prove allies. And besides this, the one called Gelon would not give heed, the Argives held aloof, the Corcyraeans took counsel more cleverly than justly, the Thessalians, under compulsion indeed, yet were going over to the Mede; the Boeotians had fared no better than the Thessalians; the Delphians did not know what to do; and small was the sound part of Greece, and this hung upon two cities—or rather upon a single man, on whatever Themistocles should resolve or advise. In such crises, then, and in such an untimely confusion of all affairs, that man stood firm and was at no loss, nor was he dismayed, nor did he pray that the earth might swallow him, nor count blessed those long since dead, nor suffer the same thing as the many; rather he became for the Greeks like a good guardian spirit. For, taking everything upon himself and setting his own judgment in place of any other safeguard, and alone holding out with steady eyes against all things, both present and oncoming, and not turning away like those who look at the sun—which befell almost all men of that time—I would not say that he did not disappoint the hope of the Greeks, but rather that he far surpassed their expectation. For when the many thought they would suffer every extremity, and were looking to shameful contrivances and helpless refuges, he so changed the state of affairs that, if afterward, when the barbarians had departed, anyone had asked them whether they would have wished that those men had not marched against them, and that these things had not been done by them, and that the dangers had not befallen them nor the deeds been done, they would all

[123352] 182. say they would rather die than have these things left undone by them. So far did he surpass not only the hopes of all who hoped the most among them, but even the prayers of the most part. And for my part I would gladly, if it were anyhow possible, ask Plato, by the gods of the Greeks: what ought Themistocles to have done in those times, or what to have said nobler than he said? Or what to have written better than he wrote? Or by what path of action to have proceeded? Or how to have led the Athenians? Or what better reckonings to have used? For tell me, by the gods—or, if not, let some other inherit the argument, let him speak, let him show—what Themistocles ought then to have done and how to have dealt with the circumstances. Should he have gathered the Athenians on the Pnyx and discoursed to them about the Forms, and taught them what justice-itself is, and what beauty-itself, and what that is which always is but has no becoming? Quickly, indeed, would becoming and being and everything else have failed them. Or should he have sought whence courage was first so named, and whence cowardice, and whether all things flow or not? They would have learned, indeed, that all things were flowing badly for them. But what, then, did he have to say or do at all? For this is the third question that has come round, like a watchword. From what shall we determine whether Themistocles was truly a counselor and leader and guide, or whether something else is the fitting name to hear? And indeed one of two things must be: either to be able to find fault with what was done by him, or to show what needful thing he left undone, having chosen the easier and pleasanter in place of the noble. And yet they say that the wisdom that comes after the event, and the reproaches made in safety, have nothing brilliant

[125171] 183. nor lofty about them. I for one grant even this; and if anyone show a better action, or better words, or a juster choice, or one better for all than that which he established, as having then been possible, I am ready myself to inherit the blame. But if it is possible neither to find fault with any of his policies, nor to say of anything one might claim he ought to have done, that he did not do it, let us rather rejoice with ourselves in praising him than seek how to speak ill. Let us consider the matter in this way, bringing ourselves back to the facts themselves. There were three divisions of the Greeks: one outside the affairs—like the Argives and the Corcyraeans and the Sicilians and almost all the Italians, and the Cretans, indeed, and others, so they say; others actually joined in the march with the barbarians against Greece, like the Thessalians and all those up to Attica, save the Thespians and Plataeans, however many they were; and there remained a third, the Athenians and Lacedaemonians and as many as took refuge with them. But let it not yet be said that these were Athenians, nor that these prepared the rest. Rather, the whole Greek world was divided into so many parts, and the choice of these three lay in the midst before all, and both city and private man had to deliberate with regard to this; and the difference was not small—either, attaching themselves to the barbarian, to follow him against those who resisted; or to be allowed to keep quiet for themselves, having begged it, not to seek what would befall the others, but to count it gain if they themselves should suffer nothing; or, third, there was left to those who professed to care for the noble and the just, to contend against fire and sword and all things, and neither, though hearing, to hear the terrors, nor, though seeing, to see them, but, condemning all things as so much idle babble, to encamp beside death itself, judging this the extremity of life preferable for themselves rather than to concede anything unworthily. So be it. What, then, was it fitting the Athenians should choose then, or what should the counselor advise them? Here consider for me the resolutions of Themistocles.

[127368] 184. "There the coward man and the valiant were made manifest"—not when we sit together in ambush, but when Greece stood upon the very razor's edge, whether to be or not to be. This is the first examination and trial of Themistocles. From here behold the man, beginning from the line; and bring me not gold in words, but apply the touchstone and consider. For remember your own image. The Athenians had to be among those contending for the common freedom, or to do one of the two remaining things. They had to be among the contenders. What then? Did Themistocles advise this, or hinder it? No—he was the very man who advised it. Was it not, then, this that they had to do, and this to advise? This the Athenians did, and Themistocles advised it. Up to this point, then, he advised the greatest things, and Plato has nothing to charge him with; nay, unless he praise him brilliantly, I do not think he could fail to be ashamed. For not only does he plainly bring the Athenians to these things and station them in this resolve, but the other Greeks too, so far as they shared in the affairs, this one man above all strengthened and spurred on, and persuaded them—some willing, some unwilling—to become good and profitable to themselves; he who even gave such answers to the heralds who came from the king concerning earth and water that it was possible for all the Greeks to learn what kind of answers one must give to the barbarians who come for such purposes. And he did not stop his freedom there, but killed even the interpreter, accusing him of having lent his voice, like any other instrument, to the Persian against the Greeks. And yet what terrible thing was it for the Athenians to learn what was being said, and, having learned, to deliberate? For he did not himself

[129144] 185. propose it, nor compel them. But still he did not think fit to serve even so far, since it was not even proper to hear such things. Quickly indeed would he himself have served, who treated his servants thus—or have spoken before the people against what he thought best, who would not even allow the interpretation of matters about which it was not better to speak. Such, then, were the preludes of the public life of Themistocles and of the contest for freedom—nothing like those of Meles the citharode, nor like the songs Plato says that man sang, but rather the opposite. For both what is best is in them, and what is sweetest is added for every noble and free man to hear. So that to me it seems liker to the music of Terpander, except that it even surpassed it. For he brought one city, that of the Lacedaemonians, into harmony, but this man tuned and held together all Greece—for I call Greece those who were able to come to the aid of all Greece—and he became the leader of so much greater and more common a concord, one that extended further. First, then, he put an end to the wars that were then standing in Greece and to the differences and factions of all toward one another, and persuaded them to count one war alone, that against the barbarians, but themselves friends and kinsmen. Then, those of the citizens who had been exiled he advised the Athenians to bring back—among whom were some at variance with him—preserving the same judgment in matters both Greek and within the city; and this judgment was to look to the common good, putting away all pettiness of soul. Having taken over affairs, then, and become the leader of the whole danger, what kind of man did he show himself, both in understanding what was needful and in carrying it through to the end? Such that, if anyone were asked whatever the question, what it was that saved the affairs of the Greeks, he would not be left to inquire, but it would be possible for all at once to say

[131109] 186. that first the gods, and then, so far as it came to men, one city, that of the Athenians, and the judgment of one man, that of Themistocles. For seeing that, unless someone should conquer the barbarians with the fleet, Greece would be undone city by city, as they attacked all in turn and ravaged them, and besides this knowing too that affairs on land had far more and more terrible difficulties, and that they would fight against far more and harder enemies than by sea, he chose first the lesser extremity in place of the greater; and then, where he should use daring at the right moment. And these things the god at Delphi confirmed by vote. Yet even when the oracle came, there was perplexity for the many as to what this "wooden wall" could be. So the old men advised holding to the acropolis—so far did they rave, for it had of old been fenced with a thorn-hedge, and they took the oracle to refer to this. And the oracle-mongers chanted everything, except that one thing of all they did not chant, namely that they must fight at sea. Nay, they advised guarding against Salamis above all—the very same men who once urged on the expedition to Sicily; for I call the same kind one and the same breed, except, of course, that the ones speaking for Alcibiades came later, while these spoke against Themistocles then—and on the whole they thought it best to seek something else, and, fleeing outside Greece, to settle another land. But in the end it was resolved by the Athenians to let the oracle-chanters be, and rather to trust Themistocles, who interpreted the wooden wall to be the triremes, and that something good lay stored up in Salamis,

[132764] 187. wherefore the god had addressed it as divine; since, if some evil were going to seize the Greeks in it, the address of it would be "wretched," not "divine." But in fact it referred to the barbarians, that many of them would perish. They must therefore fight at sea. And these things, reasonably, the others found hard to put together, but Themistocles found easy to discover. For it was not when the oracles came that he first held this opinion, nor was he improvising, nor had he become wise in this wisdom on the occasion, like the prophets of god; rather, even before the Athenians sent to Delphi and before the barbarian stirred, that man long since and from afar had considered and seen these things, and had taken forethought that, on the occasion and at the time of need, he should not be at a loss. For when much money had accrued to the city from the works of the silver mines, and this was about to be distributed at random, he alone of all dared to oppose it, doing the work not of a servant, nor of one ministering to desires, nor of one filling up pleasures, but rather, as it seems to me, of a counselor and teacher—willingly passing over the pleasantest, but foreseeing and doing the best, even if it must cause pain; imitating the physician, not the cook—or rather the trainer too, as you would say—since before the danger and the hardships he did what was advantageous, and so that affairs should not give way under the Greeks. He bade the Athenians, then, to disregard the distribution, and to build ships out of the money, on the pretext of the war against the Aeginetans (for this was then at hand), but in truth foreseeing what was to come and thinking that the battle of Marathon had been, as it were, a prelude for the Athenians, and was not the end of the whole war nor its conclusion, but rather a beginning and a preparation for other greater contests. And saying these things at the outset he persuaded them, and the triremes were built; and then he persuaded them that they must use the triremes and attend to the sea, since they had no better base of operations for the war against the barbarians. And first, sailing to

[134919] 188. Artemisium, he set up two trophies for two sea-battles, neither, I think, having spoken unseemly words to the Athenians or Greeks who sailed with him, nor having displayed mean deeds, but, as Pindar says, having laid for the Greeks the foundation of freedom. Then he wrote that decree, than which none more wonderful or more freedom-loving is recorded as ever having been written. But I seem to be passing over many things between; better, perhaps, to go back. For so truly was that man born, by some divine portion, on behalf of all Greece, and saw nothing better than the common advantage, that when the Greeks had gathered to one place, the Athenians surpassed almost all in the number of their ships, yet, since the Greeks were more inclined toward the Lacedaemonians and willing that they should lead, that man, best in all things, perceiving that, if he should examine the just claim precisely and a faction should arise over the leadership, all would perish miserably and they would have no resource, persuaded the Athenians to yield and concede the leadership for the time to the Lacedaemonians, promising that he would recover it for them from the willing Greeks. And he did not deceive them; he persuaded them to give up almost the name of the leadership, but not the leadership itself, since, if the truth be told, they assigned to themselves the leadership but to those others the title, and there resulted for them, besides the common safety, the prevailing over the enemy by courage and over the allies by mildness, and a bearing in every way nobler and more august; for they became leaders of leaders. And if you say, Plato, that cities have no need of triremes or dockyards, but of good counsel and

[136640] 189. temperance, Themistocles not only found the triremes for the Athenians—nor, what is greater than this, used them on behalf of the common rights and for the need of all the Greeks—but he himself also brought to the cities and accomplished that good concord, which saved Greece no less than the ships themselves; or rather, he made it possible to use the ships themselves. And what I said a little before is here finely shown: by how much the man was greater than Terpander in music. For the one made the Lacedaemonians of one mind among themselves, but the other then persuaded both Athenians and Lacedaemonians to be of one mind—or rather, persuaded all the Greeks to become of a single judgment; so well and nobly did he attune Greece, and himself withdrew from the command of the fleet and persuaded the others to the leadership, though they so far surpassed and were alone a hope for affairs. And yet what greater proof of temperance and endurance did any of those who have rotted away in their threadbare cloaks ever produce? Yet, as he gave up the bearing, so he did not give up the forethought concerning affairs, as I said, nor did he yield to any city or any man, but he himself advised all things, as if he were sole leader of all, and went on adorning and shielding and instructing beforehand Eurybiades, the admiral of the Lacedaemonians, like a child—as those who hold up by their own hands men unable to swim—not exposing him, but, as it were, coaxing him with the title of the command, since that he himself was admiral and master of all, and that it was for him, the very admiral, to turn things wherever he wished, he showed throughout the whole command, and indeed then at once. For when Eurybiades was struck with consternation at the multitude of the barbarian triremes—some of which he saw bearing straight against him, and others he heard were sailing around—and was minded to abandon the contest, not on any better hope, but, as happens in such cases, counting it gain to ward off the present danger, suffering such a

[138686] 190. passion and looking toward the Peloponnese, that man himself, like some god from the machine, stretched out his hand and prevented affairs from being ruined when they had begun from so shameful a beginning; and Eurybiades, when he could not persuade him by speaking, he bought—not as though deeming himself worthy to be anyone's servant, but rather using that man as a servant; and he both saved Euboea and set the affairs of the Greeks so that they were not utterly without resource, having afforded them, once they made trial, ground to trust. And when the disaster at Thermopylae was announced, and when the common prophecy—if it is right to say so—both of Pythian Apollo and of Themistocles had now for the second time become manifest, that everything lay in the ships—for both those who entered Thessaly to guard Tempe, betrayed by whomsoever it was, withdrew, and those who went to meet the enemy at Thermopylae were overwhelmed by the barbarians; and one can say not only so much about them, but that the Lacedaemonians too seem to me, having known this from the beginning, as if making expiation toward the Greeks, to have sent off only as many as they could bear to be deprived of, since failure was to be expected—when, then, things had gone thus, and those in the ships were now fleeing with all their might to within Greece, and were almost making the Peloponnese into Greece,

[140081] 191. while abandoning the rest, he withdrew last with the last of the Athenians, not keeping the same rank as when it was time to sail out; for then he was first among the first. And if again you wish here too the by-work of the road—what policy he pursued toward the Ionians, not from the platform, nor seen by them, but from the rocks and the anchorages where he hoped to encounter them—what Homeric Minos could find fault with this, or what Aeacus lifting his hands on behalf of the Greeks to Zeus? Here, then, the third trial, much greater and nobler, came upon him, since the triremes carried everything, and to expect anything else was vain. For when the Greeks had withdrawn from Artemisium, the Athenians even so both made their own preparations and bade the others come to meet them in Boeotia and to take the first risk on behalf of the rest of Greece; but the others came to such a pitch of helplessness—for it is not right to call it treachery—that they did not have the heart to go out, but, fortifying across the Isthmus from sea to sea, they did much as if, wrapping themselves up, they were handing themselves over. For where it was possible for the barbarians, sailing around, to take them city by city, what good was the wall, even if it had been raised more august than that of the Babylonians and stronger than every contrivance? Therefore, with the Athenians left alone and the rest of the Greeks toiling to no profit, it remained for everything to be seized in silence, both by land and by sea. These things Themistocles, foreseeing from afar, was not dismayed at then; but when the barbarians were now pouring in from both sides, both the ships approaching in a common

[141774] 192. armada and the foot soldiers bursting into Boeotia, and the fire burning everything and signaling, in place of beacon-fires, that the king was advancing, he wrote that decree: to entrust the city to Athena, guardian of Athens; to convey the children and women to Troezen, and the old men to Salamis, and that the rest, embarking on the triremes, should contend for freedom. O the great and prodigious conception, and the wonderful strength of him who first hoped to persuade these things and did not despair of so great a matter! And wonderful too was the virtue and discipline of those who were persuaded—the discipline in which they had been trained under him, to endure and bear up under everything that the divine power should grant and Themistocles advise. This decree is the noblest and most brilliant and most perfect witness under the sun in the reckoning of virtue, holding in succession a demonstration of all the best things: of taking courage in the gods, of having confidence in themselves, of being willing to suffer anything before making trial of anything shameful, and, besides these, of guarding the resolutions made from the beginning, of bearing no grudge against their like, even if they seem to have chosen the deeds of unlike men. This decree, it seems to me, no flatterer composed, nor a man with downcast eyes, nor one fawning on his hearers, but some one of the gods uttered through the tongue of Themistocles. Surely Mithaecus, who wrote the treatise on Sicilian cookery, or Sarambus the tavern-keeper—for now I have recalled the name—

[143343] 193. do you think composed these things? Come, then, set beside this decree the writings of the sophists, if you like, and the laws—for I have no need to name them. And I think it would appear of less worth than not many of them. And yet it was the part of a servant, and of one pursuing the favor of the moment, above all to render service in what the many commanded; or, failing that, guessing at their mind, to say and do what he supposes will be to their pleasure, or at least to deviate a little from their desire. But Themistocles was so far from doing these things and conducting his policy with a view to the desire and pleasure of the many that, though he saw them weeping, and heard children and women lamenting, and besides some being left behind of necessity, and the whole thing being most like as if the city had been taken by storm—and reasonably so; for the future was for all in obscurity, holding a thin and untrustworthy hope, but the present was the loss of city and possessions and the whole former way of life, and not even to travel the same road, nor to settle in the same place, but to be torn apart, parents and children and wives and husbands, and everything was most dreadful to hear, let alone to endure; so that even the tame dogs, they say, howled at the abandonment, and the other beasts followed down to the sea, and there was great confusion—seeing and hearing all this, the most enduring of all men held firm—things which what kind of Odysseus, seeing his wife, could easily have borne without tears?—and taking them like children he led them out with an untroubled soul and reckonings that stood firm, not only in his eyes, as though leading them out to some procession, or as colonists, and not leading them to Salamis. And they

[145110] 194. were persuaded, and, leaving behind temples and tombs and land, looked to Themistocles alone, preferring him to children and parents and the necessities of nature, and clinging to his voice as to a sacred anchor. Not even Orpheus could then have drawn them over to himself. And indeed all that he continued to say and do in Salamis, now conducting his policy among all the Greeks, and how many and what kind of utterances he sent forth on behalf of the noble and the just, and how many contests he carried through and with what affairs he was beset, whenever he had to persuade men, contending again from the beginning over the same matters; and the company he kept with Aristides, the man surnamed best of the Greeks and most just, and how they vied with one another in their dealings, and how he was not far behind in the exchanges; and the "Strike, but hear," uttered to Eurybiades beyond anything of Socrates, and countless other things—it would be endless to tell. And when no one contradicted him, but they did not dare to remain, and the words were poured out in fear, and flight was prevailing, and the most shameful things were about to come to pass—and not merely the matter of slavery, but first to run away, then to be enslaved, and to seem to the barbarians bad slaves before becoming slaves—then, then indeed, beyond all physicians who save against compulsion and against the patient's distaste, he brought the barbarians upon them

[146562] 195. having deceived both sides—the one as though summoning them out of goodwill, the other as though he knew nothing of the matter; so that Aristides was good in bringing him word—and, having taken them and brought down the third and greatest of all falls, I think, and the most complete, he cast out Xerxes as a fugitive from the farthest borders of Attica, and moreover told him to flee. And the king, as though serving a master, obeyed his orders, and when bidden to pursue the Greeks he hearkened, and when commanded to flee he was persuaded, and besides he was grateful; and he who before gave orders to others against the Greeks was then compelled to listen to one of the Greeks—and that the most hated and most hostile of all. So much, it seems, did Themistocles surpass in mastery over service. Therefore, in choosing war in place of inaction, he displayed a mark of courage; and in choosing to make war against the barbarians on behalf of the Greeks, rather than against the Greeks alongside the barbarians, a mark at once of courage and of justice—choosing the fewer in place of the more and greater, and his own kin in place of the foreign. And further, by his finding out what was needful and foreseeing it and being nowhere deceived in affairs, but foretelling the future better than the prophets, he reasonably won a reputation for wisdom; and by his corrupting none of what he had resolved through the pleasures of the body, but ever giving himself leisure for the best things and attending to the reasonings concerning the leadership, and by his restraining the Athenians concerning the leadership, and in all these things—surely no one can be temperate who does not assign to that man the first place in temperance. Can

[148301] 196. any of you who practice philosophy without risk give such a pledge of virtue, or, having passed through so many tests, claim to do so? And I think that on both sides, and beside both, Themistocles stands—both Miltiades and Cimon. For he plainly was the first to conquer the barbarians by sea, as Miltiades by land. So that he might reasonably seem to have begun the freedom in this respect too, and he plainly added to what already existed. For to the land-battle he added the sea-battles, and set up three trophies in place of one, just as Cimon went on to the second tasks. And indeed he took over the Greeks neither in the same security in which Cimon found them, nor in the same fears as Miltiades, but faring at the very extremity of extremities, in the first and last of dangers; in a word, he was the first and only to conquer the king himself, household and all, not as Miltiades conquered the satraps first at Marathon, and Pausanias later at Plataea. One might call the battle of Marathon a paradigm and honor it for its priority in time, but reckon the deeds of Themistocles in and by themselves, as done later in time than the battle of Marathon, yet having had their beginning at home, from that man's understanding and statesmanship. For nothing comparable had been done before by the Greeks—nay, had not even been hoped. Thus he surpasses both Miltiades and Pausanias and Cimon; and he becomes the equal of three—not of a baker and a cook and a tavern-keeper, but of men who had become something to the

[149825] 197. Greeks. And he alone, indeed, plainly conquered both the land force and the naval force by right reasoning. For neither did the ships hold out, and the king departed in flight together with the greater part. And by however much one exalts the later victory at Plataea, by so much the more does he adorn the understanding and forethought of that man. For if a small fraction of the land force, left behind, nevertheless caused the Greeks trouble—and that too when paradigms now stood before them both by land and by sea—by how much it is fitting that they be superior to the barbarians, and moreover when it was a satrap of the king, not the king himself, who remained—then surely no one would have recognized the fire-bearer contending against all and not against a part, when the king was set over affairs, when no one, in the present circumstances, was at hand on whom they might take courage, when the army was advancing untouched by ills and with hopes undiminished, exalted by the deed at Thermopylae, and all but holding it before their eyes that all these too must soon lie dead. But all this the "service" and "flattery" of Themistocles, as Plato says, but, as the common vote of the Greeks holds, the wisdom and forethought of Themistocles, prevented, and imposed order on all the deeds. So that not only from what he set right when himself leading, but from what he was the cause of others setting right in the matters that came to them—as for Pausanias, for Cimon, for the rest—he would justly meet with the good repute of all. Or

[151373] 198. we should do utter wrong, Plato, if we should not dare to deem worthy of even one of the fair words a man who showed such humane deeds toward the Greeks. To me, then, Themistocles seems to have become no meaner nor less honorable in commanding the Athenians than Socrates in serving in the ranks at Delium and at Amphipolis and at Potidaea. And yet you praise that man because, in the retreat from Delium, he went off courageously, and was plainly seen to be one who, if anyone laid hold of him, would defend himself well and nobly. Is it not, then, terrible—O earth and gods and leaders of words and deeds, for I am carried away to speak—to praise Socrates even for his flight, and to declare that he retreated more nobly than Laches, but, of Themistocles, who displayed his courage by pursuing and not fleeing the enemy, and of whose virtue all Greece enjoyed the benefit, to take no thought of calling him by names that belong to cowardice and unmanliness? Of him who, even when he withdrew victorious from Euboea, accomplished in the meantime such things as no one in any haste to depart would ever do. And then you say that safety is not worth much. What, then, prevents us from saying that even to the savior gods, who save us one by one, those men afforded for the Greeks the accomplishing of those things?—But I will let the blasphemy go; one may, however, suspect what follows from the argument. For my part, I would think that argument better and more just, and that one would not err in speaking thus: that the gods are in truth saviors, and these men are those who then saved Greece, but that Miltiades and Themistocles served as ministers—which is the greatest and noblest

[153065] 199. power of a human being, to serve the higher powers. This, then, divine head, is the right thing to say; and I too would declare that those men became ministers and servants—not of the people of the Athenians, far from it, nor of any men at all, unless one must call presiding and commanding "serving" and "ministering." Moreover, then, one would not even allow us, by these arguments, to feel gratitude to our parents, nor to set it down to the account of benefaction, who afforded us the beginnings of living and being saved. And if one should bring in Euripides too as a witness, saying that "we ought, gathering in assembly, to lament the newborn for all the evils to which he comes," he would seem, surely, to say something very much to the point. But I think that, of the circumstances in which we find ourselves, and of living worse or better, we hold the daemon and fortune to blame—and, by Zeus, if you like, add that we ourselves too must bear a share, for there is no harm to the argument—but to those who ministered to our coming-to-be, and through whom we first came into the light, to these we think we must hold the first and greatest gratitude, after the gods who are still prior to them. If, then, to our parents, for the mere fact of existence, we hold such gratitude and confess that we owe a debt the most venerable of all debts, how can it be that Miltiades and Themistocles must not be thought to have done something more, who became for the Greeks the cause not only of living and of safety, but accustomed them to be better instead of worse in the very things they did? It seems to me absurd that, if they had betrayed some allies or a fort, or one or two ships, or had been the cause to any of exile or death, men would drive them with many and frequent reproaches and enroll them with Eurybatus and Phrynondas—as he has called Archelaus wretched, surely, and miserable, for killing those whom he ought not—but, since they freed all men both by land and by sea,

[155057] 200. taking the first risk, and saved not only the bodies and the souls of those who entrusted themselves to them, but also cities and country and polity and customs and laws and the very name of the race, and left nothing whatever of courage and justice undone, but handed over Greece greater than they received it, and brought away to the gods the fitting thank-offerings for these things, and passed their lives, so to speak, keeping festival both in their deeds and in their policies, and established before all men their own virtue, which they held toward both gods and men—that we should think it right to deem them of the portion of Mithaecus and Thearion; and to say that physicians are better than cooks because they save, but to liken those who presided over the safety of the Greeks not to physicians but to cooks! And indeed, even if they made no one better but saved them, this at least was a thing physicians do, not cooks. So that they were in no way worse than physicians. How, then, were they of no worth to the Greeks? Plato himself would not concede this to himself. Elsewhere, at least, where there is no contentiousness, he says this; and he says it on behalf of the Sicilian men, in arranging a kind of royal rule for them, as though Dion himself, being of the line of which his ancestors were, says that they at least saved, which is the greatest thing, the Greeks from the barbarians, so that it is now possible to make speeches about polity; but, had they perished then, neither speech nor hope would have been left anywhere at all by any means.

[156629] 201. Therefore in these words he praises those who became the cause of safety for the Greeks, and says that thanks must be paid them—and not mean thanks, but such as one would not easily even ask for oneself—and to the man who is displeased he says that "the ancestors saved the greatest thing, the Greeks, from the barbarians." Either, then, it was fitting to erase that, or these things have been refuted by those. For it is not possible to say that, while it is reasonable that thanks and gifts belong to those who saved the Greeks in Sicily, yet to those who saved all the ancient Greece, and, by the same path of statesmanship, Sicily and Italy and the Greeks wherever on earth and sea they are, to these there should be no share even of a humane word, nor should it be possible for them even to be called good men. And indeed you yourself say that you care no more for those in Cyrene than for those at Athens. Then, having allowed their descendants to speak about gifts, you thought it right to speak ill of the men themselves, and at once both refute the tyrants and blame those who were the cause of freedom for the Greeks. And here is the crown of the argument: that not even freedom is anything very august, but that for many it is better to obey others than to be free. Very well. Was it then better, also at that time, for the Athenians to obey? And indeed, not from afar, but from the very things they did, they showed themselves worthy of freedom. Moreover, it was no Dioscuri, nor Theseus son of Poseidon, nor Heracles the common champion of all, nor the best and most just of the demigods, that there was danger of obeying, but men full of insolence and evils, from whom they were likely to learn no good thing

[158358] 202. whatever, but to suffer all the most shameful and most terrible things. So that how would it not have come to the most shameful of all situations, if, having earlier rescued the Heraclids into freedom, they had then themselves bowed beneath the barbarians, accounting the matter of small worth? But indeed, if they themselves were not worthy to be slaves, nor were the invaders better than they, and the danger, for those overcome, concerned the very extremities, how was this not, if anywhere, the occasion to show themselves more afraid of slavery than of death? For I will add the very words of Plato. And if this was known to everyone, and to all these things were best and most serious and the only things—come, if the truth must be told—belonging to the better argument and to political virtue brought to its extremity, how can those who afforded themselves to these things and secured for all, together with safety, their freedom, be thought of little worth either to the citizens or to the Greeks? And indeed they did not even make their freedom unbridled; for, while toward the barbarians they were so disposed as to be unwilling even to hear a voice, toward the Greeks they were so common and humane that they willingly yielded the leadership to the Lacedaemonians, though they so far surpassed them. And therefore they recovered it again from the willing Greeks. So that it was not without justice nor without temperance, Plato, that they filled the city with allies and tribute and idle babble, as you say, but, beginning from a temperate and just and wonderful rule, they guarded most nobly the bounds of freedom, leading the citizens midway between arrogance and lowliness, and not introducing the dissolute freedom, nor what one might offhand call freedom, but that which goes with justice and temperance.

[160185] 203. And indeed, that to free one's fatherland—to say nothing of Greece—is no dishonorable thing, nor the work of any chance man, Plato himself is witness, or, if you like, Dion; since this too is part of that speech: "And upon all these things, with guileless and sound judgment, together with the gods, set up as king first my son, for the sake of two favors: that from me and that from my father. For the one freed the city from the barbarians in that time, and I from tyrants now twice over, of which you yourselves have been witnesses." Does Plato, then, set it down as a small or mean thing to make a city free, or to prevent one about to belong to others? Since, then, it is right to give even kingship in return for this, and that too to one's descendants, and all but to yield freedom itself to them, because their ancestors guarded freedom—then surely, that those who freed not only the citizens but the whole race of the Greeks should not be allowed even to share in the very appearance of being free, is one of the most terrible things; but that men should rob of its due portion of freedom those who in deed preserved that freedom for the others. Come, then, let us consider this too: by how much in this respect also Miltiades and Themistocles were more just than Dion and better in matters of state and more careful to preserve equality, seeing that they, in return for those deeds, asked nothing more either for themselves or for their children, but supposed it enough to have benefited the Greeks; while Dion, as you say, needed even such gifts as included that the rest should obey those of his line—not, on each occasion nor in the affairs themselves, being persuaded that these reasoned or spoke better than the rest, but once for all setting up kings, even if some among them were better. Have you not on every side convicted yourself? Seeing that even of equality and of geometry those men plainly are thus mindful, but Dion not, nor the children of Dion, and that too though

[162184] 204. they had consorted with Plato, the man most terrible at geometry. And third, the letter says, one must summon the man who now commands the army of the enemy, Dionysius son of Dionysius, to become king of Syracuse willingly, the city being willing—if he is willing willingly to pass over into the form of a king—fearing the turns of fortune, and pitying his fatherland and the neglect of the temples and the tombs, lest through contentiousness he should utterly destroy everything and become a delight to the barbarians. If, then, even for the tyrant's son and the commander of the enemy's army there is a fitting occasion to be reconciled, if he is willing to become king instead of tyrant, pitying his fatherland and the neglect of temples and tombs, then surely with the benefactors of the Greeks, and through whom temples and tombs and all things were saved and Greece did not become a delight to the barbarians, it would have been reasonable to make a treaty, and to remit even the blasphemy against them, even if he had nothing more to assign them in deed. For come, by the gods—if, when those affairs were at hand, Themistocles, when the Athenians summoned him and bade him aid them with whatever he had, had asked nothing else, neither tyranny nor lawful kingship, but only this much—that he should not be called a servant by them, nor receive such a reproach, if he should set their affairs in order—had Plato been present, what would he have advised the Athenians—he who advised these things to the Syracusans? Would he not have thought the challenge of Themistocles moderate and have granted the favor? For to me it seems he would even have pledged himself for these things on behalf of his fatherland. Is it not, then, absurd that, while the deeds were still going to be, and as to how they should be done, he should pledge only this on behalf of all, but, when they have come to pass and been done and that man's virtue has become manifest to all Greeks and barbarians, nevertheless to attempt to insult him, and to be ashamed neither before temples nor tombs nor inscriptions, but to speak ill of one whom, had a man wished to praise him, it would have been a task to reach his worth? And indeed it is not the same thing to speak, in the midst of the sea, about those in the

[164478] 205. boat and to display one's own good courage, and to sit outside the storm beneath the little wall—which Plato, knowing better than anyone, willingly passes over, and accuses Themistocles of embarking the Athenians on the triremes, not in these words but elsewhere, saying that they were accustomed by this to flee and not to fight standing their ground. As though you and I had routed many companies of hoplites, but Themistocles knew nothing but to flee! Yet I, if it had been possible to conquer in some other way, or even to be saved at first, would perhaps think these words had something in them; but when the choice was either to prevail by fighting at sea, or to perish on land, how was it equal, or what is the wonderful philosophy of dying in vain when it was possible to be saved with the greatest glory? In the first place, for my part I do not conceive where it has been determined that to conquer by land is noble, but by sea shameful; or that the cornel-wood and the hide are worth much, but the ship-timbers and the oar-handles worth nothing—as if one should remove the sea from the things that are, or say it came into being in vain, and strike out the realm of Poseidon, which holds second place among all things, as Homer says. Why, then, shall we not also accuse them concerning their grain, that they use mostly imported grain and have further need of the sea, when it is possible to be content with the country they farm, O most divine of men?—This means perishing by famine. And indeed, if the bringing in of grain by sea is for them necessary and saving, for the sake of the same safety they then too made use of the sea, and the portion of the noble was added to the need. And indeed neither is it possible to say that the grain had to come to them by sea, but that one need not foresee how they would be masters of the grain-convoy. Therefore there was need of triremes and of knowing how to fight at sea. How, then, was he who advised these things a busybody, or how did he not adapt himself to the nature of the country, that we may add this too? And we should seem to me to be doing the like, if we should make these accusations, as if we found fault even with the nature of Attica,

[166694] 206. that the sea surrounds it almost entirely. What, then, if it seemed thus good to the higher powers? But still I let these things go for Plato's sake. Let the neighborhood be briny, as he says. If, then, Themistocles exchanged victory for victory, did he wrong the shipwrights in honoring them in place of the spear-makers? And yet the work of the sea-battle came down, surely, to the hoplites on the decks—of whom we must think the greater part were among those who risked themselves at Marathon. And if then they took on a double danger instead of a single one—the one against the enemy, the other against the sea itself—they are, I think, in no way the worse for this. But I for my part take away even these additions. Let it be wholly a fault, if there was any other means of safety for their affairs. But if all the land had been seized, and the army was flowing in like an inundation of the sea, and everything was being utterly snatched away, and there was no looking up, but some willingly joined the enemy, others were led unwillingly, and others kept fleeing ever to within Greece, and the Athenians alone were left outside; and besides this, they called even then, when affairs were in this state, on those in the alliance, and bade them, coming together with them into Boeotia, to take the first risk on behalf of the rest, but no one obeyed—rather they sat in the straits not only of the Peloponnese but also of their hopes; and it was destined to be nowhere, neither of land nor of sea—why do we judge these Achaeans from the tower? Or why do we accuse things that nowhere come to pass? For my part, I do not think the sea-battle at Salamis holds so much shame that it would have been more choiceworthy to perish before it; rather, beyond the life and the safety belonging to that time, I would call this, as it were, a gain that befell those of that time—to accomplish so great a deed and to set up a trophy common to all men, so to speak, and for all time. For they seem to me not only to have conquered their adversaries on that day, nor only the Greeks present, but also

[168788] 207. to have surpassed all men in greatness of daring and in the majesty of their victory. For if one must say one thing out of all that has come to memory, one would justly call that deed the greatest. And Themistocles seems to me alone of all men, or at least among a very few, to have shown that the saying is true which long ago Alcaeus the poet uttered, and which afterward the many took up and used—that cities are not stones nor timbers nor the craft of builders, but wherever there are men who know how to save themselves, there are walls and cities. Therefore, by the truest of arguments, he did not think he was abandoning the city, but rather refitting it, as on a stage, to meet the present circumstance; for not even in the dramas does any of the competitors destroy his own nature, if for the present he changes his costume; and at that time it fell to the Athenians to put on the bearing of seafaring men and to show the city in this. For these reasons he gave up the country and the very soil of the city, but preserved its dignity most nobly of all men, and gave up walls and hearths and temples before the post of his high spirit and the things of which he had convinced himself. For he knew that, if he clung to those things and clung to life for their sake, he would quickly be deprived even of them and would destroy the men themselves besides and cast away all hopes at once; but if he should put the ships before them and stand aside for the very time of the decision, like some competitor going abroad for the sake of prizes, he easily hoped that, just as then he chose the sea in place of the land, so again out of the sea he would find both the country and the city and would use things in no way worse. And reflecting on these things he imitated the runners who from far off catch up those ahead; and, having yielded not only Attica but the whole land to Xerxes and allowed him to seize it first, but having taken so much of the sea as sufficed for the ships, he overturned for him all his hopes, and

[170817] 208. rescued Greece—not accustoming the Athenians to be sailors instead of hoplites, nor finding for them in the triremes a provision for flight, nor that they should dwell on the sea for all time, like Glaucus of Anthedon, they say, or Saron who gave his name to the gulf, but the very opposite, O wonderful sir, that nevertheless they should fear no multitude of enemies nor flee, but, even if they must give up all the land, even if they must withdraw from their very bodies, should easily endure it for the sake of the higher good, and should not be slaves to their possessions nor count any pretext sufficient for becoming worse—neither a multitude of enemies, nor strength, nor that all men had consented to be slaves, nor that everything was turned upside down—but should hold both the sea more their own and every danger more endurable than living with shame. This is a good paradigm both for hoplites and for cavalry and for archers and for crews of triremes and for all the complements of a city. One must not, he says, give one's back to the enemy nor seek a shameful safety, nor, casting aside the reckonings concerning what is just, give oneself over to him who would carry one off, nor flee that one may not fight. "I, at least," he says, "did not go off in flight to Italy, nor did I think it right to found a city there, though the prophets bade me, but I remained with the triremes, where it was the time to range myself on behalf of Greece. And when the things on land had been seized, a small part of the sea sufficed me; and I counsel you too," he says, "to remain and keep your post, whether you contend in a contest of hoplites, or of cavalry, or of any kind whatever. But if you are even shut out of everything, become for me a man of the sea

[172584] 209. for this time; here be a hoplite, hold out your shield from the ship, and, if it is possible, even from the very sea bear it over the surge." These things Themistocles taught, and this was the meaning of his moving the city onto the triremes; for these reasons he thought it right to make the country empty of men rather than that any captured man in it should be a slave. Than these there have come to be no nobler reasonings, nor deeds more honorable, nor any holding together more fully understanding and magnanimity and courage. Since that he did not at all think fit to disregard the city utterly, nor to flee in a circle on the triremes, but supposed that these things were advantageous for the present occasions, and, having used Salamis as a camp in the same way the earlier men used Marathon, again was mindful of the original things, he showed before long. For when the barbarians had departed, he led them up at once into the city and resettled it as before, and even extended the circuit wider, as the interpreters say, on every side; and when there was need to wall it, he alone of all found out how they would be able. How, then, did he accustom them to flee, or by what stroke of fortune—he who accustomed them, when in the utmost dangers, to pursue, not to flee, but, when they had conquered and were faring most prosperously and it was possible for them to take whatever country and city they wished, led them back to the old places and did not allow them to be unmindful of what they had? By Zeus, Plato—if someone, laying hold of you, accused you, saying how much sea you sailed across in merchant ships, and how great a wandering you wandered about Charybdis, encamped together with the sailors and in need of the oar and the oar-loop, and that too though you so disliked things of the sea and were attached to the hoplites—would you not, indeed, since you are a man of the Muses and have long since condemned the phrase—the kind I mean—decline to say, O

[174565] 210. "wretch, you are mad," but would have said somewhat thus: "My good man, I did these things not because I had chosen the life of the sailors, nor adorning them in place of the hoplites, nor learning anew to go to sea in my old age, nor harming the affairs of the mainland, but it was not otherwise possible to come to Sicily"? These things, I think, you would be able to say—just as we say on behalf of Themistocles, that it was not otherwise possible for the Greeks to be saved. And indeed no one would say that, for the affairs of Dion, one had to sail to Sicily and reckon neither old age nor danger nor having been often deceived nor anything else against the just claim and the need of that man; but, for the sake of Greece and of such great affairs, one need not have used the ships, but should have refused the sea. No one would say so. And Bellerophon, my excellent friend, as the poets say, mastered the Chimaera not by embarking on the sea, but by mounting into the air upon Pegasus, and yet was not thought to be a coward—he who was even thought able to destroy whole companies. But, I think, against the fire it was not possible to hold out from the ground. And I know about Themistocles that, even if he had been able to imitate Daedalus and, having winged himself, to assail the barbarian on behalf of the Greeks, he would not have shrunk even from this; or, if, about to join a battle on foot, he had advanced from the higher ground, he would not on that account have been likely to incur the charge of cowardice. And the Lacedaemonians—you yourself say that, fighting the battle at Plataea, they were unwilling to stand their ground, but drew the Persians toward what was advantageous to themselves. For I pass over the Scythians, and how many victories they have won by fleeing. Where a man thinks he will have the advantage, there let him ward off the enemy, especially if he transgress none of the greater rights. If, then, Themistocles had used his own judgment alone concerning these matters, one might say he had brought the accusation upon himself; but since a god too

[176662] 211. plainly ordained these things, I for my part hesitate to speak, but everyone would understand the rest. Themistocles, then, brilliantly escapes the charge. Or, by the gods themselves—when it is needful that Socrates should seem wisest, shall we refer the matter to a trustworthy witness, the god at Delphi, and rely on the oracles which Chaerephon and a few others knew, those who cared about Socrates; but the things of which all the Greeks are witnesses, and which the Pythia uttered most commonly of all that ever were, and which all the future followed—these we shall nowhere set down to account, nor concede that they are the greatest testimonies to the wisdom of Themistocles? For where the same thing seemed good to that man and to the god concerning the safety of the whole, what else must one say? What, then, were the things ordained? It begins from somewhere on high, and then there is this which all babble of: "Wide-seeing Zeus grants to the Trito-born a wooden wall." Has the oracle, then, said this alone? No—but, as it were, it sets its seal upon the judgment by the addition. What, then, is this? "Alone to remain unsacked"—so that, lest, when these things were thus spoken, the Athenians should think the choice lay with them either to conquer by land or by sea, and lest they should grow soft, but should know that in the ships everything stands and that otherwise it is not possible to be saved. And further he magnified it in what follows, inasmuch as the god is leader of the Muses and best at speaking, surely. For he added: "It shall profit you and your children." What does he mean by this, "It shall profit you and your children"? Not on account of the children whom they conveyed to Troezen, it seems to me, but also those who would be hereafter. So were the triremes allotted together with the fortune of the city. For if ever they fared

[178534] 212. well, it was in accordance with these that faring well belonged to them at all. And not even here did he stop his proclamation, but, as though forestalling and as though cutting short the censures of Plato, he presses on, sending forth every voice and saying outright already: "Do not you await the horsemen and the foot host coming in great numbers from the mainland in quiet, but withdraw." Then there is yet a final close: "You shall yet one day stand face to face with them." And I would gladly ask those who draw their deep beards, as one of the comic poets said, and exalt Plato up to this point: if in those times we had Plato, and affairs had been entrusted to him, and then the oracle came, what words would he think he ought to speak, or what would he have thought the Athenians ought to do? Or, by Zeus, if he himself did not happen to be general, what would he have advised Themistocles? These same things that the oracles advised, or the opposite of these? For if he was not going to know the meaning of the oracles, it was not the part of a wise man, what he was about to suffer; but if, knowing and understanding, he attempted to contradict, he was accomplishing the work of anyone rather than of Plato. For it would have been a demonstration of two extreme things, of impiety toward the god and of betrayal of the safety not only of the city but of all the Greeks. And if, however much, the god commanded one thing and Plato led another way, which ought Themistocles to have obeyed, or to which giving heed would he rightly have seemed to be of sound mind? For let them resolve this one of my perplexities and take their stand beside the tripod at Delphi, which the Greeks set up from the barbarians. But indeed it was not possible for a mortal to fight against a god. And indeed neither has it reason that, of those who die in Plato's city and polity, Plato himself entrusts the honors to the Pythia and lays it down as authoritative whatever seems good to her, but what the Pythia ordained for the safety of the living and the guarding of all Greece, this he should blame in the man who obeyed and

[180656] 213. administered it. For by three of the greatest things the whole safety of the Greeks plainly came down almost to Themistocles alone: by his advising at the outset to build the triremes, before even any of the many expected the barbarians to come; by his persuading them, when the war was at hand, to fight at sea; and by his foreseeing in what part of the sea it would be advantageous. For if the triremes had not been built at the outset, there would have been no navy worth speaking of for the Greeks, nor one in which, taking courage, the rest would have combined; so that, while affairs on land were without resource and there was no power existing at sea, everything would have perished without a struggle; and if the ships existed, but it had seemed good to them to carry on the war in some other way, not even so would there have been any gain. And indeed the very nature of the sea made the multitude of ships useless to the barbarians. This was the terrible contest of Themistocles, and the preliminary contest among the Greeks, that he should remain and make them cease from looking toward the Isthmus. And some say there is even a fourth thing on behalf of Themistocles, that, besides the place, he also found out the time, joining the sea-battle when the wind was coming down; which indeed Phormion too later, as it seems, imitating, defeated the Lacedaemonians at sea off Naupactus. So far is Themistocles from having accustomed the Athenians to flee, or having corrupted their spirits. But I return to the rest of the oracle. So be it. What, then, did the god utter upon these things, and how did he set in order his counsel? "O divine Salamis, you will destroy the children of women." The god, then, called Salamis divine, as though there were going to be in it deeds greater than all human measure. But Plato says that the man who accomplished these things and brought them to Salamis ruined affairs and became no better than those who minister to pleasure. And Iacchus went forth and shared

[182669] 214. in the rites, and clouds from the two goddesses descended upon the sea-battle, and gods and heroes, the common allies of the Greeks, fought together, and fought at sea with them, honoring Themistocles in deed; and the name was made exact for Salamis from every side and stood as divine for all. And yet, when Salamis heard this, it was surely the sea-battle that heard it; for Salamis was, in the time before, no other region's, but the god called the sea-battle divine through it. But Plato, as it seems, refuses the victory and condemns to death those who did these things, and prefers to perish august rather than to conquer with the gods. But Homer, had he survived, would have called the man who counseled and did these things "equal to Zeus in counsel," much more, it seems to me, than the general of the Cephallenians who smeared his ships with ruddle. For if Zeus gave the ships as a gift to Athena, and Apollo declared these things, and that man from the beginning was attuned to them and in the present alone knew the same things as the gods, how was he not destined to bear this address? But not so Plato; rather, in place of calling his judgment like and divine, like that of Zeus, he likens it to Sarambus and the tavern-keepers, all of them. How could anyone have used grandeur more out of season? Come, then, let us consider this too: if, as some of the heroes are already said to have been judged before divine judges, so Themistocles too, concerning what he advised, were tried before Pythian Apollo, which vote would the god have cast concerning him? The one that condemns? But it is absurd that he himself foretold these things and gave the oracle, but should condemn the one who obeyed. For where even Orestes is said to have been acquitted, when tried among the other gods, by referring the deed to Apollo, surely the man who pleads before Apollo himself, for things he accomplished with him,

[184589] 215. there was no reason that he should be convicted. Then, the man whom it was not possible to convict before the god as judge—him did Plato think fit to accuse? And if he had been tried at Athens, with no such oracle existing beforehand, I mean, and then it had seemed good to those men to entrust the matter to the god, just as earlier, they say, the matter concerning the tribes—if the god had pronounced that he had deliberated nobly—he would thereafter have had to be acquitted, and it would have been permitted to no one to say anything else against this. But since the god forestalled the charge and acquitted him, and praised the deeds beforehand, before any man knew whether they would be done, and all but spoke in his support concerning everything from the beginning and brought forth in advance the judgment he held—nevertheless Plato has not held off, but has philosophized contrary to the oracle and has accused the deeds which, before they came to pass, one of the higher powers praised. Why, then, did you not also blame the Heraclids, my excellent friend, because they did not enter the Peloponnese by land, but crossed over from Rhium to Rhium? But I think that for them too it was the same as for the Greeks under Themistocles: by land they were to be overcome, but by sea it was possible both to be saved and to conquer. And here is a great sign: for as long as they tried the entry through the Isthmus, they fared ill, but when they came to the Achaean strait, they found it to be a strait of safety for them. Wherefore the god foretold to them to make the attempt through these narrows; but they, in ignorance, turning to the other way, almost perished utterly. And the same thing held also for those

[186314] 216. . . . had then surrounded the Greeks. For some of them had perished at Thermopylae, while the others were everywhere victorious in their ships. There were straits, it seems, on both sides: against the one it was right to guard, the other one had to make use of. This too, I think, is why Themistocles judged that the Isthmus should be avoided above all else, guarding against it as though against some ancient curse, and put Salamis forward in its place. And indeed those men held the Peloponnese in no way more dishonourably or more obscurely than they held their post by the ships; rather, they proved to be the forefathers of many brave hoplites, men whom not even Plato anywhere ever reproached for their conduct in war, and they brought forth their descendants in greater honour than any other glory. For Plato himself sings the praises of that Dorian camp. This camp of Themistocles, then, was shown to have come about for the Greeks no less opportunely than that one. And that the Athenians became in no way worse than before in affairs on land, this the battle at Plataea showed, in which they had only the Lacedaemonians as rivals; the battle at Mycale showed it, in which they alone were given the first place of honour; and the battle later at Oenophyta showed it, by which they gained Boeotia and the Locrians and the Phocians. And if at some later time they did stumble, well, having once conquered at sea they did not always conquer there either; yet Themistocles was nowhere the cause of either of these reverses, since both forms of strength prevailed so greatly both during his life and for no short time after his death.

[187959] The deeds, then, and the policies of Themistocles down to the sea-battle and the flight of the King were of the kind that befit a man who, as I believe, more than any other human being escaped flattery, but came as far as any in intelligence and daring, joined with temperance and complete justice. As for his later affairs, what manner of things were they, to set them out

[188334] 217. briefly? Mardonius was sending heralds to the Athenians on the King's behalf, having learned by deed that the balance of affairs lay with those men, and that whichever side they should join must of necessity prevail. The ambassador was Alexander, king of the Macedonians. But the Athenians, though they heard that he would rebuild their city for them and restore their land, though they heard of other acts of kindness besides, and of friendship and alliance for all time, were not lifted up by any of these offers, nor did they shame any part of what they had earlier accomplished; rather, they chose the danger undertaken on behalf of the Greeks instead of the gifts offered against the Greeks. The ambassador they let go—that he might not suffer the same fate as the earlier messengers—because of the dignity of his office as proxenos, but they ordered him to be gone at once, and in future to bring no such messages. Such was the harvest the Athenians reaped from the statesmanship and generalship of Themistocles. To such a pitch of courage and greatness of soul and of hatred for every ignoble servitude did he lead them all, that, when their city had been taken a second time, and Mardonius again sent his proposals—the council being then at Salamis and the herald having come from Athens—when someone in the council moved to accept them, they all gathered and stoned him to death, the men stoning him and the women stoning his wife: surely no more dishonourable a deed, Plato, nor one deserving of less praise, than the deeds of those women reared in your city, whom you bid take the field together with the men, doing this and that. Does Themistocles, then, seem to you to teach servility, or rather to be instructing in such things those who gathered about him? And so, when the Lacedaemonians came at about that same time to Alexander, and were appealing to him on behalf of the Greeks, and promising to maintain the Athenians' children and wives and those past the age of service so long as the war should last, so far was he from willing to accept even this, that he deemed them in need of pardon and sent them away, as men who did not know to whom they were sending an embassy. And of the same spirit too is the pillar

[190573] 218. which, after these events, they set up, bearing this inscription: that Arthmius son of Pythonax, of Zeleia, both he himself and his family, be without rights and an enemy of the people of the Athenians, because he brought the gold of the Medes into the Peloponnese. For my part I do not know what decree Plato could have framed more nobly or more solemnly than this, on the same matter. And I observe this too, that both these resolves belong to the same philosophy: for the one forbade the Guardians to acquire gold, while the other had it recorded that the man who brought in the gold of the Medes was an enemy of the city, and that, if anyone should kill him, there should be no penalty. So then, the safeguard which Plato conceived for the best-governed city, that very safeguard Themistocles thought fit to provide for Greece; and this pillar the Athenians consecrated to the goddess, setting it beside the statue brought from Marathon, considering it in no way less honourable or less useful than their other dedications—a pillar on which is written how those who try to corrupt the Greeks ought to be treated. And it seems to me that both peoples are bound to cast every favourable vote on behalf of Themistocles. For all who consider safety the most fitting and the first of goods—it was Themistocles who secured it for all the Greeks; and all who judge affairs by greatness of spirit, and hold the dangers borne for noble ends, and a glorious name, more honourable than living in security, can find no finer examples than his. And so before both sets of judges he would justly win. And indeed, after the sea-battle, when all had gathered at the Isthmus and were bringing their vote from the altar of Poseidon concerning the prize of valour, here too there is something thoughtless one might charge against the

[192398] 219. Greeks, but there is also the rest of their good sense to praise, and to take it as evidence for Themistocles. For each man, casting his vote first for himself, in the second place all alike cast it for Themistocles. The vote for first place, I think, belonged to that which by nature befalls all human beings—namely, that no one loves another more than himself; so that it had no force at all, but neither was it removed from pardon. The vote for second place, however, was already a clear token of the truth, and a sign that they could not have decided otherwise. So that, had it been declared from the outset that no one should cast his vote for himself but for another, all were going to cast it for Themistocles, whom indeed every one of them preferred above every other; and he would have become first in the same way as he then became second. So now too, by voting him into second place, they were doing the very same thing as if they had voted him into first. Yet not even so did he come away with the lesser share, but won in both. The first place he had received from the truth and from himself and held it; for he alone of all men did justly the very thing the others did. The second place had already been conceded to him; so that he was first out of them all. And when the Greeks had departed and were breaking up the assembly, since they saw what was happening—and here too they refuted themselves handsomely, showing that they were not acting honestly or as citizens should, and that they had not even passed those decrees on wholly just grounds, but rather, being throttled by the utmost necessity of their affairs, and not for any favour or goodwill—Themistocles so wholly despised them all that at the moment he gave it not the slightest thought, but, when affairs had settled, he came to Lacedaemon, as though on purpose. So poor a creature was he in his ways, and a very servant indeed. And the Lacedaemonians did not hold themselves in check at his coming; rather, while he was present they honoured him as they honoured none of their own kings, and when he departed,

[194493] 220. they escorted him with three hundred chosen young men as far as the borders of Laconia—the only man, of Greeks or barbarians, of earlier times or of later, to be so honoured. So far did Themistocles seem to them to surpass all other human beings. And yet, when the best of the Greeks in affairs on land were not ashamed to escort that man to the borders of their own country, how is it open to us to blame him on account of the hoplites? Or how can we refuse to praise the man whom even those who seemed to be his rivals honoured, and against their will, with honours they gave to none of all who had ever lived?

[195112] There being three seasons, then, from which one might examine Themistocles, in each of them he will appear the best and the first of men. For before the barbarians came, he reconciled the cities, and remitted the charges held against the citizens exiled from the city; when the struggles came upon them, he did not fall out with the Lacedaemonians, and alone drove out the enemy; and when affairs had settled, and the Lacedaemonians wished to exclude from the treaty all the cities that had sided with the enemy, he spoke against it and prevented it, holding that something of the same kind would result as if Greece were declared an outcast from herself by her own act. For more than thirty cities would have had to fall into that calamity. So he did not think it fitting that Greece, having prospered so brilliantly and become so far superior to her enemies, should become so much less than she had been before. How could a man have been better, or more skilled in matters of state? And though I am able to speak also of his later misfortunes, and

[196163] 221. how the whole business was contrived against him, and what manner of man he showed himself to be in these things too, I could have wished that my argument required me to press on and go through these matters as well; for I think I could say of him nothing inferior or less than what has already been said. But since this lies outside my subject, and length is creeping into the discourse, I shall pass these things over, adding only this much concerning this part also: that when it became necessary to march against Greece, he chose to die, by his deed dissolving every charge against him, and showing how highly he valued his former actions and policies, and that never, of his own free will, would he set anything before what was noble and fitting—not wealth, not children, not hopes, not safety itself. Then shall we slander him for the very things for which, that he might do nothing unworthy, he thought he ought to die? And shall we call a "servant" the man who never rendered any service to the Athenians against their will, nor ever thought it right to serve the King, but chose this end instead? And how would it not be shameful and monstrous, if, having no reverence for either his life or his death, we should so lightly defame him as this? For my part I think that the priests and priestesses and whoever else prays publicly at Athens might reasonably pray for this, each year, before all their other prayers—at least in those times and for as long as it was possible—that there be born among them a man like Themistocles, and that the land bring forth this good thing along with the rest of its produce. For they would seem to me to gain no less benefit than if all their crops had multiplied a hundredfold and yet more. In other circumstances I myself should have been ashamed to make use of witnesses so many and so great as those I have cited; but there is some advantage in one further testimony, which I must bring forward.

[198112] Let us consider, then, what manner of things Aeschines—the companion of Socrates and the

[198202] 222. fellow-pupil of Plato—says to us about Themistocles. "Since, then, you have dared to lay hold of the life of Themistocles, consider what manner of man you have thought fit to censure. For reflect from where the sun rises and where it sets." "But there is nothing hard, Socrates," he said, "in knowing such things." "Has it then ever yet been a care to you that, of all that country as great as the sun traverses, which is called Asia, one man is ruler?" "Indeed yes," he said, "the Great King." "Do you know, then, that that man marched here and against the Lacedaemonians, thinking that, if he should subdue these two cities, he would easily have the rest of the Greeks subject to him? And he threw the Athenians into such fear that, abandoning their land, they fled to Salamis, having chosen Themistocles as general, and entrusted to him to deal with their affairs as he should wish. And indeed these were the greatest hopes of safety for the Athenians—whatever that man should resolve on their behalf. And it was not because the affairs of the Greeks were far inferior in the multitude of ships and infantry and money, while the King's prevailed, that Themistocles lost heart at the present circumstances; rather, he knew that, unless the deciding of counsel rested with him, the rest of their resources, great in size as they were, would be of no great help; and he had recognized this, that whichever side has men of greater seriousness in virtue set over their affairs, the affairs of those men too are wont to become superior. And so the King then perceived that his own affairs were weaker, on the day he met with a man more serious than himself. And Themistocles so easily handled the King's affairs, great as they were, that, after defeating him at sea, he wished to persuade the Athenians to break up the bridge of boats that the King had yoked together. But when he was unable to do so, he sent to the King the opposite of what had been resolved by the city—namely, that, though the Athenians were bidding him break the bridge, he himself was opposing it, trying to save the King and those with him; so that not only do we and the other Greeks consider Themistocles the cause of safety, but

[200411] 223. the King himself, who had been defeated in war by him alone of men, believed he had been saved by that same man." So far did that man prevail by his intelligence. For this reason, when Themistocles was once made an exile from the city, the King repaid his gratitude as one who had been saved by him, and gave him many other gifts and granted him the governorship of all Magnesia, so that even in his exile his fortunes were greater than those of many Athenians reputed to be men of nobility and worth who stayed at home. Who, then, in that time, could justly be charged with being the most powerful, other than Themistocles, who, taking command of the Greeks, overthrew the man who reigned from the rising of the sun to its setting? "Consider then, Alcibiades," I said, "that for that man, being such as he was, knowledge so great as his did not prove sufficient to guard him against being driven out and made dishonoured by the city; rather, it fell short. What then do you suppose holds for base men, who are at no pains over themselves? Is it any wonder if they cannot manage rightly even small things? And do not condemn me, Alcibiades," I said, "as one disposed strangely and impiously toward fortunes and divine things, if I credit that man with knowledge of all that he did, and think that no fortune was the cause of these works. For I could far more readily prove to you that those who hold the contrary opinion to mine are impiously disposed than that they could prove it of me—men who think that fortunes come equally to the wicked and to the good, rather than that, for those who are noble and good, being also more pious, the things that come from the gods are better." It is, then, the same Socrates who speaks both here and there; yet in Plato's discourses he appears to name Themistocles a servant and a menial, and to set him among the flatterers, while in the passages we have just now produced he bids us count him the best of the Greeks, and credits him with knowledge of all his affairs, and thinks fit to make no fortune the cause, but holds that everything belonged to that man's judgement. As for me, this addition I do not

[202565] 224. accept, but I think the good fortune should be held the cause of all noble things; that these statements, however, do not agree with those, I prove. For if all this is merely an argument spoken on both sides, and one must carry through the rest of it in accordance with whatever thesis one has taken up, then let this be granted, and we seek nothing further: in any case, even so, our part is blameless. But if it is spoken in earnest, with just seriousness, and contains a judgement of the truth, which of the two must we trust, when these statements appear contrary to those? And indeed I should never set Aeschines on an equal footing with Plato—may I never so contend!—but let that judgement be left to the absurd among the sophists; I say rather that the greater and more perfect Plato is in discourse, the more, at least in the matter of Themistocles, one ought to accept that other account. For Aeschines, it is likely, says what he heard, or what comes closest to it; whereas Plato, I think, makes use of the abundance of his nature, just as he sets out countless other things in the name of Socrates, things which it is agreed that Socrates never concerned himself with—doing, I think, what is just in this very thing too, and the work of a most excellent man, namely to think it right to adorn one's teacher; except that to this it befits him to add also the unwillingness to disgrace others who do not deserve it.

[203996] These, then, are the things which it was reasonable to say about these men, leaving out none of the necessary points, yet not thinking it right to say everything in order, lest we should seem to anyone to lack taste. He insists, however, on the points where they stumbled in their dealings with the public, as if, because some thought worse of them, it were fitting for us to consider them worse, or, because certain others wronged them, it were necessary for us too not to refrain from heaping insults on them. But I should not have thought it right for anyone else to reproach them with these things, far less Plato; but rather

[204627] 225. to remember the saying: "And how am I the worse, if so-and-so strikes me unjustly on the cheek?" For whether a man is exiled, or punished with money or with death, or suffers any other such thing, fortune is surely the mistress of it; but their discourses and their statesmanship, derived from what they deliberately chose, it is just to examine—and in these I do not see how I could ever pardon myself, were I to think it right to accuse them. "For it is not reasonable," he says, "for those educated by them to wrong them, nor, from those things by which they became better, to vote anything unjust." But I, for my part, would not say that they erred in that by which they became better, but rather in that they were unable to become wholly like them. And of this I find there is much excuse on both sides. For neither that men should not err at all—and these a popular assembly—nor that one should be able to make all men sinless, would anyone advance as a serious charge. For where it is not easy, and perhaps not even possible, for a single man in private life once and for all to escape blame, surely one ought to think the same of so great a city. But indeed, where even for those who erred there is reasonably pardon, surely for those who lead them toward what is best, and whom they would not obey when they erred, it would be monstrous if we should not grant it. Plato, then, does not allow us to consider the matters in which, by following them, they succeeded; but the wrongs they did against those very men—so far were they from doing what those men thought right—these he charges against them. And the benefits they reaped from their education he passes over; but the things that were not part of what they were taught, but rather remnants of human nature, these he lays upon those men who did everything in their power that they might do no wrong—just as if someone should declare that the schoolmasters who showed the boys their letters and taught them to write, so far as was possible, were the cause of the errors in these matters, if afterwards they should write something not finely nor as they

[206748] 226. ought, of their own accord. But these things are not among what the teacher showed them beforehand, nor among what they were taught; rather, he set forth how they should write rightly, and what they do preserve, they preserve of his teachings, while these are their own errors—whether through want of learning, or through carelessness, or however else they came to follow—save that they are not at all on his account, nor on account of what came from him, no more than those who lack sustenance lack it on account of those who provided and gave it to them. But all these things, I think, are matters of deficiency, not of what one shared in, nor of what one reaped so far as was possible. If, then, those men taught the Athenians anything worse, let that be said against them, and no argument will excuse them from being base; but if they did not educate all, nor as exactly as possible, nor as much as they wished, why should one set down to their leadership what escaped it? For it was not from their company that the people got this; rather, in this very respect they got nothing from those men. So it was not from what they attended to in them that they erred, but from what they did not attend to that they went wrong. Thus, in the matters in which they obeyed, those who persuaded them clearly persuaded them well. Then again, music and geometry and the other arts—I mean even the quite humble ones—not all who attend their teachers acquire, but out of the many a very few; and not even in these does anyone compel the teachers themselves to be held responsible for unfailing exactness throughout, nor, if the learner does not succeed in everything, nor become like the one who taught him, does anyone set this down against that teacher as beyond dispute—neither as though he knew nothing of the art, nor as though he willfully held back, nor, to put it altogether, as doing wrong. But we know the saying of Homer, which he spoke about sons and which holds good in such cases too: "Few sons," he says, "are like their father;

[208786] the more are worse, and few are better than their father." And it has fallen out that one becomes like his teacher and another not, and the one becomes worse, the other better. So

[208967] 227. we know it to be in families and in arts. But if Themistocles and Pericles and Miltiades and Cimon did not educate all the Athenians in statecraft, nor make them all in succession better, tribe by tribe and man by man, distributing knowledge like a festival-dole, shall we then say we have discovered something monstrous against them—that they themselves were no better than anyone else at these things? And you do not accuse the potter because he did not teach all men in succession to mould clay; yet you accuse the foremost among the Greeks because they did not make all men like themselves? And you are not content with the saying of your Protagoras—that if they advanced the many even in the slightest toward the better—but rather, if the people did not handle everything blamelessly and as a single man would, this you now turn against their leaders.

[209830] And indeed I observe that even the physicians, and those reputed to be very excellent, do not so utterly remove diseases that not even a trace remains in the body, but often leave some of the old ailments behind and reckon the relief they give sufficient cause for gratitude, and are not able by their complete treatments to overcome nature itself, but free a man from this disease while in no way hindering another from coming on later. For the art is not adequate to the very end, but nature prevails. What wonder, then, if those men too, having given the Athenians much good counsel and prevented many of their troubles, were not able to hold them to the end nor to heal them immortally, but were overcome by the nature of the populace—or, if one must say it, of mankind in common—and were not able once and for all to root injustice out of the city, like farmers cutting away each year the things that ravage the land, yet not reaching through the whole of the seed? If in this way some seed of injustice and folly, inevitably, escaped them too when they wished to purge the city, and remained, and not everything obeyed them, but there were things the people deliberated on their own account, what baseness does this entail for these men? Or why should one reckon the deeds of others against them—just as if, there being civil strife in the city, and these men leading the

[211209] 228. one party, that of the decent men, someone should then attribute to those very men the errors of the others and of those who wronged them? And what nature has it, that men who neither did these things, but moreover thought fit to prevent them, should be blamed? But perhaps it is not right to bring the charge against them, yet right to bring it on their behalf. And indeed, for my part, I have reflected how profitably to Plato himself I clear away these charges, and what manner of handles he himself gives against himself out of these accusations, if anyone should wish to imitate him. For consider, by the gods: if, as they say of Protesilaus that he obtained leave to come among the living again from those below, or as one of the comic poets represented four of the leaders rising from the dead—among whom two of these are included—if in this way these four men of ours, concerning whom the present trial is, should obtain a resurrection, so as to be with Plato for one single day to discuss these matters; and then they were to speak, putting forward Pericles, or, if you like, Themistocles, who would stand for us upon the wing of the orators—and let no one reckon against me the harshness of the reply; for in the main there will be nothing of the sort, but we shall remit it so far as we can, and then one must suppose the words to be theirs and not mine. "He that scrapes, let him scrape back" even at the asses, the proverb surely grants; but Pericles the sons of Homer would liken rather to the lions than to the asses. So this much freedom of speech it will be permitted to grant him: as much as, if no one thinks it right to give judgement against Plato, would also let that man not be debarred from teaching from these same matters. And if anyone shall be vexed at these things on Plato's behalf, he will do the very opposite of what he wishes. For by the same things by which he will declare that Plato is being slandered, by these he will confirm how Plato slanders. But indeed, if he shall think it well, even for those reviled, to use the same handles, and

[213292] 229. these not to revile in return, but to clear their own case through that man's words, how will he bid us count it clever in Plato that he spoke ill first of things which no one compelled him to, and by which he supposed he was showing those men to be worse?

[213555] They will then say, as I believe, this—or rather, let me speak as in their own person: "We, Plato, though we have heard from you many slanderous things, will not requite you with the like, nor speak ill of you, but consider you a man among the foremost and the best of the Greeks, and we rejoice with the city, not with you alone, at your nature. Altogether, from the beginning we have made it our own windfall, whatever our city should gain. And the finest of all gains is the bearing of good men—among whom we too once thought we belonged, though you do not grant it. And since you liken us also to Mithaecus, who wrote up the Sicilian cookery, it is likely that you know these things better than we do. For we know nothing of such writings, since we did not frequently mix in Sicily. But just as you had no leisure for affairs of state because of your discourses in philosophy, so we, because of our discourses in statecraft, had no leisure to learn anything of those matters there. But it is not unlikely that you should fall in with such men and writings, even if not willingly but unwillingly—just as, no doubt, you got experience of many other things even willingly, having often been conveyed across the Sicilian sea. Come then, by the very table in Sicily—whether Mithaecus set it forth or anyone else whatever—what proof have you of our baseness? That, by Zeus, we did not make all the Athenians just. But did you make Dionysius any better—if you like, the son of Hermocrates, or, if you like, the son

[215068] 230. of Dionysius? For you consorted with both of them. And what benefit did they reap from you and your company? And yet you surely discoursed with them about justice and law and the constitution, and you praised to them also the equality found in geometry, and they were so fond of listening that they even sent for you, and you fell short in nothing of eagerness, that their cities might fare well through them. But you failed to notice that you yourself were caught in all the proverbs—carding wool into the fire, and boiling a stone, and sowing the rocks. For what did those men reap of your admonitions and discourses? What of divine or human matters did they manage better after that day on which they lent you their ears? What repentance for their former errors came upon them? What love of philosophizing, leaping over all else? What did they get better than the men within the city itself, or those outside it? Which of the people of Gela or Leontini, or the other Greeks in Sicily, obtained those good and just men through you and your discourses? And if none of the Greeks, to which of the barbarians—to whom of those in Sicily—did they show that they had become better? Very well. But of those dwelling in Sicily to none; yet of the barbarians or Greeks in Italy, to whom, tell me, did they conduct themselves more nobly than before? Toward what and toward what men did your statesmanship make them better? To which of the Carthaginians—if you cannot name the Greeks—or to which of the other barbarians in Libya did the tyrant display himself practising virtue, from the time he listened to Plato's teachings, whether I mean the elder or the younger? And indeed, if one must lay upon the counsellors the errors of those in power, why will men say you accuse us rather than yourself? Since it is possible to allege against you also the deeds of those men. But if you should say that these are nothing to you, by these same arguments you also acquit us, if the people of the Athenians did anything outside what we thought best. I think, then, that this will not suffice these men, but that they would now most gladly add a further point. Of what kind? This: 'Since, then, in both cases it is possible that not everything was done as the counsellor