WORK: Orationes 46  (slug: aelius-aristides-orationes-46-01d156)

CHAPTER: 01-orationes-46



[326788] 285. suffered this, but also the multitude of those who manage the affairs of the city, having here too built himself a road against Pericles, he tries to fasten the same charge on him too, concealing nothing, but thinking it right to convict him, as the saying goes, of knowing neither letters nor swimming. And yet, apart from these things not agreeing with those, which was better—if indeed he had to say the opposite things about the man—to say the harshest things to Phaedrus of Myrrhinus, who was nowise concerned, or to Alcibiades those gentler ones; or, having praised him to Phaedrus, to speak ill of him to the other? I think the former. For he wishes, I suppose, to convict both this man and that, and it cannot be said that he convicts Alcibiades but not Phaedrus. So that if for this reason he accused Pericles to the one, it was likely also to the other. But the difference is not small. For first, to the one he was slandering about a kinsman and a guardian; and yet, just as it was not likely that he should blame his father to him, even if he were the basest of citizens, so neither to abuse his uncle, even if he were privy to some such thing, was it opportune. For it was not the same for that man to be ill spoken of and for this man to hear arguments against him. Then the arguments were addressed to a man who would easily despise not only Pericles, but one such that what Aeschines says of him—that he would most gladly have found fault even with the twelve gods—so much pride was in him, and so much of thinking no one worth anything. Wherefore his Socrates too took a different course. But what does he say? "Knowing him to be jealous of Themistocles"—then follows the praise of Themistocles, rightly framed, I think, for two reasons: both of the truth, and of having the arguments opportune for the youth. And he does not speak ill of Themistocles in his presence, lest by hearing he should be still more corrupted; nor does he lay it up for him by way of consolation that not he alone dwells with ignorance, but that all are

[328841] 286. such who manage the affairs of the city—by no means; rather, he compels him to weep, setting his head upon his knees in dejection, as not being even near to Themistocles in preparation; and besides, he stretched the argument out in due measure. For he said somewhere in passing that not even for that man did such great knowledge suffice, but that it fell short—so that the slander was removed, but what was useful for exhortation was present from both sides: both from the praise and from saying that not even these things sufficed Themistocles.

[329394] So, although in other respects Aeschines falls short of Plato, this at least he managed somehow better. But that Plato is not the best of the Greeks—he would be the basest even of the barbarians who is unwilling to say it. He seems also to draw some advantage from his nature, as kings do from their power; for instance, even about the diction itself there are places where he will be found doing this, using a greater license of words, and concerning the very subjects too, as is the case in the dialogue we mentioned a little before. For Socrates is supposed by him, surely, to be going through the funeral oration, and he makes mention of those who died at Corinth and at Lechaeum and of the peace called that of Antalcidas. And yet Socrates died in the archonship of Laches, and Eubulides was the middle archon between the battle at Corinth and that at Lechaeum. And from Laches to Eubulides, Eubulides himself was the seventh archon, and from Eubulides again the eighth archon was Theodotus, in whose time the peace was made. In all, fourteen archons together from Laches to the peace. So that not only had Socrates seen none of these things, but he did not even know, surely, whether they would come to pass; nor would his divine sign have foretold to him about things so long after him. Another instance, then. For in the Symposium he brings together to the same place Aristophanes and Socrates and Agathon, still a youth, as

[330828] 287. he says. And he advances the times so far that Aristophanes, when he had ceased from his hiccups, speaking, recalls the proposed subject—and this man again after the Arcadians had been dispersed by the Lacedaemonians. But the Mantineans were dispersed by the Lacedaemonians when the peace had already been sworn. So that these things are still later than those. How then could either Aristophanes be saying these things, or Socrates hearing them, or Agathon still a youth about these times? And how could Alcibiades come reveling in upon them, and he too still young and fair, who had died before Socrates, having lived in all so many years? Unless the symposium was being held in the Elysian field. And what was this hiccup of Aristophanes? And where did you observe this? But he had, I suppose, to hiccup, that he might be mocked for gluttony. But if anyone should insist on Plato's opinion about everything, and should say that Socrates was alive when the funeral oration over those who died at Corinth and Lechaeum was spoken, and that he was drinking at Agathon's after the peace, and that Aristophanes hiccupped at the symposium, and that Alcibiades came reveling, and that Agathon and Alcibiades were youths at that time, and that all things were together—how will he not be talking nonsense in not examining further whether the man speaks somewhat by license, but, like a child, supposing it enough simply that Plato said it? Or if anyone again should believe that the Egyptian deity Theuth—for so he himself has given his name—came to be near Naucratis in Egypt, and should be unwilling to grant that Hermes is a word of the Greeks, and that from Naucratis to the city named after him, where all the Egyptians agree he came to be, the voyage up is of no few days? It is not, then, because Plato is by far the first of the Greeks that Naucratis and the city of Hermes are the same, nor again that Hermes had to be born near Naucratis,

[332777] 288. but not in his own city. Nor shall we say, I think, that the iambic line, "Wise are the tyrants by intercourse with the wise," is Euripides',

[332925] nor if anyone of the wise has so spoken; for it is from the Ajax of Sophocles, the Locrian Ajax. But these things spring from the license and habit of the dialogues. For by the fact that they are all in a fair way fabrications, and that one may weave through whatever persons one wishes, there is even in the arguments themselves something that does not very strictly preserve the truth. And at the same time, it seems to me, it draws in something of freedom and magnificence, and he is not altogether precise, but, as I said, yields to his nature. Then shall we accept these things just so, simply? We shall not seem, then, to know his meaning. Nor is any of Plato's writings Plato's, nor will be—whence?—but these are of a Socrates become young and fair, and then the man who wrote did not write . . . It remains, then, for us—even if he denies the name—not to be persuaded, if we are sensible, but to know his playful jests—for let there be said what he himself would have said about himself—such as in these very arguments, no doubt, that we may not speak of remote things: there is a thesis about gymnastics and medicine, as though the matter were easy and simple, that gymnastics is altogether better than medicine. And yet I myself have already heard one of the physicians say that gymnastics deals on the whole with athletes and is concerned with this, but medicine in sum presides over all, and the difference is great. For where it is not possible even for the athletes themselves to use their strength unless health is present, how is it possible that the art which provides this for all should be inferior to that which provides for the few that thing which can never be had apart from this? And altogether he did not concede that medicine amounts to so much as to look after the sick, but that it is twofold. For the physician must both preserve the health that is present and produce that which is not yet present—

[334855] 289. just as the trainer must both preserve the strength that is present and produce that which is not yet present. For it is not the part of one man to train those who are already athletes, and of another to prepare those who are to become so, but of one man and the same art. And if this is so, it is now easy to learn that gymnastics is second to medicine and comes altogether under it. For the very knowledge of for whom exercises are needful, and when, and how many, and of what kind for each individual—I mean of laymen—belongs now to the wisdom of the physician, and he is the one who sends to the trainer, if there is need. And the trainer, taking him over, will do the work of a servant, and will not contend with the physician, but will remain in the rank of the charioteer. For he too, taking over from the physician the man who is to be carried in a litter, supplies his service and exercises him in his own way. But whether it is better to be carried in a litter or not, the physician must already have considered this. And, by Zeus, the sailor, putting a man into his boat, will convey him along the shores or even on the open course, if he wishes, and will move him by rowing, leading him up and down, or even using the sails besides, and will sit like some absolute master doing what he wishes. But whether it is better for someone to sail at all, and whether this will make him healthier, this belonged to the art of medicine, not to that of seamanship. And indeed that such things too have already benefited many, and no less than the exercises in the wrestling-schools, we all in a manner know; but the charioteers do not on this account dispute with the physicians, nor do the sailors say that they themselves are marvelous guardians of health and exercise all who wish, while those others know nothing except how to destroy by shutting men up. And yet, if gymnastics is better than medicine, what prevents these too, on the same grounds, from being better than the physicians, since they too share somehow in gymnastics? Or against all these arts will this one thing be a strong point of medicine, and will it be possible to say next, with Aesop's dog, that if this did not exist, none of these others either would be

[337095] 290. useful, but the very fact that one uses some one of them—does it come back again to the conclusion that one must not have recourse to it? Just as, I think, with food too: the physician judges what is needful, but the cook prepares it; yet the cook will not dispute with the physician for the leadership, no more than with the master. Some such thing one might say gymnastics is in relation to medicine—second, and subordinate, and everything rather, one might say, than superior. But concerning these matters let it be left to the physicians, on their own behalf and on their own, to say what they know and what they wish.

[337724] He also claims that lawgiving is better than justice. And yet, is lawgiving better than justice, or a part of it? For I think all, one might say, would agree that both to lay down laws, and to cast votes, and to plead for what is just, and to counsel, and to vote by show of hands, and, by Zeus, to do what one must concerning the gods themselves, and all such things, justice refers to one common head. But he says that the lesser is prior and better than the greater, and the part than the whole. And if indeed he had said that piety is better than justice, it would have been possible to praise it, on the ground that, of the two highest parts of justice, the older and better is that which concerns the gods; but as it is, it is not so, but simply, and as if truly laying down a law, he pronounces an unexamined opinion. Then he sets down two as the tendings of the body, gymnastics and medicine, and two again as those of the soul, lawgiving and justice. But where, in the gods' name, is prudence itself for us? Where temperance? Where courage? For these surely are the four parts of virtue, as one may hear men forever harping—prudence, temperance, justice, courage—of which he sets down one as twofold, justice, taking lawgiving as a part of it, but all the rest he passed over. How then is this rightly or justly laid down, on his own argument about justice? And then, where is the

[339115] 291. likeness? For gymnastics and medicine are surely not virtues of the body, but sciences concerned with the use of the body, whereas justice is outright a part of the virtue concerning the soul. He does nothing else, then, but quibble over a name, as Socrates does with Polus as with a child. And this is not yet the finest of it, but that he says the sophistic art too is better than rhetoric, just as gymnastics than medicine and lawgiving than justice—keeping, I think, the same argument throughout, but stumbling in the same way about everything, like those who, having first erred in their diagrams—and I use Plato's own example—both at one time say, "It is the same, blessed sir, orator and sophist," and at another that the sophistic art is better than rhetoric and differs from it.

[339909] But, that I may not seem to be exact about everything, let us grant that he always says the same thing—that the sophistic art is better. Let us consider, then, to what this argument leads us. For here indeed the whole outrage, if one may say so, will appear plainly. Therefore the sophists are Protagoras and Hippias and Prodicus and those about them, but the orators again are Miltiades and Cimon and Pericles and Themistocles. And he appears again to set and reckon the sophists among those punished in Hades, "And lo, Tantalus I beheld," and "the next I marked," honouring them with the adornments from the Book of the Dead—Prodicus as being Tantalus, Hippias as the phantom of Heracles. And Protagoras again lives among these, having taken over a part of the house, and wishes to make display to them, and he too is marvelous in his prudence. And Socrates asks Apollodorus whether he would not be ashamed to be willing to present himself as a sophist to the Greeks. And why should one strive? For it is easy even for the chance comer to know this, how much Plato always laughs the sophists to scorn and of how much worth he holds them. Since, then, the sophistic art is better than rhetoric, and the sophists are those whom I named—these are

[341156] 292. like Tantalus—and to become one of them and to take their appellation is a clear disgrace, to what does the matter of rhetoric come, or what is left to Miltiades and Cimon and Pericles and Themistocles? Is it anything but truly, like a phantom, to be borne off as inferior—and who will endure these things? And yet, when the sophists differ in no way from those punished in Hades, and the orators are worse still than these, and these again no more venerable than cooks, and comedy and tragedy must not be taught at all, but be cast out of the good city by proclamation, and the dithyramb is a kind of flattery, and the choruses base, even if they sing paeans, and we anoint Homer and send him forth as not fit to associate with the young, but as being a sorcerer and a hunter after pleasure, and all are of no worth—are not the affairs of the Greeks gone? Or how do the affairs of the Greeks not descend into wretchedness? Or in what way will Socrates henceforth be better for us, if we strike out all in succession in this way, and make so great a banishment of the Greeks as we never hear has happened even in Lacedaemon? This is not the part of gentle and just men, as say the first of the Greeks, Homer and Plato. And these things I say not in assailing Plato. Whence?—may there be for me, as Aeschylus says, neither shield-bearer nor near neighbour, whoever is not a friend to this man nor honours him as is fitting; but as Lysias said that he was a common friend of the city, so too about us one must think that we are common friends to the Greeks, and now contend on behalf of the common rights of justice. For it is not the part of a lover of Athens to cherish the Academy alone of Attica, and to judge all the rest as if it were hostile and at war; nor must one, when one has rendered all the others ridiculous, then wait to admire Plato. For this would not be an honour to Plato, but rather a dishonour to the others, and almost to Plato himself. For to hold that, when another has been judged good,

[343173] 293. one is worth more by another's being judged inferior—how is it not such a thing? But just as Homer praises, saying, "Good was he who fled before, but far better he who pursued"; and again, "Of men far the best was Telamonian Ajax,

[343410] while Achilles wrought his wrath; for he was far the mightier." And elsewhere, "Mightiest were they and with the mightiest fought,

[343542] the beasts that haunt the mountains, and terribly did they destroy them"—so it is fitting that we too should stand toward our praises: to honour whom we will and whom it is just, but not to tear down those whom it is not right to, nor to think that enmity toward the one is a ground of credit toward the others, but to hold that we are now doing something like what we should if, when common friends were fighting at a banquet, one should think it right neither to take sides with either, nor even with those one held to be wronged, but should try to soothe those who began it and to reconcile them so far as possible. For if, abstaining from speaking any ill of Plato, we have rendered these men their due, we do no wrong, I think. For these things are both civic and human and pleasing to the gods through all time. For one must, O Plato, know how to praise tragedy and comedy too in their fitting parts, and the dithyramb and the choruses; nor would Apollo have appointed the setting up of choruses, if it were altogether base; nor—what is greater than this—would he have driven from his temple the man who slew Archilochus, who handled the most preeminent and most difficult kind of poetry, the iambics, declaring him unclean, and this though the slaughter befell in war. But nevertheless he honoured Archilochus and called him a servant of the Muses, not a servant of any men. Nor, then, did Archilochus, dwelling so on slanders, speak ill of the best and most renowned of the Greeks, but

[345037] 294. of Lycambes and Cheides and a certain seer, and the Pericles of his own time, not the great one, and such men as these he spoke ill of. Let us not, then, outdo that man, nor do the deed of wretched Timocreon, but let us know how to speak well of what comes to pass—and that, most of all, being able to—and let us hold the saying of Homer to be good: "For there shall not be one and the same honour, not in the least." But there might be something else of the kind. Wherefore one would justly share in the portion that falls to him. But if indeed we cannot praise, yet at least we may surely keep silent. But even if we dishonour all the rest, still it was not likely that one should be so contentious or so bitter toward rhetoric; and even if toward the other orators, yet not toward the best of the Greeks, nor toward those to whom the greatest is owed for the greatest, and not only from those of their own time or those born right after them, but from almost all who came later, one may say.

[346038] Then you accuse comedy, but you yourself make comedy of Hippias, Prodicus, Protagoras, Gorgias, Euthydemus, Dionysodorus, Agathon, Cinesias, all men. And that you make comedy of the others is the lesser matter; but who is it that makes comedy of Aristophanes himself? One in whom there is much comedy, one might say. And you revile tragedy, but again, praising one of your own writings—the Laws, I think—you have called it a tragedy, and you set it down as the best of tragedies, and you yourself agree that you are a poet of tragedies; speaking truly, as I would say. But if tragedy is something base and of base men, how shall we say that you compose tragedy? For what is wholly shameful can in no way, surely, be made noble. And you say that one must not imitate the base nor liken

[346824] 295. oneself to the worse; but you yourself do not altogether do this throughout, but you imitate sophists, you imitate informers, you imitate Thrasymachus who never once blushed, doorkeepers, children, a thousand sorts. But I think the Greek quality of your nature—easy and graceful and varied and divine—leading you to all these things makes you bear witness that there is a use of each of these too, having its proper occasion and a harmonious grace. And I see that even in the most august of your polities, having made some mention of this too, you think it right that the city should be Hellenic. For you say it must be so, as something distinct, evidently. Therefore these things are native to the Greeks. And yet how is it likely that about uncertain things you bid one inquire of the Pythia, but what the Pythia has already often and to many ordained, one should willingly transgress and be unwilling to reckon? What, then, has she ordained already often and to many? That those acting rightly by the law of their city act rightly. Let us not, then, disturb the customs concerning these things, especially as we too often use them and are in some way well thought of for these very things; since the dithyramb too one might think he blames, but he plainly so honours it as even to use it, and—what is finer than this—he himself agrees. For he says somewhere, speaking, that he utters not far from dithyrambs. And yet if the dithyramb is outright shameful and ignoble and illiberal, why do you compose dithyrambs, or, if not, imitate them, and that though ranked among those who compose in prose? Or what do you mean by uttering not far from dithyrambs? For you surely do not mean this—to utter not far from flatterers and servants—neither would you say this, nor shall we believe it against you, or everything would be turned utterly upside down. I hold, then, that Plato is the best poet of dithyrambs too. For how not? Yet I, for my part, have nothing to say why one must condemn the dithyrambs of Pindar such as Plato charged—

[348863] 296. not only considering this very thing, that the dithyrambs are surely more manly and more solid than for anyone to think them subject to him, but also because in his hymns too, going through the sufferings that befall men in all time, and the change, he says that Cadmus heard Apollo displaying the right music. So too Pindar is a lover of the right music. And to be a lover of it is to practise the right music. For he surely does not assign this to Apollo while himself pursuing another and abandoning this, and that though forever calling on Apollo and the Muses. Then you say that all these are attached to pleasure. Shall we say, then, that you speak less than is fitting, or more? For that they have a care for pleasure too is agreed. So that, as much as it was fitting to add, by so much have you, taking it away, spoken less than the case. But that you brought against them flattery from this—how have you not spoken beyond what is fitting? Or how is your argument not in this way again to have more than is fitting? Well then: you yourself, in the gods' name, have you never said or done anything for us with a view to pleasure? Have you not composed, have you not arranged a discourse, have you not given relief, have you not introduced anything, but quite simply discourse to us in the manner of the Scythians? I, for my part, have not met to this day with anything more pleasant than this, and I would say so even to the dithyramb-makers and the tragedians themselves, if any of them asked. And then you yourself, uttering like Nestor—if indeed one must think that he too uttered some such thing, for I think you would make even the Sirens yield to you—do you accuse the rest if they say anything for pleasure too? See that someone does not rather set you down as playing than as in earnest and contending, you who even in these very arguments, in which you tear apart these peoples, brought in so much of grace and pleasure as it was possible to bring in the most, considering the whole discourse as in an unpleasant and rough thing.

[350915] 297. That Plato thinks more highly than the rest I do not begrudge; but that he insults the others—if it is not bitter to say so—and that, were one his companion and counsellor, I should hold it no wrong to take this away. And I think Apollo too bade Socrates this, in bidding him make music—to take away the love of quarrel about words; since otherwise it is not easy to find what one might accuse him of. But this some have already charged; for instance, in the trial which he underwent, this seems most of all to have harmed him. And, that none of the sophists may take me up—well, Socrates was not harmed, since another too might have something to say against this—but he was the cause of harm to those of the jurors who voted against him, if indeed they did not judge what was just. But apart from these things, if he wholly desired death, first, what was death so great a matter to him? Then it was not fitting to make a defence at all in the beginning. But if he would not have escaped without more unpleasantness, this was what hindered—his having given offence to many by speaking ill. And Homer too seems long ago to prophesy and foretell these things, being, I think, the servant and assessor of Apollo. For what Odysseus says to Achilles in the Prayers, declaring it to be the exhortation of his father Peleus, this it is fitting to think Homer's appeal to all as to a common father: "to cease from mischief-working strife, that the more

[352366] the Argives may honour you, both young and old." For terrible is excessive strife, both to drive away existing goodwill and to draw on contests that did not exist. I, then, as long as he ran down to rhetoric and convicted the tyrants and went through the rest, followed as was likely, knowing indeed that none of these things is a conviction of rhetoric, but having the most just argument to set against it; yet I admired his daring and marvelled at his cleverness and his resourcefulness, and, if one must say it after his own manner, like

[352908] 298. a lion at play I formed some notion, and all but beheld the man among his arguments. And if this too must be added, even Meles was not unpleasant to me, nor Cinesias, but I enjoyed the ridicule and went along so far even as the mocking by name. By no means are these men my dearest. But when he came to Miltiades and Themistocles and those about them, and, bidding farewell to these, struck the same chord, and attached Thearion, and mingled all, both ridiculous and serious, for the sake of convicting these men, and shrank from nothing at all, but spoke ill without restraint—then at last something stood in my way, and it appeared like a kind of treachery to abandon these men. What do you say? Do you not carry through the argument on its own, but bring names into the midst for us, and, abandoning the matter, speak ill of this man and that? And the law of Solon does not even allow one to write a law against an individual, but do you compose a book against individuals? And Socrates and Pythagoras did not write down even the arguments by which they lived, but philosophized on their own; but do you make comedy of the very images of the Greeks in the midst? And the poets of comedy have already abstained from names and have been able to work out their drama without making comedy by name; but you have made the foremost of the Greeks into Aristophanes' sausage-seller, and that at random and for no further need of the argument. For when Callicles had already given up and was conceding to Socrates, what was the matter in still mentioning these men, when, even if Callicles had chanced to make some objection about them, . . . it is all, I think, a laughing matter. For who does not know that Socrates and Callicles and Gorgias and Polus are all of them Plato, turning the arguments to what seems good to him? But if indeed even

[354753] 299. in truth the argument had come from there, and Callicles had on purpose made mention of these men to convict Socrates, it was possible to take it thus and to say nothing slanderous; and it is worth attending to this too, if to anything. For the second part went somehow thus, as it seems to me: "Therefore if you say that these men too, dear Callicles, are certain flatterers and of those who harangue for pleasure, set down for me that these things were said against them too. For flattery is surely no better on account of Miltiades and Pericles and whomever you may name; for how is what is base by nature otherwise? So that the saying of Euripides comes about—'you say these things, not I'—that these men were no better than those of the present. But if they were of the other portion, and chose the best instead of pleasure, then these too, it seems, accuse those of whom we have discoursed of being base, and rhetoric is no better on their account—the rhetoric which up to this you have praised and which you commend to me—but is base even with these as judges; and you plainly use these as witnesses against me, men whose views appear the same as mine."

[355920] Thus, I think, it was possible to dissolve the argument, and there was no need of slanders. For the argument advanced no further outward, but stood upon the same points. For what does he say before coming to these men? "It suffices. For if this too is twofold, the one part of it would be flattery and base haranguing, the other noble"—speaking, surely, of rhetoric. And yet when this sufficed, it sufficed also to keep silent about these men. For nothing prevented rhetoric from being twofold, by conceding that these at least were good; rather, it agreed very well with that argument. For some were flatterers, and some not. For if rhetoric is not twofold, why did you divide it? But if it is such, what more is gained by convicting these? But indeed, when, having accused these too, he again praised another, he added nothing to the argument. So that Callicles could again have returned to the same holds, saying what? "It suffices. For if it is twofold, and you praise some and blame others, what has been gained for you, except that toward these you were otherwise

[356991] 300. unpleasantly disposed?" For come, in the gods' name, if Callicles had straightway at the beginning held out Aristides—either naming him alone or with those others—when Socrates asked him whether he could name any of the old men, how would he have received him, or what would the result for the argument have been? For if he would have spoken ill of him too, as of these, then so, it seems, has he spoken of each of these. So that the man he praised he would have spoken ill of, had it so fallen out. But if it was not possible to accuse him, what need was there of this contentiousness, "if you can name any of the old men"? For when it was not possible to convict all, what need to challenge against all? And indeed, if there were no harm to the argument in not convicting Aristides, neither was it under necessity to speak ill of these. If, then, he praised one of them and blamed another, what more would have accrued to him? For that old point remained—"it suffices" and "it is twofold." For Socrates surely did not foreknow that Callicles would mention anyone rather than him, and for this reason asked confidently; but it was possible both to name him alone and to mention him with the others, and so the whole compass would have been poured out. What then shall we say is the difference—whether he is praised mingled in with those who are ill spoken of, and Callicles bringing him into the midst from the start, or whether, after the accusation of those, this man is praised, and Socrates is the one who mentioned him? I, for my part, would say there is no difference, at least as regards the confusion of the argument. And indeed, if one had mentioned him alone, one could have spoken ill neither of him nor of these. So there is no necessity to speak ill of these. But I think it is some such thing, by which it is most plain that Plato was already eager to accuse these men, and to name Aristides first and alone, and foresaw the man from the start, and no

[358964] 301. Callicles present troubled him, nor hindered him from carrying through the argument as he wished. If, then, I think, he had straightway at the beginning mentioned Aristides, he would have had no starting-point for speaking against these, but would at once have destroyed these arguments, and the matter would have turned around to the opposite for him, so as to accomplish nothing further. But as it is, in order to accuse these, he reserved Aristides. Then, when he had gone through what he wished, that he might not seem altogether contentious, the man whom it was not possible to speak ill of at the beginning he praised among the last, as though it were now permitted, very much in the old-fashioned and artless way, as one might think. And the most solid point: for when he had gone through the accusation of those men, at the end again, playing the bold youth and adding that "the former arguments, it seems, were true, that we know no man become good in political things in this city," having said this and set his seal upon it, after many arguments still lying between he placed Aristides, praising him. So much more is it Socrates, and not Callicles, who is the one who spoke about him. Therefore neither was it of necessity for him to speak ill of these men, nor does he appear to have saved, by what one might call abundance, the point that none of the old men became good. But indeed, when he even convicted Callicles himself, against whom the arguments were directed, of being worth nothing in political things, asking all those questions that he asked—when these had been refuted, what need was there besides of an accusation of the old men? For the argument ended, surely, in the finest point and the one that most befitted: to show that the opponent and the one who urges toward statesmanship or service is base and does not know what he is talking about; and this very thing, surely, you yourself say suffices—for him to present the one to whom he addresses his arguments agreeing. That man, then, it seems, not only conceded to the argument, but was even forced by what belonged to him; so that the argument had a fitting conclusion, and it was not the same for Callicles to hear these things

[361181] 302. as for Pericles or Themistocles. Whence? But he was eager for this too, to set this man on a level with those. But it is not the same thing, my good sir, Iphicles and Heracles. And still greater, I think, is the gulf between Callicles and these men; so that it was likely to spare these at least. For if the arguments concerned the living, perhaps one might have said they were spoken for the sake of admonition; but to reproach the dead, what is the occasion? For where, even if he wished to convict the living, it was not likely to accuse the absent, nor to speak to certain others, but to address them themselves—surely to contend in this way utterly by default is unseasonable. For where it was fitting to respect even the kindred of those men for their sake, how was it not likely also to respect themselves?

[362001] Let us reflect too on the law of Solon, how gentle it is—not to speak ill of the dead, even if a man himself hear it from that man's own children. Therefore the very thing—one might say—of making, without having first heard from children or from any other of those connected with them, so great an effort to declare them base, is far removed from this law. And indeed this too is not likely: that he should shrink from abusing them before their children, but should so blame them before all, both descendants and citizens and strangers; and that he should respect the children of those who died in Sicily and propose decrees for them concerning gifts, but for those who had been the cause of the greatest things to the city and to the Greeks should not spare even their names; and if, when the people had set up images of them, he disturbed them, everyone would say it was a thing to be indignant at, but when he does away with what was worth more to them—their good reputation—what must one say? And if he were a painter and imitated them in their more shameful and ridiculous aspects, he would seem not to display his art well; but when in his arguments he expounds them at their basest, and corrupts the true images of their thought, and likens them to those who have nothing in common with them, how is it likely that one should be pleased? And if upon images or

[363369] 303. memorials he chiselled out the inscriptions upon them, or changed them, writing slanders in place of praises—that the people casts these men out for flattery and vice—one would say there was great outrage and dishonour; but having shut up such reproaches in so serious a work, and writing these in place of the praise that previously belonged to them, and handing it over for all to hear, does it not seem to someone that he has wrought exceedingly of his own music? And Themistocles set up a pillar against Arthmius, because he brought the gold from the Medes into the Peloponnese, but Plato has so made Themistocles and Miltiades and those whom he thought fit to list with them pilloried. And yet the pillar against that man was visible only to those dwelling near and to those who came in, but you have published the slanders against these to all men and everywhere of earth and sea. And of your own servants you never once branded any, but you have come to be as one who branded the most honoured of the Greeks and those who contended for the common freedom; and Gorgias you spared—and Socrates says somewhere, "I shrink from speaking for Gorgias' sake, lest he suppose I am making comedy of his art"—but Pericles, though dead, you did not spare, and that too; rather, to Gorgias you assign reverence on Callicles' account, but to Themistocles and the others you assign none, but make them all equal—or rather have spoken more evils of these than of him—and that knowing that every argument, once it is written down, rolls about, and whoever wishes handles it, alike one who understands and one who does not; and if anyone does not know how to hear rightly, there is danger of corruption; as one might perceive to be the case concerning these arguments too. For even if Plato most certainly used them on all just grounds—which one might say is far from being so—still it is necessary that from them men become bolder and rougher

[365308] 304. and more reckless, and such as readily to leap upon rulers and elders and whomever one ought to yield to. For well does the law of the Lacedaemonians stand, and profitably, that one should once for all give way to elders—not as though the elders were in every case better and more just, all of them, but for the sake of practice and that the order be not confounded. And in arguments too it is noble to spare those who are advancing in worth, so far as is fitting, in order that no facility creep in among the many, and no habit of insulting those whom it befits them to honour. For when the greatest and most august are easily ill spoken of, and this by those reputed wisest, a contempt for the law arises in the base, so that they are benefited not so much as they are harmed. And indeed you drive out Homer not as saying everything ill, surely, nor as erring in the whole, but as it being not safe for the young at least to hear some things, even if in some other way what is said be cleverly put; but we are far from driving you out, in that we would even seat you on the throne, if you will, but we except such of your arguments; for we shall not say of these either that we shall erase them—we are not so reckless.

[366535] And indeed neither was it likely that this escaped Plato, nor is anyone of the rest ignorant, surely, that the good repute and memory of brilliant and great men, apart from the honour to the present, holds a store also against later fortunes for cities, and some men have already, through this man or that of the old ones, found a certain leniency in their calamities—which seems to have befallen the Athenians themselves often. But he appears, so far as in him lies, to rob the city of this too. For if this stood in each man's soul, and all were persuaded of it—that not even Miltiades and Themistocles and Pericles and Cimon, the very flower of the

[367188] 305. Athenians, were any better than cooks or bakers, but that "I too possess in my household certain such by nature, who tend me in the same way as those tended the people of the Athenians, differing from them only so much, that they had many masters instead of one"—if they held this opinion against those men, and did not reckon that these were mere words and a certain present contentiousness and exaggeration, hardly would they respect any others, or think them worthy of any public honour for the sake of these men, to whom themselves no reverence at all was owed, as it follows from the argument. Is it not, then, painful that the Lacedaemonians felt shame before Miltiades and Themistocles, and, having mastered the city, spared it, remembering their statesmanship, but you do away with all these things by your arguments? And indeed, if you did not furnish them with walls or dockyards or allies, ashamed at the appearance of serving, but overlooked all as lesser than yourself, this at least, surely, it befitted you to leave to your fatherland—a resource for the time to come, and the appearance of being worthy of some leniency. Or, being present with them when they had met with misfortune somewhere and were about to be destroyed, if you had the power, you would not have shrunk from interceding, but by the temples and by the tombs and by the very soil you would have helped in whatever you could; and even if you had something to accuse them of—but in tearing down the reputation that would intercede for the most serviceable men, that very thing which you are eager about—what fitting work do you seem to do for statesmanship? Well then: apart from such use, toward the continual goodwill from all and toward being blended in spirit with the city, how much must the memory of these men be thought to contribute, preserved on the terms on which it was originally handed down? Therefore this at least befitted everyone who claims to be good—whether he live privately, I say, or in public—to provide as much goodwill as possible from all toward his fatherland; or, if not, at least not to corrupt the goodwill that exists,

[369326] 306. nor to destroy it. For not even in this is there any service ignoble or illiberal. And I wonder at Plato, if he would never willingly have thought fit to deprive these men of libations, yet thought it his own windfall to do away with the memory and the praise conceded to them by all. And indeed, if it is statesmanlike to make punishments commensurate, this dishonour to the men has itself passed beyond the commensurate. For I think that, if there is any perception for the dead, they would account it no such calamity to be deprived not only of customary rites but even of their very memorials, nor to have failed in the last extremities even to their descendants, so great a calamity as if the Greeks should condemn them of flattery; and that, having died and accomplished what they purposed, they should bear the reproaches of slavery—the very things they fled while living, and against which they undertook to say and do everything that they might not be liable to them—and that the one who persuades men of this should be Plato, the only one able worthily to adorn their virtues, and who has indeed adorned them. But indeed, if this follows by nature for good men—to pursue good repute—how would one not say they are wronged, if they thought they must run risk and suffer anything whatever for the nobler kind of argument, or, if not, partly for this too, but, when both their words and their deeds and besides their life had reached their end, they shall bear the opposite repute? And how could we more deprive them of the wage which alone the decent have from nature, and that while agreeing that it must be so for good men, both living and dead? For it was possible, O noble sir, both to exhort the young to be just and to render the elders their due. For even if we had nothing to praise them with, yet it was possible, surely, to pass by in silence, and you would not have been liable to a charge of negligence. But it is not the case that, because Plato so far surpasses the Greeks and

[371331] 307. justly thinks most highly of himself, and thought fit to accuse certain men by a kind of greatness and license of nature—at this one might most be indignant; but that certain men of utterly no worth, using this as a starting-point, have now made the business their practice, and dare even about Demosthenes—whom I would say came down to men as the very type of some eloquent Hermes—to slander whatever they chance upon. And yet who, counting himself among the living, could endure these men, who commit more solecisms than they utter, and look down on the rest as much as it befits them to be looked down upon, and examine others, but themselves never once thought fit to, and exalt virtue, but practise it not at all, but go about otherwise "phantoms of mortals outworn," Hesiod's drones, Archilochus's apes, having two shapes instead of three, no different from the tragic cow of the patched garments, august without, but within another might know what; not even by day temperate, as Demosthenes says, but for whom day and night are the same when they get the power; who say they are no worse than Zeus, but are so far worsted by an obol; and reproach the rest, not having condemned their deeds, but envying because they themselves cannot do these things. And if anyone, while they discourse about self-control, should stand right opposite holding morsels and twists of bread, they thrust out their tongue as Menelaus did his sword. For if they see Helen herself—Helen, do I say? Why, a serving-maid such as Menander made his Phrygian woman—they truly make the Satyrs of Sophocles look like child's play.

[372944] But indeed their faithlessness and greed

[372986] 308. one need not learn by entrusting them with a deposit, for they themselves take whatever they can; who have given to robbery the name of fellowship, to envy that of philosophy, to poverty that of despising money. Professing humanity, they have benefited no one ever, but insult those who deal with them. And the rest they do not even see when they meet them, but for the sake of the rich they set out into foreign parts, as the Phrygians for the sake of the olive-gathering, and at their approach they at once catch the scent, and taking them in hand lead them off, and promise to hand over virtue. And the rest, even when greeted, they would not greet again kindly, but the cooks and bakers of the rich and those in the other ranks they hail at once from afar, before they have been fairly and properly seen, as though for this they had risen from bed; and they roll about in the porches, spending more time with the doorkeepers than with the masters themselves, mending their flattery with shamelessness, possessing this one token of not consorting with men for favour—that they grind everyone down by clinging on with their unpleasantness, more readily seen asking for what does not belong to them than others demanding back what is their own. For these are the men who count shamelessness freedom, and being hateful frankness, and taking philanthropy. They have come to such a pitch of wisdom that they do not charge money, but know how to take what is worth money; and if anyone chances to send less, they abide by their resolve, but if the little bag appears to them more ample, Perseus has mastered the Gorgon. And the pretext is most clever: "for the children and the wife." O most unfortunate of households! And then you peddle for these reasons? Why then do you not allow your wife too to take from wherever she can, so as to be fed the more easily? And in a most novel manner they seem to me

[374894] 309. to define magnanimity—not by giving great things, but by not taking small ones now. For they show it not by bestowing great things, but by thinking it right to take great things. And already some, as I hear, have made even this a tenet: to accept what is given, but, while taking, to revile. These men alone it is fitting to set neither among flatterers nor among free men. For they deceive like flatterers, but insult like superiors, being liable to two extreme and most opposite evils, lowness and arrogance, like in their ways to the impious in Palestine. For with them too this is a token of impiety, that they do not acknowledge the higher powers; and these too in a certain way stand apart from the Greeks, or rather from all their betters—in other things more voiceless than their own shadow, but when they must speak ill of someone and slander, you would liken them not to the bronze of Dodona—for, no, by Zeus—but to the gnats that buzz in the dark; in helping to accomplish any needful thing of all the most useless, but at breaking into a house and throwing it into confusion and setting those within at odds with one another, and saying that they will manage everything, of all men the most formidable; who never once spoke or found or made any fruitful argument, did not adorn festal assemblies, did not honour the gods, did not counsel cities, did not console the grieving, did not reconcile those in faction, did not exhort the young, nor any others, took no thought for adornment in their words; but having sunk down into their holes, there they work their marvellous subtleties, drawing up arguments out of a shadow, reaping, as you said, O Sophocles, the asphodel-stalk, plaiting the rope of sand, unravelling I know not what web; for as much as they advance in wisdom, so much they take away again, thinking great things

[376740] 310. if they speak ill of rhetoric—just as if slaves too do not often curse their masters under their breath, and especially the whipping-stock among them. And already some Satyr on the stage cursed Heracles, and then ducked down when he approached. And reasonably do they seem to me to speak ill of all; for they have much advantage of the matter, who, even if they make mention of no man, say ill what they say; so that they give freely from what they have. And they now dare to make mention of the best among the Greeks, as though it were permitted them; from whom, if one should take away their lying and their malignity, he would have taken away, as it were, the sinews of their life. Then they have given themselves the fairest of names, philosophy, as though they had pre-empted a seat, and the rest must at once concede, or as though such things were judged by the changing of names and not by the facts—as if that Phrynondas had renamed himself Aeacus, so as straightway to seem a twin and superior to every charge. This is a license to wrongdoing—as if a thief should think that, having stolen what was in sight, he is Rhadamanthus, or Thersites should call himself Hyacinthus or Narcissus, or Lycaon Hector, or Coroebus Palamedes, or Margites Nestor, or Battus Stentor, the man who came to Delphi about his voice. And I myself have seen, even in psalm-singing, wicked servants adorning themselves with the names of the gods, from which they had only the profit of having their bodies torn, and they became, deservedly, all the more hateful to the gods. It did not suffice the Boscyptaechmus to change his name, but when he had well and fairly called himself Fortunate, he was still more grievously unfortunate. And these men, having veiled themselves in the fair name of philosophy, think through it to steal what is within. Then the fox

[378590] 311. crept in, the wily one, instead of the lion. But to begin with, they seem to me not even to know the very name of philosophy, how it stood among the Greeks and what it could mean, nor in general anything of these matters. Did not Herodotus call Solon a sophist, and Pythagoras again? Did not Androtion call the seven sages sophists—meaning the wise men—and again Socrates, this very famous man, a sophist? And again Isocrates called sophists those concerned with eristic and, as they would say of themselves, the dialecticians, but himself and the orators and those concerned with the political condition philosophers? And in the same way certain men name some of those associated with him. Does not Lysias call Plato a sophist, and again Aeschines? "Accusing him," one might say. But the others, accusing those others, have nevertheless given them this same appellation. And further, even if it were permitted to one accusing Plato to call him a sophist, what would one call these men? But I think that "sophist" was a fairly common name, and that philosophy could mean this—a kind of love of the beautiful and a pursuit concerning words, and not this present manner, but education in common. And Demosthenes and a thousand others testify to it. And not only in prose writers do these things stand so, but also in the poets. Indeed, also mocking those who practise base arts, they called even these to philosophize, in the same way as they brought the word "sophist" too to a baser meaning. Plato himself, then, who most laid hold of this designation and called this thing philosophy—both his own and Socrates' way of life, both deed and writing—has nevertheless in both senses portrayed their ways; for one might find him calling the lovers of the beautiful and lovers of learning fairly philosophers, near to the appellation of the many, and again somewhere, distinguishing these, he has privately called philosophers those concerned with the Ideas and despising bodies. So neither does he take the name from the others,

[380620] 312. but grants even to those to philosophize, while those to whom he privately rendered this title are not all who say they philosophize, but those now nearly of the school of Pythagoras and Plato; since the others one might call body-lovers, but not philosophers, in Plato's idiom. Since the sophist too he seems somehow always to revile, and Plato seems to me to be the one who most rose up against the name. And the cause of this is his despising both the many and those of his own time. But he appears in this way too to have used the appellation for all good repute. Him, at any rate, whom he holds to be wisest, a god, and with whom is all the truth, this one, surely, he has called the perfect sophist.

[381332] But I let the sophist be; but for the sake of which I digressed to these things—under neither of the appellations could philosophy become a name for these men: neither, as I said, according to the common usage of the Greeks—for it had not been defined that this is to philosophize, but it was a kind of education, in which these have no share at all, beginning from the very names—nor again according to Plato's, which he thinks fit to be preserved for certain men privately. For he did not give a share of the appellation to all who are of the outward show, but to those alone whom I named. But nevertheless, before they are even able to say anything about the name itself, they give themselves airs and say that they philosophize, and that they alone know both things present and things to come, and that all the arts are under them and refer to them; men whom one need not examine by name, but carry off in heaps on wagons, like the corpses of the Corcyraeans. For what use are these to the human race, whom one could not readily use even as scapegoats, in the comic poet's phrase? But nevertheless let us grant them this at least, and not begrudge it: for this one thing let them be useful to cities—having fed them, to cast them out. For one might say there is no fairer or purer riddance of troubles and evils for them than if they should be released from these beasts. But if the god had not attached to the wickedness of their nature and to their

[382788] 313. villainies a weakness and want of manliness, everything would have been uninhabitable through them, as Herodotus said about the snakes. But as it is, even an ibis would master them. And let no one think these things hold any slander against philosophy, nor are said with any unpleasantness, but rather that they are very much on behalf of philosophy and spoken against those who outrage her. And as an advocate of philosophy I now rise up and accuse these men, if indeed they must seem to be anything good. Let me recall too the bald smith who lived with the mistress. Plato did not, surely, make this man dishonouring philosophy, but as a most beautiful likeness for those who set themselves against her, and readily think themselves worthy of greater things than their measure. Since this too appears to me marvelous and divine in his philosophy—that it does not concede to all at random, which would be perilous, but that there is a selection of the men and their natures are examined. For I do not myself think that the Eleans dissolve or dishonour the Olympic festival because they do not readily admit all such contestants, but a preliminary judgement . . . it is not the same, but they seem to me even to magnify and adorn the institution more greatly by setting so great a fear before all, and by thinking fit that all proclamations among them should be made of those stripped from the start to be seen. So too we do not dishonour philosophy, but defend it, as was likely. For I think that Plato and Pythagoras themselves, rising up and taking such a one, would bid him sit far off, and it would be most nobly resolved by them on philosophy's behalf, and they would separate off those who come reveling against her, as those who separate off those who truly come reveling against it; and we too do not, surely, speak ill of all, nor have we, but of those whom it befits among the sceptre-bearers, and whoever may recognize what is said—neither

[384746] 314. whoever of them is the first to bring a charge, is it against him that the words are spoken. For philosophy is both an honour to me and was mine, as it would be to any other such man. And I think that I too consorted with the best and most perfect of those who philosophized in my own time, and that I am inferior in this to not many mortals, and they have been to me in the place of foster-parents. So that I would war rather with my own household than with the philosophers. But let this not be such a case; rather, philosophy has some grace for us; since I would say I rejoice in rhetoric too, if any man does . . . and I too perhaps have some share in the war. But not on this account do I think one must praise those who outrage it; and to begin with, I do not even call them orators. But by how much the more I admire and cherish even rhetoric itself, by so much the more am I vexed at those who, unworthy of it, lie against this very thing; and on behalf of rhetoric itself I would most gladly defend it, and would try, so far as I could, to show that they deserve to hear anything rather than this. But I do not hold this opinion toward Miltiades and Themistocles and Pericles and Cimon. For against you, O Plato, these men, now drawn round, must be let go and bidden farewell, if indeed they have any share in this—but I think they have none . . . these things are no small matter. But let us recognize ourselves, and not be thrown into confusion as in a battle by day, nor imitate even this one Hellenic vice—quarreling about the leadership—but, yielding the judgement to the god, let us present ourselves in our appointed place, and become toward our predecessors such as we would in turn wish those who come after to be toward us. For it is shameful, as Demosthenes said, that those whom not even one of their enemies and foes would deprive of their praises, these should, by us, because we are akin to them, not obtain the reverence and kindness that is their due.

[386730] 315. I, for my part, then, have both rendered Plato the honour that befits him and helped the men to their due, and have not been wanting. But if anyone has anything to say against these things, while keeping toward me the same fair speech as I have kept toward Plato, this man I judge a friend, both now and hereafter, not an enemy.