WORK: The Sexual Life of the Child  (slug: albert-moll-the-sexual-life-of-the-child-20c689)

CHAPTER: 09



[109625] It is a question of great importance, who, outside the school, is the person best fitted to undertake the sexual enlightenment; and I have repeatedly expressed my preference for the selection of the mother. But a mother who is unable to superintend the general education of her children, because she is compelled to spend most of her time away from home engaged in earning a livelihood, is not fitted to undertake the sexual enlightenment of her children; equally unfitted for this is the mother who leaves the education of her children in the hands of hired assistants, whilst herself occupied in attending public meetings, perhaps on behalf of the woman's movement, of the education of children, of the promotion of the sexual enlightenment, of rational dress, or the like, whilst her children at home are abandoned to moral corruption; and the same considerations apply to the mother whose nights are so much occupied in dancing and feasting, that the greater part of her days have to be spent in bed. Fortunately, however, there are many mothers who have very different conceptions of their duties to home and children. We find such mothers very often among the class of skilled artisans, but also among the cultured middle class, although among these latter the desire to ape the manners of the so-called upper classes is unfortunately far too general. I have seen cases in which the mother was still the confidant of her sons after they had entered the period of early manhood; and thus I have known a mother who in the case of a son of sixteen and even of eighteen years, was in a position to allay the grave anxiety awakened by the first occurrence of nocturnal emissions. But where the mother is not the confidant, some other person must take this place, as, for instance, a governess or a near relative. In the case of boys, the father is often the person best able to undertake the sexual enlightenment; or it may be a physician who enjoys the lad's confidence, and especially a family physician in the old and excellent sense of the term; in other cases it may be an elder brother, or an old family friend. Much good in such cases may be done by a friend, older, indeed, than the child who is to receive enlightenment; and yet not so much older as to make the child feel that a mutual understanding is hardly possible. In any case, next to the possession of a cultivated intelligence by the person who undertakes to effect the sexual enlightenment, the point of greatest importance is that this latter person should receive the full confidence of the child. Only when the child has such perfect trust, will it accept as true what it is told, and not suspect that, as has so often been the case, it is being put off with hypocritical phrases--for children recognise the hypocritical character of much of what they are told about sexual matters at an age far earlier than most elders are willing to believe. But another reason why the person who undertakes the enlightenment must be one who has the child's fullest confidence, is that in that case only can the child be expected to be absolutely straightforward. A very frequent mistake in dealing with children is to mistrust them needlessly. Let us suppose that a child has been discovered to masturbate, and that it is spoken to very earnestly in order to break it off the habit. I have known cases in which, although everything pointed to the fact that the child had abandoned its bad habit, yet, when it denied masturbating any longer, it was accused of lying. A child will naturally never give its confidence again to one who has once unjustly reproached it in this manner. On the other hand, a child is far more likely to acknowledge its faults to one in whom it has perfect confidence. The child's confidence can be gained only by an individual confidant. In the presence of such a confidant, a child loses all sense of false shame, and this is an indispensable precondition for effecting a really valuable enlightenment. Where no individual is forthcoming who fulfils the requirements just specified, it is usually better to dispense with the enlightenment; and above all, in this matter, a mechanical routine must be avoided.

[113822] I will now briefly report a case in which a younger brother made a confidant of his elder brother, and will show how unwise it would be to lay down any general rule as to who is the person best fitted to undertake the sexual enlightenment of a child.

[114074] CASE 18.--One day a student of medicine came to me to ask my advice about his younger brother, a lad of thirteen. This latter, an intelligent boy, was attending the upper third class of the higher school. The boy confessed to his brother that he masturbated to excess, and that he found that scenes of cruelty especially aroused sexual stimulation. I asked the student to bring his young brother to see me, and the latter made on me a very favourable impression, especially in the matter of his frankness. He spoke to me quite openly, and attended most carefully to all my advice. I explained to him truthfully that his future was endangered, not only by the masturbation, but also by the perverse ideas; I told him that the danger of a combination of masturbation with perverse ideas was especially serious; and I assured him that he was still at an age when it remained possible for him to develop into a normal man. Some years later, I saw the young man once more. His subsequent development had been excellent, and he was almost free from perverse sexual sensibility.

[115147] In this case it would have been utterly wrong to insist on the lad's being enlightened by his father, his mother, his guardian, or his schoolmaster. The particular circumstances of the life often point out the right way. In this instance, it was his older brother in whom the lad had complete confidence. Now, if the elder brother had consulted the parents in this difficulty, such a course would not merely have destroyed the younger's confidence in his elder brother's silence and discretion, but would have undermined the lad's confidence in general. Especially towards the parents, but also towards other relatives, a feeling of shame commonly exists--perhaps a mistaken feeling, but one with which we have to reckon. Often it is the parents' own fault, when they fail to gain the confidence of their children.

[115963] The question has also been mooted whether the sexual enlightenment of girls should not be entrusted to some companion of the same sex, more especially in cases in which the mother is for one reason or another unfitted for this task. This view is altogether erroneous. Sex has comparatively little to do with the question. For example, Heidenhain, whose practical experience in these matters is most extensive, has shown that the enlightenment of girls may be effected most admirably by a male physician endowed with the requisite qualities. The thing that matters is not the sex of the person who effects the enlightenment, but the manner in which the enlightenment is effected.

[116643] To sum up. _The sexual enlightenment of the child is advisable. The biological processes of sex in the vegetable and lower animal world may be taught in school as early as the second period of childhood. A warning against the dangers of venereal infection may be given at school to the senior pupils shortly before they leave, or at some similar suitable opportunity. But for effecting enlightenment regarding the processes of the individual sexual life, the school is unsuitable; this matter can best be undertaken by some private person, and above all by the mother. Choice of the time for this last phase of the sexual enlightenment must be guided, in part by the questions of the child, in part by the child's physical maturity, but more especially by the indications of psychosexual development._

[117446] Deliberately I avoid discussing the question as to the precise words and phrases with which the child's enlightenment is to be effected. Moreover, this question is subordinate to another, namely, to what extent instruction in natural science has prepared the way, in the child's mind, for such enlightenment. Both in Germany and in Austria, schemata have been drawn up for systematic preparation of this kind. Speaking generally, we may draw the following conclusions. We have to distinguish according to the age of the child with which we have to deal. Where we have to caution a young man about to leave one of the higher schools, about the dangers of venereal infection, our difficulties are inconsiderable. But where we have to do with a girl of eight, who has asked her mother where her baby brother has come from; or with a boy of fourteen, whom we wish to protect because he has taken to sexual malpractices with his school-fellows, our difficulties are great. In such cases, tact, which cannot always be taught, and a desire for the best interests of the child, must show us the right path. It is obvious that each case will require individual consideration and treatment. An intelligent mother, who constitutes half the child's world and more, can describe these matters to her child, can even describe the sexual act, whose existence most persons prefer to conceal from children. It is by no means impossible to present even this act to the child's mind in a tactful way. It can be done in a poetical manner, and yet without departing from the strict truth. The same considerations apply to the act of birth. In a book dealing with this subject, a mother is asked by her child where children come from, and she answers as follows: "You see, little one, how fruit grows upon a tree; in just the same way, little children grow within the body of the mother." Beyond question, there is no justification for the assumption that sexual enlightenment can be effected only in a repulsive manner; and this view depends merely upon the fact that through a perversion of moral ideas certain persons regard as unclean things which are essentially clean. Everything depends upon the person who effects the enlightenment, upon finding a suitable opportunity, and upon choosing words and phrases adapted to the child's intelligence. Success will often follow upon replying in an illuminating way to some chance question of the child. In other cases, there may be indications for making the enlightenment part of a festival occasion--a method described in an old book, in which the father effects the enlightenment of his children to the accompaniment of public prayers. The description shows a truly religious spirit, and a genuine love for children; it shows, further, that natural processes may be described truthfully to children without wounding in any way their sense of shame. There is no ground whatever for the belief that to a fairly advanced child a serious person cannot suitably describe all the natural processes of the human body, including sexual intercourse. The child to whom these things are described in a well-considered way, will receive no kind of injury to its moral sentiments; nor will such a description, once more, if it is couched in well-chosen words, provoke in the child any tendency to laughter. The secrecy with which the sexual life is surrounded, confused by many with the sentiment of shame, often gives rise to the belief that the child has the same feelings about the sexual life as the adult. But the unspoiled child has absolutely no feeling that the sexual life is in any way unclean; and for this very reason, no great difficulty arises in the sexual enlightenment of such an unspoiled child--an enlightenment which includes a description of the sexual act. I have myself on several occasions been asked by parents with a proper care for the future morality and health of their children, to undertake the necessary enlightenment of these latter. I am absolutely convinced that when the child has complete trust in the person who effects the enlightenment, the explanation of *everything* is fully possible. In this book, I have more than once proved that a description of sexual intercourse, appealing as it does rather to the intellectual side of the child's mind, need have no bad influence at all upon its emotional life; and in the further course of this chapter I shall have to speak of the matter once again. I may add here that there are books written specially for the purpose of assisting parents in the instruction of their children in these matters.

[122046] From what I have written it will have been obvious that I regard the sexual enlightenment of the child as very desirable; but it does not follow from this that I regard it as something that *must* be undertaken. Not everything is practicable which may seem desirable. We must not forget that there are dangers associated with the sexual enlightenment. It will not be right simply to ignore a reason often alleged against the desirability of sexual enlightenment, namely, that in this way it is possible that the child's thoughts will be turned in the sexual direction. This is unquestionably possible, and the danger can only be avoided by great adroitness. But when we remember that such adroitness is not found everywhere, we shall have to admit, however much we may wish that the sexual enlightenment of children should invariably be effected, that it will often be necessary to dispense with it, because the person suitable to undertake the enlightenment of a particular child is not forthcoming.

[123048] If the right person is not to be found, the idea of the sexual enlightenment must be abandoned. However unsympathetic and even dangerous the manner in which, as a rule, children mutually enlighten one another about sexual matters, even more serious dangers may attach to the enlightenment of a child by an adult unsuited for this difficult task. Inept enlightenment may entail extremely serious consequences, and more especially it is likely to bring about the particular evil results that we are most eager to avoid, that is to say, it may direct the attention of the child to its own sexual inclinations. We have also to take into account the fact that there are persons who cannot discuss sexual topics without themselves becoming sexually excited; and we cannot afford to ignore the danger that among those who undertake to effect the sexual enlightenment of children there may be persons who will gladly seize every opportunity of speaking to the children upon sexual matters, intoxicating themselves the while with their own sexual imaginings. The grave danger of allowing an unsuitable person to undertake the sexual enlightenment is obvious from the existence of those persons who teach that homosexual inclinations occurring in children indicate that they are permanently homosexual--a view which, as has been shown, is utterly erroneous. But let us suppose that one who holds such a doctrine is the person who has undertaken the sexual enlightenment of a child, and we can hardly doubt what the result will be, namely, to foster homosexuality. The greatest possible care must therefore be exercised in the selection of the person who is to undertake the sexual enlightenment.

[124735] Nor must we expect too much from the sexual enlightenment. Although to adults the way in which one schoolboy instructs another about matters of sex may appear to be extremely unpleasant, yet, as a matter of practical experience, this method has not had the disastrous results that some believe to attach to it. Unquestionably, the Germans and other civilised races have done much very important work, not only in the intellectual field, but also in that of ethics and in that of social life. Still we have learned that disadvantages are entailed by the rough-and-ready methods of sexual enlightenment hitherto commonly practised. Will these ill-effects disappear with the realisation of the modern efforts for a purposive and deliberate sexual enlightenment? Even though the modern ideas on the subject are to be preferred, it must not be supposed that their adoption will immediately result in the disappearance of all the unfavourable aspects of the sexual life. We shall not thereby transform children into little angels; and I doubt very much if the new methods of enlightenment will have much effect in diminishing the frequency of masturbation among children. I am led to this conviction by my experience that at the time when the process of sexual ripening begins, a child does not usually possess an adequate sense of the dangers of such malpractices. I am certainly afraid that nothing we can do will greatly lessen the prevalence of masturbation among children. I would rather venture to hope for a diminution in the prevalence of venereal diseases, as a result of the newer methods of sexual enlightenment; but even here there will be many cases in which passion will gain the victory over all possible prudential considerations. The same remarks apply also to pregnancy, and to the other consequences of the sexual life.

[126569] I am, moreover, sceptical _because the very persons to whom to-day we have to look to effect the sexual enlightenment of children, are themselves to a great extent also in need of enlightenment_; and in respect of many of the questions about which the child has to be enlightened, no general harmony of scientific opinion can as yet be said to obtain. Take, for example, the question whether masturbation during the period of sexual development is or is not a physiological act; or the question whether sexual abstinence can do any harm to the health. It is true that such differences in scientific opinion are not so extensive as gravely to affect the question of the sexual enlightenment of the child. In the matter of sexual abstinence, for example, the majority of physicians are to-day agreed upon the view that such abstinence in general does no harm; and that those, if any, whose health may be unfavourably influenced by sexual abstinence, constitute at most a very small minority. In my own view, the persons who may suffer from this cause are those affected with hyperaesthesia of the sexual impulse, and in whom the impulse is dominant to such a degree that it interferes with all their alternative activities. But it is certainly only an extremely small percentage of persons about whom, among medical men able to speak authoritatively, that there is any difference of opinion.

[127960] A more serious matter is the extent to which erroneous views about sexual questions still prevail among the populace. A father who starts with the false assumption that his son must inevitably have intercourse with so many prostitutes and must seduce so many girls--in a word, a father who regards sexual abstinence as unmanly, or as necessarily dangerous to health (and fathers who hold such opinions are no rarity)--such a father must himself be sexually enlightened before we give him the right to enlighten his son. Those also themselves greatly need enlightenment who, for instance, advise a young bridegroom who has always lived a chaste life to visit a prostitute before marriage, in order to prove his sexual potency. As if potency in intercourse with an experienced prostitute, skilled in all the tricks of her trade, were a proof that the bridegroom will prove sexually potent in intercourse with a chaste woman; or as if, on the other hand, the fact that a man proves impotent when he attempts intercourse with a prostitute whose embraces are repulsive to him, were in any sense whatever a proof that the same man will fail to effect intercourse with the woman he loves. Thus, many full-grown men are in need of enlightenment about this matter of sexual potency, and especially need information regarding the extent of the individual variations in this matter. We hear of young men who believe themselves to be ill, simply because they are not sexually potent to a degree that enables them to effect complete sexual intercourse several times in brief succession. Their error often depends upon the fact that they have been told by other young men that normal sexual potency enables a man to have repeated intercourse at intervals of a few minutes. As regards the informants, it may be that, having had such exceptional potency on one or two occasions, they really believe it to be a normal requisite of full manhood; more often, however, the mistake originates from a young man taking at its face value the boasting of one of his comrades who has lied freely about his own "virile potency." I have known similar things happen in the case of women, among whom boasting about the intensity of the voluptuous sensations experienced during sexual intercourse is by no means uncommon. There are a great many women in whom voluptuous sensations during intercourse are entirely lacking, and in whom even sexual desire may be in abeyance. Sometimes this is a matter of no great importance. But wives whose women-friends have boasted to such an extent of the intensity of the voluptuous sensations experienced in sexual intercourse, are apt to overestimate the importance of the lack of such voluptuous pleasure in their own experience of the sexual act; and it is therefore desirable that women should know the true facts of the case. We have further to remember that many of the disillusionments of marriage depend upon the fact that before marriage girls have allowed their imaginations to run riot concerning the intensity of enjoyment they will experience in sexual intercourse; all the greater is their disillusionment if they are among those who fail, after all, to experience sexual pleasure to the full.

[131176] In conclusion, I may refer to another instance of the way in which the importance of the sexual enlightenment is apt to be over-estimated, namely, as regards the effect of the enlightenment in furnishing protection against the venereal diseases. It is by this very error attaching to so much of what is said about the sexual enlightenment, that attention is readily diverted from a far more important field. Namely, in moral questions, a child is far more easily influenced by good example, than by any amount of good instruction by word of mouth. Example arouses a stimulus towards imitative action, whilst, in countless cases, the listener has no inclination whatever to do what he is merely told. This applies even to very little children, who adopt for themselves the practices they observe in their elders to a far greater extent than is commonly believed--although, as Bleuler has shown, in this imitativeness the conceptual life may play a comparatively small part. If, therefore, from the first the principal stress is laid on giving a good example, the subsequent sexual enlightenment would be rendered far easier, and its success to a large extent assured. In a pure household, it is not so necessary that a child should be fully enlightened; or rather, the child's enlightenment will be extremely easy. Conversely in the case of an impure household. Unless the greatest care is taken that children shall never be exposed to the contagion of bad example, how readily may it happen, that the child, after it has received the sexual enlightenment, and has been cautioned against any kind of obscene talk, is allowed to watch all sorts of improper acts and to listen to obscenities! Such mischances may occur, not only, as self-satisfied parents are apt to imagine, through the misconduct of servants or strangers, but often the members of the child's own family may be the persons at fault. Adults believe that a child hears nothing, when in reality it is paying careful attention to that which is not intended for childish ears, and to that which gives the lie to what the child has just been told in the form of the sexual enlightenment. And this may happen without the grown-up persons having made any indiscreet connected speeches in the child's presence. Various slight indications, gestures, a stolen laugh, &c., may be interpreted by the child after its own fashion, which is often one directly conflicting with the sense of the lesson previously given. How easily may it happen that a boy is taught that the seduction of a girl is a wicked thing, or a girl is told that she must never be so ignorant or so stupid as to become the victim of a seducer, and yet a few minutes later the child may overhear the instructor relating the heroic deeds of a cousin, who has seduced so and so many girls of the lower orders!

[134007] Thus the importance of the sexual enlightenment must on no account be over-estimated. Rather should the words of the old proverb always be kept in mind: "As the old birds sing, so will the young birds chirp." Those who guide their own conduct in accordance with this principle, will find the sexual enlightenment of their children an easy matter; but in other houses, the theoretical enlightenment may be effected as carefully as you please, and yet it will do but little good. It is evident that the earlier movement in favour of the sexual enlightenment, to which I referred on page 8, failed because the expectations of its advocates were pitched too high, and because the emotional life of the child was ignored--an error rightly pointed out by Thalhofer. I have no doubt that in a few decades the efforts of our own day on behalf of the sexual enlightenment, in so far as they lay the principal stress upon the theoretical enlightenment, and expect its enforcement to initiate the golden age, will arouse similar feelings of amusement to those with which we ourselves now contemplate the failures of the past.

[135123] The above is all I have to say about the psychical aids to the sexual enlightenment of the child, I turn now to consider the hygienic measures--those with a direct effect upon the body. Speaking generally, these are identical with those which are recommended for the treatment of masturbation.

[135418] When the child awakes in the morning, it should not be permitted to lie in bed too long, above all, not in a hot feather-bed. To send children to bed, or to keep them in bed all day, as a punishment, as a means of depriving them of liberty, is, from this point of view, a practice which must unreservedly be condemned. Very dangerous, from this outlook, is also the rule common in boarding-schools and similar places, in accordance with which the children are sent to bed at a fixed time, and are not in any circumstances allowed to leave their beds before a fixed time in the morning. Everything must be done strictly according to the rules. Now although we may admit that no such institution can be carried on without some discipline, yet it is necessary to point out that when there is a rule in a boarding-school that no inmate shall get out of bed before seven o'clock in the morning, children that are wide awake and lively at an earlier hour are exceedingly likely to take to masturbation. The dangers attendant upon prolonged lying in bed arises from a combination of mental and physical influences. Among the physical influences, the warmth of the bed is the most important; among the mental influences, we have to consider the lack of occupation, and the ease with which the genital organs are handled.

[136732] We have further to take steps to allay as far as possible all kinds of local irritation of the genital organs. Among these may be mentioned: phimosis and skin-eruptions of the genital region, which latter may lead to scratching, and so give rise to masturbation, even apart from the fact that the itching itself may favour the occurrence of voluptuous sensations. In addition, we have to think of the clothing. I pointed out before that breeches which pressed on the perineum sometimes led to the practice of masturbation. Hence this article of dress, breeches, knickerbockers, or trousers, should be made loose and comfortable. With regard to the proposal to do away with breeches altogether in the case of children, a recommendation which, as previously explained, has been made by several authorities, I cannot think that we should gain much thereby, for, to be effective, this measure would have to be continued up to a comparatively advanced age, and would thus involve a complete remodelling of our customary dress. It may be doubted however, if attention to this point will do much to prevent premature sexual stimulation; for the danger is not so great as has sometimes been suggested. Still, a careful mother will take care that the tailor does not cut her little boy's breeches so as to fit too closely: for though this may please the parental eye, it is undoubtedly dangerous to the child. I have previously referred to the dangers attendant upon climbing the pole in the gymnasium; and here will merely add that a number of teachers of gymnastics regard pole-climbing as an exercise of very great value, whilst they believe that the danger of sexual stimulation in climbing results from the use of too thin a pole, and does not occur in climbing a thick pole, or in climbing a rope. It has been suggested, in this connexion, that the rocking-horse should be eliminated from the list of permissible toys. Objections have also been made, on the ground of the possibility of improper sexual stimulation, against bicycling and horseback-riding; but I think these objections are largely unfounded, for, as far as bicycling is concerned, a well-shaped saddle cannot improperly stimulate the genital organs; and just as little does such stimulation occur in horseback exercise unless when the lower part of the trunk is pressed forward against the front peak of the saddle, as in halting, or in passing from a faster to a slower pace. Of course, for horseback exercise, the breeches must be properly cut, as otherwise they may exercise injurious pressure on the genital organs when the rider is in the saddle. Intestinal stimulation may also give rise to reflex excitation of the genital organs; for example, intestinal worms may initiate such reflex disturbance. Mantegazza lays especial stress upon stimulation of the rectum, being of opinion that stimulation of this region is very likely to lead to the development of paederastic inclinations. There are no grounds for such an assumption; but it is quite true that stimulation of the anal or gluteal region will very readily irradiate to the sphere of the genitals. For all these reasons, constipation, and more especially the accumulation of large scybalous masses in the rectum, are above all to be avoided.

[140002] In cases of obstinate inclination to masturbate, all kinds of local measures have been recommended to prevent manipulation and artificial stimulation of the penis or the vulva. But speaking generally, no great reliance can be placed in any of these local measures. Moreover, casual local stimulation, especially towards the end of the second period of childhood, has no very profound etiological significance. The chief stimuli giving rise to reflex excitement of the genital organs are of an organic nature, and are therefore but little influenced by external measures. Besides, the fact that among races who never wear breeches, the boys masturbate freely, and perhaps even more freely than do boys in Europe, proves that such external stimuli as the pressure exercised by breeches on the genital organs play no decisive part in the causation of masturbation.

[140865] I purposely refrain from further reference here to such measures as a methodical "hardening" by hydrotherapeutic procedures, and the like. In special text-books, whether upon masturbation, or upon hydrotherapeutics, ample information will be found about these matters.

[141135] The suggestion has also been made that from the sexual outlook the diet of children is a matter worthy of the most earnest attention. Nothing should be given to the child which may exert a sexually stimulating effect; especially we must avoid giving heavy foods late in the evening. More detailed directions are also given as to the use of particular kinds of food, some of which may be consecrated by tradition, and yet seem to have but small reasonable foundation. To this category belong the prohibition or limitation of flesh-foods, and the prohibition of asparagus, celery, and other articles of diet. There is no proof that such things have a stimulating influence upon the sexual impulse, either in children or in adults. We might more readily incline to believe that certain spices may have such an influence; but even as regards these, no great anxiety need be felt. As regards alcohol, many maintain it has an exciting influence upon the sexual life, and thus gives rise to all kinds of excesses. This is true of a good many cases, but the rule is by no means so general as is commonly assumed. I recall that in my own student days we often classified the students into two groups, the alcoholic and the sexual; those of the former group spent their money upon alcohol, those of the latter group upon women. My own experience of these days certainly leads me to dispute the assertion that those addicted to alcohol are generally more inclined than others to indiscriminate sexual intercourse. But this reservation is necessary, that at that time actual abstainers were almost unknown among the students, and we classified in the alcoholic group those who consumed very large quantities of alcohol; whilst the members of the sexual group certainly also consumed alcohol, though not very much. Beyond question, the common belief that there is an association between the free use of alcohol and sexual excesses is one which lacks foundation. This view is to too great an extent based upon criminal statistics, and upon the records of the perversions to which the sexual perverts among alcoholics have been inclined. But think of the countless normal persons in whom the enjoyment of alcohol induces no tendency to sexual excesses; and, on the other hand, abstainers from alcohol have been personally known to me whom no one could venture to call moderate in their sexual relations. But although I make all these reservations with regard to the effects of the use of alcohol by adults, I am in full accord with the view that the use of alcohol should be prohibited to children. Alcohol cannot do any good to children, and the possibility that in individual instances it may stimulate the sexual imagination, is one which cannot be denied. But this fact does not justify us in advising against the moderate use of alcohol by adults.

[143974] Passing to consider the general mode of life, we certainly agree with Hufeland, who, in his *Makrobiotik*, recommends vigorous bodily activity. He contends that children who go to bed at night healthily tired out, will not be likely to think of masturbation. In the present age of sports and games it will not be found difficult to fulfil this indication; and we see as a matter of fact that a great deal of trouble is taken to give children every opportunity of keeping in active movement. Even in our large towns, in which, owing to the lack of a sufficiency of open spaces, great difficulties have arisen in this respect, much has of late been done to improve matters. For many years past in England special efforts have been made to provide such playgrounds for children and adults.

[144762] I take this opportunity of drawing attention to a method recommended by Fere for the cure of masturbation, which I have myself found of good use in several cases, but which appears to be almost entirely unknown. It is that the child addicted to masturbation during the night hours should be watched by a trustworthy person; every time the child puts its hand to its genital organs, or endeavours to stimulate these organs mechanically in some other way, the attendant must immediately intervene, and draw the hands from beneath the bed-clothing. This plan may be adopted whether the child masturbates while asleep or while awake. But good can be expected from the method above all in those cases in which the child masturbates during sleep, and in which it commonly wakes up directly it is interfered with. In most cases the children treated in this way soon give up the practice of masturbation, even though the evil is of long standing. But it will be advisable to continue to supervise the child for some time after a cure has apparently been effected, lest what may have become a nervous automatism should be resumed after a brief intermission. The chief difficulty in the practical application of this method lies in the choice of a trustworthy person to watch the child. As a rule, the mother will be the most suitable, but now and again we shall find a hired nurse to whom this extremely difficult task may safely be entrusted. In a number of cases with which I have had to deal, I have recommended the mother to undertake the duty herself, because she seemed to me the most trustworthy person available. But it is a very regrettable fact that many mothers are altogether unwilling to make the necessary sacrifice for their child's good; and most of them are quite ready to believe that some woman whom they can hire for a few shillings a night will perform the duty which they themselves as mothers have renounced. Such lack of proper feeling is especially common among those who belong to what are termed the upper classes of society--to the aristocracy whether of birth or of wealth--whereas among the middle classes I have found mothers far more ready to make the necessary sacrifices.

[146960] In sexual education, the sexual perversions must receive especial attention. I must first of all refer again to two matters, of which some account has previously been given: the influencing of congenital inborn tendencies; and the undifferentiated sexual impulse. As regards the former, we have to take the following data into consideration. The fact that the indications lead us to believe that a particular sexual perversion is inborn, need not induce us to think there is no hope of counteracting this perversion by well-planned educational influences. I have already written at considerable length about the undifferentiated sexual impulse, and have shown that perverse manifestations during the period of the undifferentiated sexual impulse do not prove that a permanent perversion has developed. But everything possible should be done to guard against the further development of any such perverse mode of sexual sensibility, including sexual qualities in the wider sense of the term. We know, for example, that many homosexual men have a tendency to dress in girls' clothing, and many homosexual women to go about in men's clothing, and, in both cases, to adopt the inclinations and occupations of the opposite sex. During the period of the undifferentiated sexual impulse, we must not attach too much importance to the appearance of inclinations of this kind; but it would be equally erroneous to ignore them altogether. Boys who adopt a girlish behaviour, should not be encouraged in doing so by treating the matter as a joke. If a boy frequently dresses up as a girl, or a girl as a boy, and if we observe between two boys, or between two girls, an unduly intimate friendship at an age which corresponds to the period of the undifferentiated sexual impulse, it will be as well to modify the children's education accordingly. A girl with such inclinations should, for example, be thrown as much as possible into the society of lads of an appropriate age. In the case of those who are still quite young, there is no doubt that by the proper measures we can in part check the development of perverse manifestations, and in part completely repress them; notwithstanding the fact that interested agitators, whose principal aim is to secure the repeal of Section 175 of the German Imperial Criminal Code, maintain the contrary, and assert that homosexual tendencies appearing in the child necessarily indicate the future development of permanent homosexuality. Parents, tutors, schoolmasters, and physicians, must not allow themselves to be led astray by these agitators, who falsify the data of science. In the interest of truth, in the interest of the children endangered by these perversions, and in the interest of civilisation, these misstatements must be contradicted.

[149739] The chief danger associated with the appearance of sexual perversions lies in the fact that the child thus affected, whether boy or girl, endeavours again and ever again to revive these pleasurably-toned sensations; and above all in the fact that as soon as the genital organs are sufficiently mature, the boy or girl obtains sexual gratification by masturbating simultaneously with the imaginative contemplation of perverse ideas. Such perverse psychical onanism, accompanied or unaccompanied by physical masturbatory acts, is eminently adapted to favour the development of the perversion. Obviously, the actual performance of the corresponding perverse sexual act will be just as dangerous as is perversely associated masturbation. Thus, a boy who is homosexually inclined may masturbate while allowing his imagination to run riot upon homosexual ideas; or he may take to homosexual acts with one or more other male persons. Every sort of gratification that is associated with perverse images, is dangerous; and no less dangerous is the spontaneous cultivation of such perverse sexual images.

[150835] A very real and serious danger to children is to be found in my opinion in the risk of the progressive cultivation of homosexuality, if they become victims of a paedophile. The adult homosexual will sometimes conceal a perverse inclination directed towards children under the cloak of friendship or of an educational interest. I have previously referred to the danger that the child, at a time of life when its own sexual impulse is still undifferentiated, may sometimes reciprocate such a feeling. When I recall the light-heartedness with which homosexual males have acknowledged to me their experiences of sexual intercourse with apprentice-boys, and with pupils attending the higher forms of our secondary schools, and when I think of the readiness with which homosexual women seek opportunities of sexual intercourse with immature or partially mature girls, it seems to me that there are good grounds for the utterance of an urgent warning. My experiences in this department further lead me to believe that if Section 175 of the German Imperial Criminal Code is to be repealed, a further alteration in the Code will also be indispensable, namely, that the Age of Protection (*Schutzalter*--equivalent to the *Age of Consent* in the English Criminal Law Amendment Act) should be raised to the completion of the eighteenth year, and that the protection should apply, not merely to the actions now specified in Section 175 as "unnatural vice," but to all acts of sexual impropriety in the widest sense of the term. Recently this proposal has been approved by a resolution of the Reichstag.

[152427] There are certain additional points about which it is unnecessary to write here, for the reason that these have all been considered in some appropriate connexion earlier in this book. For example, I have insisted upon the importance of anyone who possesses children's confidence taking steps for the removal of corrupted children from the environment of uncorrupted ones.

[152800] Where we have reason to believe, in the case of a particular child, that a perverse mode of sexual sensibility is developing, we shall occasionally find it preferable rather to attempt to hinder the growth of the perversion, than to try to check the general manifestations of the sexual impulse. Thus, in the case of a boy of fourteen, who is continually affected with homosexual imaginings, we shall find it far more difficult to repress sexual manifestations altogether, than to divert the homosexual sensibility into heterosexual channels. If a boy affected in this way be thrown much into the society of girls, or conversely, a girl into the society of boys (at dances, games of lawn-tennis, &c.), the subsequent effect is likely to be good, because the sexual pervert, even if his perverse tendency be congenital, can nevertheless be educated out of his perversion. It should hardly be necessary to state expressly, that when I speak of finding for the homosexual associates of the opposite sex, I am not thinking of suggesting intimate sexual intercourse. Apart from moral considerations, we could not, in the cases under consideration, expect any benefit to accrue on medical grounds; my reference was to a purely platonic association.

[154044] No one need suggest that all these recommendations are superfluous, for the reason that, according to my own previous account of the matter, the undifferentiated condition of the sexual impulse is spontaneously replaced by the normal heterosexual impulse. For, first of all, the signs that give rise to anxiety may not be manifestations of the undifferentiated sexual impulse, but may be the first manifestations of a developing congenital perversion; and, secondly, it is by no means improbable that, even in the entire absence of any congenital tendency to sexual perversion, unfavourable external conditions may lead to the further development of the perverse manifestations of the undifferentiated period. I may refer in this connexion to what was said upon p. 312 *et seq.*

[154824] It is necessary to refer at length to one additional educational method which plays a very important part in sexual development, namely, punishment. The sexual perversions known by the names of sadism and masochism have of late attracted much attention from students of the sexual life. In sadism, sexual excitement occurs in association with the infliction of ill-treatment, humiliation, or pain upon others; in masochism the sexual excitement results from the experience of such ill-treatment, humiliation, or pain by the masochist in person. But in sadism, it is not essential that the sadist should himself play the active part; very often, the maltreatment by a second person of a third suffices to cause sexual excitement in the sadist who looks on. Masochistic and sadistic modes of sensibility are frequently associated in the same individual. As far as the relationship of these perversions to punishment is concerned, we learn from many adult masochists and sadists that their first experience of sexual excitement occurred when as children they received a whipping, or saw another child whipped--at school, for instance. The oft-quoted case of Rousseau has previously been mentioned in this work. It is thus evident that the subject of the punishment of children needs to be considered, not merely from the general educational point of view, but also from the special outlook of sexual education. The principal question is whether as a result of corporal punishment, either personally experienced or witnessed, an enduring sexual perversion may be induced in a child; and this problem must be carefully distinguished from another problem, which, however, is also of very great importance, namely, that of the sexual excitement which may be experienced by the person who inflicts the punishment. The significance of the materials available to guide us to a conclusion upon these questions, is not, however, perfectly clear in all cases. I may refer to what was said upon p. 130 *et seq.*; and will here merely add that the question whether the infliction of corporal punishment really originates a perversion in the sufferer, or whether it merely awakens to activity a pre-existent tendency, and one which, in the absence of this particular exciting cause, would almost certainly have been awakened by some other and unavoidable cause, some influence acting from without--this is a question to which conflicting answers have been given.

[157272] But corporal punishment entails other dangers, in addition to the risk of the origination or the awakening of a sexual perversion. Certain children, having experienced sexual stimulation as a result of such punishment, will endeavour to secure its repetition. I have known cases in which sexual perverts have deliberately misconducted themselves in school, in order to be punished, and thus to enjoy voluptuous sensations. Finally, there is a third danger to be taken into account, and this is a danger of whose reality I have been convinced by the direct confessions of schoolmasters and schoolmistresses, that they have struck their pupils for the purpose of thereby enjoying sexual stimulation. Even if no such admissions had ever been made to me, I should have regarded it as by no means improbable that such incidents should from time to time occur. Let no reader draw the inference that whenever a master chastises a naughty boy, he acts always under the influence of a sadistic inclination; I do not even consider that sadistic inclinations are a frequent cause of the infliction of corporal chastisement. The danger of such sweeping generalisations is obvious, especially in view of the fact that to-day many children, even, know what sadism is. Hence a schoolboy who has been punished might readily attribute sadistic motives to his master; and might even make a definite accusation of this kind.

[158679] When we come to ask what practical conclusions may be drawn from our recognition of the relationships between corporal punishment and sexual perversions, the first point that occurs to our minds is to consider whether the corporal punishments which may possibly give rise to such perverse stimulations are in fact absolutely indispensable. Although in this matter I find myself in opposition to a great many physicians and to not a few educationalists, I remain of the opinion that we cannot propose to do away altogether with corporal punishments in our schools; at any rate, such punishment remains, I consider, essential, so long as certain other reforms are still wanting. Among the reforms which are indispensable preliminaries to the complete abolition of corporal punishment, is one giving a greater power to expel insolent and undisciplined boys. Not until such a power is granted can corporal punishments be abolished from our schools. For a flogging is oftentimes the only punishment of which a rough and ill-conditioned boy is afraid. Moreover, and altogether apart from this consideration, the discipline of our schools is to-day endangered in various ways: for instance, by public disquisitions about overwork in schools; by the conduct of many parents, who prejudice their children against the schools in a most indiscreet manner; and by attacks in the newspapers on the schoolmasters--attacks which are often unfair and inconsiderate. Further, the recent widely advertised public pronouncements against the right of the schoolmaster to inflict corporal punishment, are hardly calculated to strengthen the discipline of our schools, or to assist the masters in the performance of what must be at best extremely difficult duties. So long, therefore, as we lack the safeguard to discipline that would be provided by extensive powers of expelling undesirables, I consider that corporal punishment is essential to the discipline of our schools.

[160635] Unquestionably it would be a good thing if we could entirely dispense with the use of corporal punishments, or at least dispense with them in all cases in which there might be any possibility of their doing harm, as by giving rise to sexual stimulation. But unfortunately we have no means of ascertaining beforehand what are the cases in which corporal punishment is likely to do harm. There is no possibility of withholding the right to inflict corporal punishment from those masters in especial who might use it to gratify their own sexual passions--if only for the reason that we have no means of finding out who these persons are. For it is not the masters with free views about sexual questions who are especially open to suspicion from the point of view we are now considering; nor is it the masters who are morally defective or irreligious. Indeed, I am acquainted with some extremely pious schoolmasters who, according to their own admissions to me, have experienced sexual excitement when chastising children; and some of these have in other respects had admirable characters. Cases recorded, not merely in erotic literature, but also in historical literature, show that religion affords no safeguard against such temptations; we learn, for instance, that in the cloister, monks and nuns have utilised their right to inflict punishment in order to procure sexual excitement. For these reasons, it is inadmissible to infer, because a schoolmaster is a religious man, that therefore he is the one to whom the right to inflict corporal punishment may safely be entrusted.

[162214] The danger of an excessive use of powers of administering corporal punishment, and more especially the danger of awakening the sexuality of children prematurely and with perverse associations, may be minimised by the proper treatment of schoolmasters. We must not treat our schoolmasters in such a way that behind them they always feel the presence of the inspector, compelling them to force the pupils through the prescribed, but excessive tasks. Nor must the schoolmaster's own work be excessive, for nervous overstrain will very readily lead to outbreaks of violence. It seems also desirable that the right of administering corporal punishment should not be entrusted to masters who are still quite young, for a certain experience is needed to guide them to a reasonable moderation. What I have said of schoolmasters applies, *mutatis mutandis*, to schoolmistresses and governesses. There are many reasons for the belief that the danger that the right to inflict corporal punishment may be utilised to procure erotic excitement for the person exercising that right, is considerably greater in women than it is in men. Even if we take no notice of erotic literature, in which sadism in women manifested by the mishandling of children is so frequent a *motif*, we shall find quite a number of experiences of actual life which compel us to admit the frequency of such perverse sensibilities in women. Among various records bearing upon this matter, I may remind readers of those of the upper class women of ancient Rome, and of the horrible punishments they inflicted upon their female slaves; and also of American women of the slave-owning class, in the South before the war, who sometimes flogged young male slaves in the most terrible way.

[163958] Whether this matter is regarded as one of great or of small importance, it is as well to inquire whether it is not possible that the necessary disciplinary punishment should be inflicted in such a way as to reduce to a minimum any dangers from the sexual point of view. Now, we learn from experience, that when a perversion is traced back to its origination in a chastisement endured during childhood, this chastisement was as a rule the customary whipping of the buttocks. Far less frequently, and indeed hardly ever, are we told that any other form of punishment has initiated a sexual perversion. This may, of course, depend merely upon the fact that other modes of punishment are far less common. But there are many reasons for supposing that stimulation of the buttock is especially apt to induce sexual excitement. It is possible, also, that another factor is in operation here, namely, the fact that the child undergoing punishment is commonly placed across the elder's knees in such a way that *pressure upon the child's genital organs* is almost unavoidable. Moreover, when we bear in mind the fact that other methods of chastisement may involve dangers to health (boxing the ears, for instance, may threaten the integrity of the sense of hearing), the question which is the best method of corporal punishment becomes a very serious one. I have myself elsewhere expressed the opinion that as far as the possible effects on health are concerned, and especially from the point of view of sexual hygiene, blows upon the palm of the hand perhaps constitute the least dangerous form of corporal punishment. But I by no means suppose that even here danger is altogether excluded, or that no sexual stimulation can possibly ensue from such chastisement. For the local physical stimulation is not the only matter we have to consider in connexion with a whipping upon the buttocks. In quite a number of cases in which we are told that some experience during childhood has been the initiating cause of subsequent masochism or sadism, there has been no question of purely physical causation, as by a whipping upon the buttocks. I may recall the case in which sexual perversion appeared to have developed out of witnessing the slaughter of animals, so that the only stimulus acting upon this child belonged to the psychical sphere. The cases, also, in which a child refers the origin of his perversion to having looked on at a whipping (in school, for instance) show that such perversions are not only aroused by mechanical stimuli, but may depend also upon psychological factors. For these reasons I consider that we are not justified in assuming, if whipping upon the buttocks were altogether done away with, and if blows upon the palm of the hand became the only permissible form of corporal punishment, that permanent sexual perversions would then become impossible. With further reference to what I have said above about discipline in schools, I may add that the kernel of the problem is this: is the probability that corporal punishment will lead to permanent sexual perversion, or will induce sexual excitement, sufficiently great, to render it necessary that corporal punishment should be completely abolished from our schools, so long as our schoolmasters possess no other adequate means of making certain of their pupils observe the discipline of the school? It is unconditionally necessary that the discipline of our schools should be maintained; and those who are unreservedly opposed to corporal punishment in all its forms should make it their business to see that some other adequate means are provided for the maintenance of school-discipline. However strongly we may feel that it is essential that there should be no abuse by schoolmasters of their right to administer corporal punishment, none the less, even in this "Century of the Child," we need safeguards also against the abuse of sentimentality.

[167876] In this chapter I have attempted to deal with a few only of the problems of sexual education. To discuss the subject exhaustively would have been impossible within the limits of this book; nor have I endeavoured to take into consideration the enormous mass of literature relating to the modern movement in favour of the sexual enlightenment. I have made no reference to the fact that it has recently been recommended that every girl should spend a year of service [*Dienstjahr*--analogous to the term of military service obligatory on all males in Germany] in hospitals, asylums, &c., whereby she would gain enlightenment concerning many things which will be of value to her in her subsequent married life. All such proposals are so much matters of detail, that I have thought it inadvisable to discuss them here.

[168691] The most important requirement of all is certainly a good educator--a word used here in the widest possible signification. The best of all educators for the child should be its own mother; although we may agree with the assertion recently made by Eschle and others, that the father has important duties to fulfil as instructor, even during the child's first year of life. Nevertheless, the father, even if his professional training gives him especial skill in these directions, is not really likely to do very much in the educational way for his infant offspring. It is to the mother, above all, that the care of infants and young children is of necessity entrusted. We have, however, to remember that a large proportion of mothers, especially those belonging to the ranks of the proletariat, take part in the work of breadwinning for the family, and are thus prevented from giving as much attention to their children as might be wished. But in the families of the well-to-do there is often no question of the mother herself playing the principal part in the education of her children, since it is customary for her to depute so many of her maternal duties to hired substitutes. It has recently been maintained that it is to the Woman's Movement that we owe the fact that the question of the sexual enlightenment has now become a live one; but this is certainly an overstatement, though it is not to be denied that women have had some influence in this direction. But if the women who play a prominent part in the Woman's Movement would do more than they have done as yet to impress upon the women of the well-to-do classes an understanding of their duties towards their children, they would certainly be doing excellent work. No paid substitute can adequately replace for the child the benefits it will derive if its mother herself does all that she could and should do. A mother who seriously devotes herself to the care of her child, need have no anxiety about the risks of its being misused by others for sexual purposes. Such a mother keeps herself fully acquainted with her child's sentiments. She is in a position to choose the best moment for effecting the child's sexual enlightenment, and she can best judge when the use of the stork story is no longer justified. Of such a mother, a child far more readily makes a confidant. Moreover, if the mother devotes a great deal of time and pains to the personal care of her child, this has, in the case of a boy, the great advantage of inculcating a greater respect for the female sex in general than is apt to be found in boys to-day. I consider this last-mentioned point to be one of the utmost importance in relation to the sexual enlightenment, for only in such a way can the boy when grown to manhood be led instinctively to refrain from the seduction of girls--with all the misery which such a course usually involves for the victims. Similarly, a young man brought up to respect women will refrain from making a mock of pregnancy, whether "legitimate" or "illegitimate." When we see a young woman bearing a new life in her womb, owing her position it may be to all the subtle arts of the seducer, and note how cruelly she is treated by the law and what scorn and contempt are poured upon her by society and by the individual, we cannot fail to welcome most heartily the movement for the Protection of Motherhood (*Mutterschutzbewegung*) which has recently made such progress in Germany. When children are properly educated, there is reason to hope that sexual matters will be less often treated in an obscene spirit than is the case to-day. Nor need we fear, when such education becomes the rule, that every allusion to sexual things may involve dangers to the child. Precisely because the sexual life will then be known to the child in a natural way, will there be less reason to dread the deliberate cultivation by children of sexual topics of conversation. When at school the love adventures of Mars and Venus are the subject of the lesson, in children thus educated no unclean thoughts need arise. It must never be forgotten, however, that when the imagination has been perverted, opportunities for unclean thoughts recur with extraordinary frequency; and indeed by no means whatever can such opportunities be altogether avoided. Since this is so, we must strengthen the child against the dangers it will inevitably encounter, and must be careful not to pervert its imagination by a false prudery.

[173154] Of course we must avoid leading the child to dwell too much upon sexual topics, and fortunately human beings have numerous other interests. The sphere of the sexual must be regarded as a fraction merely of the general educational field. The inculcation of true ideas of morality, and of a sense of honour not confined to externals but one by which the entire being is permeated--these will be the safest essentials of a good sexual and general education.

[173610] *Infancy* appears to be the best English term to represent the German *Saenglingsalter*, literally "age of suckling." It is true that the *legal* denotation of the term *infancy* is "the period from a person's birth to the attainment of the age of twenty-one years," but in common speech an *infant* is "a child during the first two or three years of life," whilst writers on *infant mortality* restrict the term to the sense employed in the text. Thus Newman, in *The Health of the State* (p. 108), writes: "Infants are children under twelve months of age."--TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

[174190] *Involuntary Sexual Orgasm.*--This is a very cumbrous rendering of the German *Pollution*. In English we greatly need a general term, first, to denote all involuntary emissions of semen, whether nocturnal or diurnal; and, secondly, to denote involuntary sexual orgasm in the female as well as in the male. In the case of the female, the term "seminal emission" is inapplicable; but the term "pollution" may be applied in English (as it is in German) to such phenomena in either sex. By American writers the term "pollution" is now generally used (*e.g.*, Allen, "Disorders of the Male Sexual Organs," _Twentieth Century Practice*, vol. vii. p. 612 *et seq._). My first inclination, therefore, was to adopt the rendering "pollution" in this translation. But this word inevitably connotes the ideas of physical uncleanness and moral defilement, and its use would thus assist the survival of medieval ideas of the essentially corrupt nature of sexual passion--such ideas as are exemplified by the quaint survival among certain "occultists" of the medieval doctrine of *incubi* and *succubi*, by the belief that sexual dreams are induced by the "thought-forms" of other persons tormented by ungratified sexual desire! For this reason I have not attempted to acclimatise the word "pollution" in this country.--TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

[175515] Thalhofer, *Die Sexuelle Paedagogik bei den Philanthropen*, Kempten, 1907.

[175591] Rudeck, *Die Liebe* (Leipzig, undated), p. 158.

[175640] Groos, *Die Spiele der Tiere* (*The Games of Animals*), Jena, 1896.

[175709] See a translation by Dr. Brill, of New York, of Freud's *Selected Papers on Hysteria and other Psychoneuroses* (1909).

[175829] *Die Stoerungen der Geschlechtsfunctionen des Mannes* (_The Disturbances of the Male Sexual Functions_), 2nd ed., Vienna, 1901, p. 8.

[175964] Otto Adler, _Die mangelhafte Geschlechtsempfindung des Weibes* (*Inadequacy of Sexual Sensation in Woman_), Berlin, 1904, p. 54 *et seq.*

[176103] Marthe Francillon, *Essai sur la Puberte chez la Femme*, Paris, 1906.

[176174] *Der Koerper des Kindes* (*The Body of the Child*), Stuttgart, 1903.

[176244] Halban, *Die Entstehung des Geschlechtscharakters* (_The Origin of Sexual Differentiation_), Archiv fuer Gynaekologie, vol. lxx., Heft 2. p. 268.

[176391] *Man and Woman*, London.

[176417] Meumann, _Vorlesungen zur Einfuehrung in die experimentelle Paedagogik und ihre psychologische Grundlagen* (*Introductory Lectures on Experimental Pedagogy and its Psychological Basis_), Leipzig, 1907, vol. i. p. 145.

[176636] *Zeitschrift fuer Psychologie*, Leipzig, 1906, p. 384.

[176692] *Geschlecht und Krankheit* (*Sex and Disease*), Halle, 1903.

[176754] *Die Hysterie im Kindesalter* (*Hysteria in Childhood*), 2nd ed., Halle, 1906.

[176834] *Die Hysterie des Kindes* (*Hysteria in the Child*), p. 8, Berlin, 1905.

[176908] *Vorlesungen ueber Stoerungen der Sprache* (_Lectures on Disturbances of Speech_), p. 105. Berlin, 1893.

[177014] *Hautkrankheiten und Sexualitaet* (_Diseases of the Skin in Relation to Sex*). Reprinted from the *Wiener Klinik_, 1906.

[177136] William Douglas Morrison, *Jugendliche Uebeltaeter* (*Youthful Delinquents*), p. 28. Leipzig, 1899.

[177237] *Die Seele des Kindes* (*The Soul of the Child*) p. 147, 4th ed., Leipzig, 1895.

[177319] Although in various other parts of this book I draw attention to the fact that the sexual processes of childhood described by me are not to be witnessed in every child, but that on the contrary there are many children in whom such sexual phenomena are by no means to be observed, I take this additional opportunity of stating categorically that erections naturally occur in children less frequently than in adults; they are in fact notably less common in the former, but nevertheless erection is not, in my opinion, a pathological manifestation even in very early childhood. The comparatively slight capacity for erection possessed by children, as compared with adults, is, for example, shown by the fact to which Jullien draws attention, in his work *Seltenere und weniger bekannte Tripperformen* (_Rare and Little Known Forms of Gonorrhoea_), Vienna and Leipzig, 1907, that the painful erections (chordee) which so commonly accompany gonorrhoea in adults, are very rare indeed in the case of gonorrhoea in children, and even in the case of older children are hardly ever observed.

[178403] *The Hygiene of Love.*

[178427] *Lehrbuch der Gerichtlichen Medizin* (_Text-book of Forensic Medicine_), p. 58, 7th ed., Vienna, 1895.

[178531] Pauli Zacchiae, *Quaestiones Medico-Legales*, lib. i, p. 26, Lipsiae, 1630.

[178608] *Lehrbuch der Gerichtlichen Medizin* (_Text-book of Forensic Medicine_), p. 64, Stuttgart, 1895.

[178706] In the next chapter I shall describe certain analogous pathological processes.

[178786] *Handbuch der Eingeweidelehre* (_Handbook of Splanchnology_), 2nd ed., Brunswick, 1873.

[178875] German, *Kitzelgefuehl*. In German, the word *Kitzel* signifies both *itching* and *tickling* and is likewise used to denote both *sexual desire* and *sexual gratification*. Consult my note "Itching, Ticking, and Sexual Sensibility," in the English edition of Bloch's *The Sexual Life of Our Time*, pp. 43, 44.--TRANSLATOR.

[179200] "Zur Psychologie der Vita Sexualis" ("Contributions to the Psychology of the Sexual Life"), *Zeitschrift fuer Psychiatrie*, vol. 1.

[179333] Compare Mrs. Browning's graceful treatment of a young girl's imaginings, in her well-known poem, "The Romance of a Swan's Nest."

[179463] "Little Ellie sits alone . . . . . While she thinks what shall be done, And the sweetest pleasure chooses For her future within reach.

[179599] Little Ellie in her smile Chooses, 'I will have a lover Riding on a steed of steeds: He shall love me without guile, . . . . . And the steed shall be red-roan, And the lover shall be noble, With an eye that takes the breath: And the lute he plays upon Shall strike ladies into trouble, As his sword strikes men to death.' . . . . .

[179932] And later, little Ellie imagines her lover kneeling at her knee to tell her--

[180011] 'I am a duke's eldest son, Thousand serfs do call me master, But, O love, I love but *thee*!'"

[180107] --TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

[180129] Mantegaaza, *Fisiologia del Amore*.

[180166] "Precocite et Impuissance Sexuelle," _Annales des Maladies des Organes Genito-Urinaires_, vol. i. No. 2, 1906.

[180278] By *masturbation* or *onanism* I understand the artificial mechanical stimulation of the genital organs. Etymologically and strictly, onanism denotes coitus interruptus (Gen. xxxviii. 9); masturbation (manustupration), artificial stimulation of the genital organs with the hand.

[180558] *Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie*, p. 41, Leipzig, 1905. For reference to English translation, see footnote to p. 14.

[180681] *Dreissig Jahre Praxis*, Part I. p. 306, Vienna, 1873.

[180737] *Nervoese Angstzustaende und ihre Behandlung*, Berlin, 1908.

[180799] See note to page 3.

[180820] Translated from the German edition of the _Memoirs of Madame Roland*, Part I., p. 82 *et seq._, Belle-Vue, near Constance, 1844 (_Bibliothek ausgewaehlter Memoiren des XVIII. und XIX. Jahrhunderts_, berausgegeben von F. E. Pipitz and G. Fink).

[181065] *The Introduction to a Devout Life*, by St. Francis of Sales, published early in the seventeenth century.

[181172] *Die Spiele der Tiere* (*The Games of Animals*), Jena, 1895, p. 255 *et seq.*

[181251] Moll, *Untersuchungen ueber die Libido Sexualis*, Berlin, 1897, p. 374.

[181324] "Die Entstehung der Geschlechtscharaktere" ("The Origin of the Sexual Characters"), *Archiv fuer Gynaekologie*, Berlin, 1903, vol. lxx.

[181461] Gall maintained that as a result of castration the development of the cerebellum was hindered, and that this failure of development could be detected by external examination of the occipital region.

[181661] Jastrowitz, _Einiges ueber das Physiologische und ueber die aussergewoehnlichen Handlungen im Liebesleben der Menschen_ (_Physiological Considerations regarding the Amatory Life of Mankind, and regarding certain unusual Features of that Life_), p. 16 *et seq.*, Leipzig, 1904.

[181939] Ancel et Bouin, "Insuffisance spermatique et Insuffisance diastematique," *La Presse Medicale*, January 13th, 1906.

[182056] The quotation in the German original, from the German poet Storm, would have lost life and spirit in any translation possible to me. I have therefore replaced it by an appropriate quotation from Longfellow.--TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

[182284] In the German language the word *castration* is used of both sexes; *i.e.*, it signifies removal of the ovaries as well as removal of testicles.--TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

[182450] A record of such cases will be found in the article on "Menstruation," p. 700 of the _Dictionnaire des Sciences Medicales_, Dechambre, Paris, 1873.

[182599] Kisch, *The Sexual Life of Woman*, pp. 79-80, English translation by M. Eden Paul; Rebman, London, 1910.

[182705] The reference will be found in the _Jahresbericht ueber die Leistungen und Fortschritte auf dem Gebiete der Erkrankungen des Urogenitalapparates_, second year of issue, Berlin, 1907.

[182889] *Untersuchungen ueber die Libido Sexualis* (_Researches into the Nature of the Sexual Impulse_), Berlin, 1897, chap, iii.

[183012] S. Hall, "The Early Sense of Self," *Am. Journ. of Psych.*, April 1898.

[183085] *Sexualbiologie*, Berlin, 1907, p. 48 *et seq.*

[183134] *Union medicale*, May 1877.

[183163] *Psychopathologie legale*, Paris, 1903, vol. ii. p. 169.

[183221] Havelock Ellis, *Studies in the Psychology of Sex*, vol. v., "Erotic Symbolism, &c.," p. 53 *et. seq.*

[183325] "The Early Sense of Self," *American Journal of Psychology*, April 1898, p. 361.

[183407] Moll, *Die kontraere Sexualempfindung*, Case 20, 3rd ed., Berlin, 1898.

[183480] Neugebauer, *Hermaphroditismus beim Menschen* (*Hermaphroditism in the Human Species*), Leipzig, 1908.

[183584] *L'Hygiene sexuelle et ses Consequences morales*, p. 26, Paris, 1895.

[183655] Albert Moll, *Untersuchungen ueber die Libido Sexualis* (*Studies concerning the Sexual Impulse*), p. 256 *et. seq.*, Berlin, 1897.

[183788] *Emile* (at the beginning of Book IV.).

[183829] _Magister Laukhards Leben und Schicksale, von ihm selbst beschrieben, bearbeitet von Viktor Petersen* (*The Life and Fortunes of Master Laukhard, described in his own words, and edited by Viktor Petersen_), vol. i. p. 15, Stuttgart, 1908.

[184069] *Monsieur Nicolas*, vol. i. p. 51, Paris (Liseux), 1884.

[184127] *Kinderleben in der deutschen Vergangenheit* (_Child Life in Old Germany_), p. 112, Leipzig, 1900.

[184227] _Die geschlechtlich-sittlichen Verhaeltnisse der evangelischen Landbewohner im Deutschen Reiche, dargestellt auf Grund der von der Allgemeinen Konferenz des* *deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine veranstalteten Umfrage* (*The State of Sexual Morality among the Protestant Inhabitants of the German Empire, as shown by an Inquiry instituted by the General Conference of the German Societies for the Promotion of Public Morals_), vol. ii pp. 562-3, Leipzig, 1897. The collective investigation made by Wagner, Wittenberg, and Hueckstaedt, as a part of the inquiry instituted by the General Conference of the German Societies for the Promotion of Public Morals, is certainly the most exhaustive of which any record at present exists.

[184952] _Wie der Geschlechtstrieb des Menschen in Ordnung zu bringen usw.* (*How to Control the Human Sexual Impulse, &c._), Brunswick, 1791.

[185087] *Studies in the Psychology of Sex*, vol. iii.; _Analysis of the Sexual Impulse_, pp. 59-60 and footnote, Davis, Philadelphia, 1908.

[185220] *The Sexual Question*, Rebman, London, 1908, pp. 485-86.

[185278] *Dreissig Jahre Praxis* (_Thirty Years of Medical Practice_), Wuerzburg, 1907, p. 305.

[185366] Quoted by Havelock Ellis, _Studies in the Psychology of Sex_, vol. i., 3rd ed., Davis, Philadelphia, 1910, p. 179. The original paper is by C. W. Townsend, "Thigh Friction in Children under One Year," Annual Meeting of the American Pediatric Society, Montreal, 1896. Five cases are recorded by this writer, all in female infants.

[185697] Regarding the precise significance of the terms *iomasturbation* and *onanism*, see the author's footnote to page 87. The adjectives corresponding to those words are respectively *masturbatory* and *onanistic*. By German writers, *onanismus* or *onanie*, and *onanistisch*, are often used where, strictly speaking, the words are inapplicable, since reference is made to cases in which sexual gratification is obtained by direct manipulation. In this translation, I prefer for such cases to use the words *masturbation* (i.e. *manustupration*) and *masturbatory*; and to limit the use of the terms *onanism* and *onanistic* to cases in which no direct use is made of the hand. Where sexual gratification is obtained without any mechanical act at all, it to preferable to speak of *psychical onanism*, or else to employ the general term introduced by Havelock Ellis for the description of all varieties of self-induced sexual stimulation and sexual gratification--whether mechanical or psychical--viz. *auto-erotism* (adjectival form, *auto-erotic*). See Havelock Ellis, *Studies in the Psychology of Sex*, vol. i., 3rd ed., 1910. Part III., "Auto-Erotism: A Study of the Spontaneous Manifestations of the Sexual Impulse."--TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

[186939] Kisch. *The Sexual Life of Woman*, English translation by M. Eden Paul, Rebman, London, 1910, p. 81.

[187041] "Die Entwicklung der Geschlechtscharaktere," _Archiv fuer Gynaekologie_, vol, lxx. p. 239, Berlin, 1903.

[187147] Kisch, *The Sexual Life of Woman*, English translation by M. Eden Paul, Rebman, London, 1910, p. 82.

[187249] *Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie* (_Three Essays on the Sexual Question*) p. 36 *et seq._, Leipzig and Vienna. [For reference to English translation, see footnote, p. 14.]

[187426] *Jahrbuch fuer Kinderheilkunde*, 1879.

[187466] *Die Masturbation*, p. 50, Berlin, 1899.

[187508] "Die Beziehungen des sexuellen Lebens zur Entstehung von Nerven- und Geisteskrankheiten" ("Relationships of the Sexual Life to the Causation of Nervous and Mental Diseases"), *Muenchener Med. Wochenschrift*, No. 37, 1906.

[187731] "Quelques mots sur l'onanisme" ("A Few Words on Masturbation"), _Annales des maladies des organes genito-urinaires_, 1905, No. 8.

[187862] "Schuelerselbstmorde" ("Suicide during School-Life"), *Zeitschrift fuer paedagogische Psychologie*, April 1907, p. 21 _et seq._

[187991] For a comprehensive account of these views, see Loewenfeld, *Sexualleben und Nervenleiden* (_The Sexual Life and Nervous Diseases_), 4th ed., Wiesbaden, 1906, chap. xiv.

[188162] "Das Erleiden sexueller Traumen usw." ("The Ill Effects of Sexual Dreams"), *Zentralblatt fuer Nervenheilkunde*, November 15, 1907.

[188295] *Seltene und weniger bekannte Tripperformen* (_Rare and little-known forms of Gonorrhoea_), German translation by George Merzbach, Vienna and Leipzig, 1907.

[188453] *La Donna delinquente, la Prostituta e la Donna normale* (*Woman as Criminal and Prostitute*), p. 374, Turin, 1893. [English readers will find an account of this widely-read book in Kureila's *Cesare Lombroso, a Modern Man of Science*, pp. 55-64, translated by M. Eden Paul; Rebman, London, 1911--TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.]

[188771] *Etude medico-legale sur les Attentats aux Moeurs*, p. 31, Paris, 1857.

[188844] Kisch, *The Sexual Life of Woman* p. 80, translated by M. Eden Paul; Rebman, London, 1910.

[188936] *L'Onanisme chez l'homme*, p. 99, 2nd ed, Paris.

[188986] *Minorenni Delinquenti*, p. 184, Milan, 1895.

[189033] *The Sexual Question*, p. 482 *et seq.*, Rebman, London, 1908.

[189097] *Delinquenza precoce e senile*, p. 197, Como, 1901.

[189150] *Les Enfants menteurs*, Memoire lu a la Societe medico-psychologique, seances du 13 et 27 Nov. 1882.

[189252] *Handbuch fuer Untersuchungerichter* (_Manual for Police Magistrates_), Part I. p. 110, 5th ed., Munich, 1908.

[189364] *Aprosexia* is the technical term for inability to fix the mind upon any subject.

[189447] In the first book of *Les Confessions*.

[189488] Strodtmann, *H. Heines Leben und Werke*, vol. i. p. 27 _et seq._, Berlin, 1873.

[189569] *Fisiologia del Amore*.

[189594] *Les Femmes homicides*, Paris, 1908. p. 39 *et seq.*

[189648] "Beitraege zur Kenntnis der Lebens- und Entwicklungsbedingungen der Inder" ("Contributions to our Knowledge of the Conditions of Life and Development of the Natives of India"), *Archiv fuer Rassen- und Gesellschaftsbiologie*, 1907, p. 839 et seq.

[189896] *Archiv fuer Rassen- und Gesellschaftsbiologie*, 1906, p. 916.

[189960] We are irresistibly reminded, in this connexion, of the reputed higher morality of age as compared with youth, of which La Rochefoucauld says (Maxim 192): "When our vices leave us, we flatter ourselves that it is we who leave them."--TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

[190214] Esquirol refers to this in his great work on Mental Disorders.

[190278] *Die Sittlichkeitsverbrecher* (_Offenders against Sexual Morality*). See also *Vierteljahrsschrift fuer gerichtliche Medizin und offentliche Sanitaetswesen_, Third Series, xxix, 2.

[190460] The custom of taking in a man as a night-lodger in crowded working-class tenements appears, unhappily, to be commoner in the large towns of Germany and Austria than it is in this country. See, for instance, Adelheid Popp's _Jugendgeschichte einer Arbeiterin_ (3rd ed., Reinhardt, Munich, 1910, pp. 19, 20). But such lodgers are by no means unknown in the overcrowded quarters of English towns.--TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

[190875] *Psychiatrische Vorlesungen*, Leipzig, 1892, p. 41.

[190928] Compare George Meredith on the male egoist's demand for "innocence" (*The Egoist*, p. 105): "The capaciously strong soul among women will ultimately detect an infinite grossness in the demand for purity infinite, spotless bloom." The frequency with which young widows remarry suggests that the demand for *"innocence"* in women is largely "a result of conventional opinions."--TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

[191325] *La Prostitution Clandestine*, p. 41 *et seq.*, Paris, 1885.

[191387] *The Intermediate Sex,* Swan Sonnenschein, London, 1908, p. 86.

[191452] Werthauer, *Sittlichkeitsdelikte der Grosstadt* (_Offences against Morality in Large Towns*), p. 78 *et seq._, Berlin and Leipzig, 1908.

[191590] _Verbrechen und Vergehen wider die Sittlichkeit. Entfuehrung. Gewerbsmaessige Unzucht* (*Crimes and Misdemeanours against Morality. Abduction, Professional Unchastity_), p. 115. Reprint from the _Fergleichende Darstellung des Deutschen und Auslaendischen Strafrechts* (*Comparative Statement of German and Foreign Criminal Law_).

[191921] *Das Geschlechtsleben in der Voelkerpsychologie* (_The Sexual Life in Folk-Psychology_), p. 557, Leipzig, 1908.

[192034] Beraud, *Les Filles Publiques de Paris*, Paris, 1839.

[192089] For fuller details, see Mittelmaier, *op. cit.*, p. 116.

[192147] "Ueber die klinisch-forensische Bedeutung des perversen Sexualtriebes" ("The Clinical and Legal Significance of Perversions of the Sexual Impulse") _Allgemeine Zeitschrift fuer Psychiatrie und psychisch-gerichtliche Medizin_, vol. xxxix, p. 220 *et seq.*, Berlin, 1883.

[192418] See footnote to page 260.

[192445] Compare Havelock Ellis, *Studies in the Psychology of Sex*, vol. vi.; *Sex in Relation to Society* (Philadelphia, 1910, p. 368); "But altogether outside theoretical morality, or the question of what people 'ought' to do, there remains _practical morality_, or the question of what, as a matter of fact, people actually do. This is the really fundamental and essential morality. Latin *mores* and Greek [Greek: ethos] both refer to *custom*, to the things that are, and not to the things that 'ought to be.'" The etymological connexion, of which Dr. Moll speaks, between the words *morality* (or *ethics*) and *custom*, thus subsists through the intermediation of the dead languages. But in German, the etymological connexion between *Sitte* (custom) and *Sittlichkeit* (morality) is immediately apparent.--TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

[193271] For details, see Rosenbaum, *Geschichte der Lustseuche* (*History of Venereal Disease*), Halle, 1893, p. 52 *et seq.*

[193390] It is surprising that the author makes no reference to the close association, in many cases, of the sentiment of disgust with unpleasant smells. The earthworm, the cockroach, and the bed-bug are regarded as peculiarly disgusting, and all have a particularly offensive odour. The unpleasant smell of the alvine evacuations is assuredly a large element in the disgust these inspire.--TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

[193792] *Die seelische Entwicklung des Kindes* (_The Mental Development of the Child_), 2nd ed., Leipzig, 1908, p. 90.

[193904] For fuller details, see the work of Rudeck, _Geschichte der oeffentlichen Sittlichkeit in Deutschland* (*History of Public Morals in Germany*), 2nd ed., Berlin, 1905, p. 4 *et seq.* *Cf._ also, Alfred Martin, *Deutsches Badewesen in vergangenen Tagen* (*German Bathing Customs in Former Days*), Jena, 1906.

[194212] A German law dealing with offences against sexual morals.--TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

[194291] I owe to private information, most kindly given me by Dr. Bohn, my knowledge of numerous details bearing on this question.

[194415] *Romanische Liebe und persoenliche Schoenheit* (_Romantic Love and Personal Beauty_), 2nd ed., Breslau, 1894, vol. ii. p. 58.

[194542] This does not conflict with the fact that in these circles also much hypocrisy is practised--much more certainly than in our own country (Germany). To a still greater extent is this true of England, where also in many circles all illegitimate sexual intercourse is proscribed, thus leading to the practice of hypocrisy. Because a large proportion of the population does not practise illegitimate intercourse, those who do indulge in it are led to conceal as far as possible their own illegitimate intercourse; as a result of this we find side by side and simultaneously in the same circle, on the one hand a prohibition of illegitimate intercourse based upon genuine conviction, and on the other a hypocritical condemnation of such intercourse. Further, we have to admit that the question is an exceptionally difficult one, precisely on account of the hypocrisy and lies in which the sexual life is enveloped. Naturally, where illegitimate intercourse is forbidden, those who do indulge are far more careful, and especially in guarding against venereal infection, lest the illness should betray them to others. A communication made to me very recently suggests the need for great caution in our judgment in these matters. A foreign university professor gives his students very fine lectures on the sexual life, laying great stress on the beauty and importance of sexual abstinence. The lecturer was convinced that as a result of his lectures his students were exceptionally chaste and abstinent. But a colleague of this same professor at the university is no less firmly convinced, and this as the result of reports from members of his friend's audience, that the assumed chastity of the students is purely imaginary, and that in actual fact their lives are just as loose as those of students in general.

[196348] See the article on "Coeducation" in *Buch von Kinde* (_The Book of the Child_), edited by Adele Schreiber, vol. ii, Leipzig, 1907, p. 48.

[196487] *Versuch einer Charakteristik des weiblichen Geschlechtes* (*Attempt at a Characterization of the Female Sex*), Hanover, 1797, vol. i. p. 95.

[196630] Pougin, *Dictionnaire du Theatre*, Paris, 1885, p. 715.

[196687] The description of such a mental state will be found in a diary, shown to Nystroem by a young friend of his, and published by the former in his work on *The Sexual Life and its Laws* (_Das Geschlechtsleben und seine Gesetze_), Berlin, 1904, p. 129.

[196937] Moll, *Aerztliche Ethik*, Stuttgart, 1902, pp. 220-31.

[196993] Theologians are not agreed as to when the "age of reason" is attained. Gousset, in his _Moraltheologie zum Gebrauch der Pfarrer und Beichtvaeter_ (German translation of the seventh edition of a French work, _Moral Theology for the Use of Priests and Father-Confessors_), Aix, 1852, vol. ii. p. 244, demands that children should go to confession as soon as they are seven years of age; other authorities consider that the "age of reason" begins only in the last years of childhood.

[197475] From what has been said before, it will have become evident that the question has different aspects in different strata of the population. I have attempted merely to formulate general principles, not to furnish an answer for every possible concrete question. Differences between town and country, between richer and poorer, between cultured and uncultured, must be given due consideration. In the case of those belonging to the less cultured and the poorer strata of society, a special use in this connexion may be found for those social institutions which have of late come into being in various localities as the fruit of voluntary effort [corresponding to our Children's Care Committees, &c., in England--TRANSLATOR], and conducted by women of the cultured and well-to-do classes. These institutions may be utilised for imparting the sexual enlightenment, at any rate in so far as they permit of an individual study of the child-psyche.

[198416] _Sexuelle Belehrung der aus der Volksschule entlassenen Maedchen* (*The Sexual Instruction of Girls Leaving the Elementary School_), Leipzig, 1907.

[198565] Among others by K. Hoeller: "Die Aufgabe der Volksschule" ("The Task of the Elementary School"), _Proceedings of the Third Congress of the German Society for the Suppression of the Venereal Diseases, at Mannheim, in the Year 1907_. In these Proceedings, which were published as the seventh volume of the *Zeitschrift zur Bekaempfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten* (_Journal for the Suppression of the Venereal Diseases_), the reader will find a vast amount of material bearing upon this question.

[199060] _Briefe ueber die wichtigsten Gegenstaende der Menschheit (Letters Concerning Matters of the Utmost Importance to Mankind)_, written by R., and published by S. I. Teil, Leipzig, 1794, p. 100 *et seq.* To all who are interested in the subject under discussion, I strongly recommend the perusal of this book, which seems to-day to have been entirely forgotten.

[199420] For example, Max Oker-Blom: _Beim Onkel Doktor auf dem Lande_. A book for parents, 2nd ed., Vienna and Leipzig, 1906.--An English version, _How my Uncle the Doctor Instructed me in Matters of Sex_, has been published by the American Society of Sanitary and Moral Prophylaxis, 33, West 42nd Street, New York. [A list of a number of such books will be found in a footnote to p. 684 of my translation of Bloch's _The Sexual Life of Our Time_. As Oker-Blom himself says of this vital matter of sexual enlightenment, "Better a year too early than an hour too late."--TRANSLATOR.]

[199996] *Affektivitaet, Suggestibilitaet, Paranoia*, Halle, 1906.

[200055] _Anthropologisch-kulturhistorische Studien ueber die Geschlechtsverhaeltnisse des Menschen* (*Anthropological and Historical Studies concerning the Sexual Life of Mankind_), 2nd ed., Jena, 1888, p. 106.

[200259] There is one bearing of the use of alcohol in relation to irregular sexual intercourse, the importance of which Dr. Moll appears to me largely to ignore in his discussion of the subject, and that is the effect which even moderate doses of alcohol have in blunting the finer sensibilities, and in disturbing the balance of the judgment. (The author's only reference to the subject is on page 348, where he writes, "If so much alcohol is taken as to interfere with the natural psychical inhibitions, sexual practices may occur that would not otherwise have occurred.") To take the woman's point of view first, it is, I believe, a common experience with prostitutes that, in the earlier days at any rate, they find it difficult to ply their trade unless under the influence of alcohol. Turning to the man's point of view, there is quite a considerable proportion of young men who, however strong their sexual impulse, object to meretricious intercourse at once on ethical and aesthetic grounds. The ethical ground is that intercourse with a prostitute infringes the elementary principle of civilised morals, that one human being should not use another as a mere means to the ends of the former, but that each of us must treat all human beings as ends in themselves; considering the general character of prostitution, the fact that obligations to the individual prostitute are supposed to be discharged by a conventional money payment, does not countervail the fact that this moral principle is infringed. On the aesthetic objections to prostitution, it is hardly necessary to enlarge; they have been felt by all men with refined sensibilities. But it is precisely these refined sensibilities which are blunted by even moderate doses of alcohol--doses insufficiently great to abate the sexual impulse itself. I do not mean to suggest that prostitution would not continue, in the present economic and social conditions, were there no intoxicants in the world; but I think an evening spent in quiet observation in the "promenade" of a "fashionable" London music-hall will convince most people that the above-described effects of alcohol are by no means purely imaginary.--TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

[202445] The arguments against raising the Age of Consent for women beyond the age of sixteen now specified in the Criminal Law Amendment Act of 1885, as ably summarised by Havelock Ellis, should be consulted in this connexion. See his _Studies in the Psychology of Sex*, vol. vi., *Sex in Relation to Society_, pp. 528-30. Davis, Philadelphia, 1910.--TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

[202808] "Die Anfaenge einer Erziehung zu geistiger und koerperlicher Gesundheit waehrend des ersten Lebensjahres" ("The Beginnings of an Education for the Maintenance of Mental and Bodily Health, as applied during the First Year of Life"), _Fortschritte der Medizin_, 1908, No. 21.

[203083] INDEX OF SUBJECTS

[203102] "ABREACTION," 278

[203121] Abstinence, sexual. *See* Sexual abstinence

[203166] Accuracy, sexual differences in, 41

[203203] Accusations, false, by children, 227

[203241] Acme, voluptuous. *See* Orgasm; *and also* Voluptuousness

[203300] Adenoids, 207

[203315] Advertisements, perverse, 240-245

[203350] Age for the sexual enlightenment, 289-290

[203393] "Age of reason," 275

[203415] Alarm at sexual manifestations, 213

[203452] Albums, 15

[203464] Alcoholism, 220

[203481] Alienists and the study of sexual life, 147

[203526] Alopecia areata, 47

[203547] Altruism and love, 208

[203571] Amatory passion and suicide, 188, 189

[203610] Anaesthesia sexualis, 87, 92

[203640] Animal friendships, 139, 140

[203670] Animals, sexual fondness for, 61, 66. *See also* Bestiality sexual paradoxy in, 123 sexual phenomena in young, 99-103

[203789] Anthropology, works on, 8, 9

[203819] Anxiety causing ejaculation, 92-94 in the masturbator, 184

[203879] Aprosexia, 207

[203895] Assaults, sexual. *See* Sexual assaults

[203936] Association of contrectation and detumescence, 81-87 theory of sexual perversions, 130-133

[204028] Autobiographies, 10-12, 15

[204056] Auto-erotism, 166, 188. *See also* Masturbation *and* Onanism

[204119] Auto-Suggestion, 190

[204141] BALANITIS, 118

[204157] Bars, parallel and horizontal, and sexual stimulation, 159

[204217] Bartholin's glands, 23, 25 secretion of, 25, 56

[204266] Bathing, mixed, 255

[204287] Beard, a secondary sexual character, 34, 38

[204332] Beauty and the sexual impulse, 70

[204367] Beggars, 199

[204381] Belletristic literature, love in, 12

[204419] Bestiality, 61, 66

[204439] Bicycling. *See* Cycling

[204465] Biographies, 10-12

[204485] Blackmail, 227

[204501] Bladder, distension of, causing erection, 50

[204547] Blindness, 283

[204563] Boarding-schools, 200, 247

[204591] Books and pictures erotic, 260-264

[204627] Boot, masturbation with, 164

[204657] Boys frequenting brothels, 154

[204689] Braggadocio, 174

[204707] Breasts, sexual differences in, 34, 36

[204747] Breathing, sexual differences in, 37

[204785] Breeches and sexual stimulation, 159, 307, 308

[204833] Brothels, boys frequenting, 155

[204866] Brother and sister, rarity of sexual desire between, 71 improper sexual acts between, 71, 199, 200 elder, effects sexual enlightenment, 297

[205007] Bulb, vaginal, or bulb of the vestibule, 23

[205052] CABBAGE-PATCH, babies in, 170, 285

[205088] Calf-love, 70

[205103] Caressive inclinations and sexuality, 163, 164, 175

[205156] Carunculae myrtiformes, 28

[205184] Cases:-- 1. Undifferentiated sexual impulse, 64 2. Undifferentiated sexual impulse, 66 3. Undifferentiated sexual impulse, 67 4. Coitus in childhood, 82 5. Development of sexual impulse, 84 6. Anxiety causing ejaculation, 93 7. Sexual paradoxy, 119 8. Sexual paradoxy, 119 9. Sexual paradoxy, 121 10. Disappearance of early perversions, 128 11. Foot fetichism, 134 12. Homosexual, fondness for soldiers, 134 13. Case of a "Voyeur," 135 14. Flagellation fetichism, 135 15. Onanism by thigh friction in a girl of four, 187 16. Masturbation in a boy of eight, 188 17. Masturbation treated by hypnotic suggestion, 276 18. Sexual enlightenment by an elder brother, 297

[205849] Castration defined, 111 *n.* effects of, 103-109

[205899] Catamenia. *See* Menstruation

[205930] Cathartic method, 278

[205953] Catholic confessional, 274-276 priests, homosexual, 209, 210 sadistic, 239

[206029] Catholicism and sexual morality, 274-276

[206071] Caution requisite in diagnosing masturbation, 165

[206122] "Century of the Child," the, 321

[206156] Ceremonial observant of attainment of puberty, 162

[206208] Cervix uteri. *See* Uterus

[206236] Chancre, soft, 192

[206256] Characters, sexual, *See* Sexual characters

[206301] Child, as object of sexual practices, 219-245 defined, 1 sexual life of, its importance, 179-218

[206399] Child-depraver. *See* Paedophilia

[206434] Child-life in old Germany, 155

[206466] "Child-lover." *See* Paedophilia

[206500] Child-marriages, offspring of, 214, 215

[206541] Child-prostitution, 220

[206566] Child-protection, 230, 269, 270 against sexual offences, 230

[206628] Child-suicides, 48

[206648] Child-witnesses, credibility of, 201-205

[206690] Childhood, frequency of sexual incidents in early, 7 periods of, 1, 2 sexual differentiation in, 33-49 sexual experiences in, as a factor in disease, 277-279 sub-epochs of, 1, 2

[206869] Children, false accusations of assaults on, 227-229 in the law courts, 230, 231 legal protection of, *See* Age of consent sexual acts with, to cure venereal diseases, 219

[207041] Children's care committees, 295 dances, 268, 269

[207091] Church, the, and sexual indulgence, 193

[207132] Circumcision, 18

[207150] Civilisation, modern, and precocious sexuality, 156, 157

[207208] Clap. *See* Gonorrhoea

[207232] Class, social, and precocious sexuality, 151-152

[207282] Climate and precocious sexuality, 150-151

[207325] Climbing the pole, 159, 308

[207354] Clinical histories of the sexual life, value of, 5, 6

[207409] Closets common to both sexes, danger of, 158, 279

[207460] Clothing and sexual stimulation, 159

[207498] Code, German Criminal, 206

[207526] Code of love, 9

[207543] Coeducation of the sexes, 264-270

[207578] Coitus. *See also* Sexual intercourse capacity for, 54

[207634] Colour sense, sexual differences in, 40

[207675] Concealment. *See* Secretiveness

[207709] Confessional, the, 274-276

[207737] Conjunctivitis, *See* Ophthalmia

[207771] Connubial intercourse, 193

[207799] Consent, age of, *See* Age of consent

[207838] Consequences, the fear of, 256

[207870] Consequences of sexual phenomena in childhood:-- ethical, 192-195 forensic, 201-207 hygienic, 180-192 intellectual, 207-209 social, 195-201

[208011] Constipation, 309

[208030] Contagion of example, 305 moral. *See* Moral contagion psychical, 279

[208101] Contrary sexuality. *See* Sexual inversion

[208145] Contrectation and contrectation-impulse, 29-31, 60-71, 81-87, 147, 148, 163, 164, 177 and detumescence, importance of their association, 177

[208287] Conversation, indiscreet, before children, 161 obscene, 170, 305, 306

[208358] Coquetry, 77

[208372] Corpus cavernosum clitoridis, 23 penis, 18 urethra, 18 spongiosum, 18

[208443] Corpuscles, Finger's, 27 genital, 27 Krause's, 27

[208494] Corpuscular richness, sexual differences in, 33

[208543] Corruption of children by paedophiles, 225-227 of town-life, reputed, 152-156, 264

[208627] Country *versus* town as influencing sexual morality, 152-156, 264

[208695] Courage and love, 208

[208718] Credibility of children's evidence, 201-205

[208763] Crime, sexual differences in, 47, 48

[208801] Criminal code, German, 206, 313, 314 responsibility in children, 206 of paedophiles, 231-234

[208895] Criminals, youthful, 199, 200

[208926] Cruelty. *See* Sadism

[208949] Culpability in children, circumstances affecting, 205, 206

[209009] Curiosity of children regarding sexual development, 211-213

[209070] Custom and morality, 249, 250

[209101] Cystitis, gonorrhoeal, 192

[209129] DANCES for children, 268, 269

[209160] Danger to children of legal proceedings, 230, 231

[209211] Dangers, hygienic. *See* Health, dangers to of corporal punishment, 316, 317 of masturbation commonly exaggerated, 180-183, 283-284 of the sexual enlightenment, 301-302 social. *See* Social dangers

[209410] Decolletage, 255

[209428] Degradation, social. *See* Social degradation

[209475] Demarcation, strict, of sexual feelings impossible, 176, 177

[209537] Depraver of children. *See* Paedophilia

[209578] Depression in masturbators, 185

[209611] Detumescence and detumescence-impulse, 29-31, 70, 81-87, 147, 148, 164, 166 in association with contrectation, 81-87

[209729] Development, puberal. *See* Puberal development sexual. *See* Sexual development

[209811] Diagnosis, 162-178 difficulties of, 162 errors in, 165 of sexual perversions, 178

[209894] Diaries, 15

[209907] Diet and sexual stimulation, 160, 309

[209946] Differentiation, sexual, in childhood, 33-49

[209992] Diligence as a love-manifestation, 77, 208

[210036] Disease, sexual differences in, 45-47

[210075] Diseases falsely attributed to masturbation, 180, 181 venereal. *See* Venereal diseases

[210164] Disgust and shame, 250-258

[210192] "Distinguished governess," 241-243

[210228] Diversion of the sexual impulse, 270

[210266] Doctor, the, and illegitimate intercourse, 272 and masturbation, 284

[210336] Drawing, sexual differences in capacity for, 42

[210385] Duct. *See under specific names as*, Prostatic ducts, Seminal duct, &c.

[210458] Duverney's glands, 23

[210481] Dwarfs as objects of sexual desire, 223 sexual phenomena in, 116, 117

[210552] Dynamometry in habitual masturbators, 185

[210595] EARLY awakening of sexuality, 146-152

[210634] Economic and social reasons for the sexual enlightenment, 287, 288

[210702] Educability, limits of, 246-248

[210735] Education and sexual differentiation, 41-45 religious, 270-276 sexual, 246-324. *See also* Coeducation works on, 9

[210851] "Educational" advertisements, 240-245

[210890] Educational reasons for the sexual enlightenment, 281-282

[210949] Egoism, sexual. *See* Sexual egoism

[210986] Ejaculation-centre, 21, 22

[211014] Ejaculatory duct, 18

[211036] Embellishment, romantic, of object of love, 71, 72

[211088] Emission, seminal, 3 *n.*, 53. *See also* Ejaculation the first, causing alarm, 212, 213

[211178] Emissions, nocturnal. *See* Sexual dreams

[211221] Empirical psychology. *See* Psychology, empirical

[211272] "Energetic instruction," 241-243

[211306] "English instruction," 240-245

[211338] Enlightenment, the sexual, 7, 8, 280-306

[211380] Environment. *See* Education

[211410] Epididymis, 17

[211426] Epididymitis, 192

[211445] Erectile tissue, 18

[211466] Erection-centre, 20

[211487] Erections, matutinal, 171 non-sexual, 170

[211530] *Erfahrungspsychologie*, 9

[211558] Erotic books and pictures, 260-264 literature, love in, 13 obsession, 179

[211633] Ethical. *See also* Moral dangers of precocious sexuality, 192-195 reasons for the sexual enlightenment, 285-286

[211747] Ethics. *See* Morality

[211771] Eugenic considerations opposed to child-marriage, 215

[211826] Eugenics, 246

[211841] Eunuchs. *See* Castration

[211868] Evidence of children, 201-205

[211899] Exaggerated expectations regarding the sexual enlightenment, 302-306

[211969] Examination, physical, of child witnesses, 203

[212017] Example *versus* precept, 249, 305

[212053] Excess, sexual. *See* Sexual excess

[212090] Experimental psychology. *See* Psychology, experimental study of the sexual life, 6

[212175] Fallopian tubes, 24

[212196] False accusations by children, 227-229

[212236] Family tendencies. *See also* Congenital predisposition

[212293] Fanatics, morality-, 259, 260

[212324] Feather-bed, 307

[212342] Feeble-mindedness, 206

[212366] Fellatio, 199

[212381] Fertilisation, 24

[212400] Fickleness, 79, 80

[212420] Fig-leaf, the, 259

[212440] Finger's corpuscles, 27

[212465] First love, description of, 11, 12

[212501] Fission, 84

[212514] Flogging. *See* Corporal punishment; *and also* Flagellation

[212576] Fluor albus, 181

[212594] Follicles, Graafian, 24, 28 Graafian, primitive, 24 ovarian, 24 ovarian primitive, 24

[212681] Forensic. *See also* Legal aspects of sexual life of the child, 201-207 reasons for the sexual enlightenment, 286

[212796] Friendship and homosexuality, 138, 139

[212836] Friendships of animals, 139,140

[212869] *Fuersorgegesetz* 279

[212892] GAMES of animals, sexual phenomena in, 99-103 sexual differences in, 38, 39, 99

[212973] Gastralgia, 180

[212990] Gemmation, 84

[213005] Genital corpuscles, 27 organs. *See* Sexual organs

[213057] German Criminal Code, 206

[213084] Girth, sexual differences in, 35

[213118] Gland, *See under specific name as* Prostate gland, Cowper's glands, &c.

[213192] Glans clitoridis, 23 penis, 18

[213224] Graafian follicles. *See* Follicles

[213261] Growth, sexual differences in, 35, 36

[213300] Guardianship, law of, 279

[213327] Gymnastic exercises and sexual stimulation, 159, 308

[213381] HAIR, pubic, 26, 27 sexual differences in, 33

[213428] Hairdressers, homosexual, 209

[213459] Hanging posture and sexual stimulation, 189

[213504] Health and the sexual enlightenment, 282, 285 dangers to, from sexual phenomena during childhood, 180-192

[213611] Heel, masturbation with, 164

[213641] Height, sexual differences in, 35

[213676] Hereditary taint. *See* Congenital predisposition

[213727] Heredity, morbid. *See* Congenital predisposition and sexual differentiation, 41-45

[213812] Hermaphroditism, 144, 145

[213839] Herpes progenitalis, 171 sexualis, 171

[213879] Hetero-suggestion, 190

[213903] Home *versus* school for the sexual enlightenment, 291-297

[213963] Homosexuals, shame in, 78

[213990] Horizontal bar and sexual stimulation, 159

[214034] Horse-back riding, 308

[214058] Hygiene of the sexual life of the child, 306-312 social, 248

[214120] Hygienic dangers. *See* Health, dangers to reasons for the sexual enlightenment, 282-285

[214210] Hyperaesthesia, sexual. *See* Sexual hyperaesthesia

[214263] Hypnotic treatment of sexual aberrations, 276, 277

[214315] Hypochondriasis in masturbators, 283, 284

[214358] Hypocrisy regarding the sexual life, 266, 296

[214405] IDEALISM, 270

[214420] Idiots, masturbation in, 29

[214449] Ignorance regarding the sexual life, 281-282, 288

[214500] "Illegitimate" intercourse, 193, 287

[214538] Imagination in children, 201, 202, 204, 294, 295 its part in masturbation, 88 perverse, 324 and masturbation, 184

[214653] Immaturity, stimulus of, 221

[214683] Immoral acts, definition of, 194

[214717] Impersonator, feminine, 209

[214746] Importance of the sexual life of the child, 179-218

[214799] Impotence, psychical, 219

[214826] Impulse, contrectation, *See* Contrectation impulse detumescence. *See* Detumescence impulse sexual. *See* Sexual Impulse

[214949] Inattentiveness, 207

[214971] India, child-marriages in, 215

[215003] Infancy defined, 2, *and note*

[215035] Infection, venereal. *See* Venereal diseases

[215081] Inheritance. *See* Heredity

[215110] Innocence as a sexual stimulus, 222 of rural life, reputed, 152-156

[215179] Insanity, moral. *See* Moral insanity

[215218] Instinct, sexual. *See* Sexual impulse

[215258] Instinctive chastity in girls, 288

[215294] Intellect, the, and precocious sexuality, 207-208

[215345] Intercourse, sexual. *See* Sexual intercourse

[215392] Interdependence of contrectation and detumescence, 81-87

[215450] Internal secretion of ovaries, 26 of testicles, 19

[215502] "Interstitial gland" of the testicle, 108

[215545] Inversion, sexual. *See* Sexual inversion

[215588] Irresponsibility. *See* Responsibility

[215628] Irritation, local, of genitals, 307

[215665] Irrumatio, 199

[215681] Itching, 59

[215694] Itching-reflex, 50, 51

[215718] JAUNDICE, 181

[215733] Kissing, 73

[215746] Kitzel, 59

[215758] Kitzel reflexe, 50

[215778] Knightly code of love, 9

[215804] Krause's corpuscles, 27

[215829] Ladies' tailor, 209

[215850] Larynx, sexual differences in, 34, 38

[215889] *Laudatis temporis acti*, 154

[215920] Law of guardianship, 279

[215946] Law-courts, children in, 201-205 danger to children in, 230, 231

[216012] Legal. *See also* Forensic relationships of sexual life of the child, 201-207

[216091] "Legitimate" intercourse, 193

[216122] *Lese majeste*, 228

[216143] Levity regarding sexual manifestations in childhood, 280

[216201] Libidio sexualis, 22

[216223] *Liebeskodex*, 9

[216241] Life, sexual. *See* Sexual life

[216274] Limits of educability, 246-248

[216306] Literature, belletristic, love in, 12 erotic, love in, 13 of the sexual life of the child, 7-16

[216403] Looking-glass, 212

[216423] Love, code of, 9 first. *See* First love in belletristic literature, 12 in young children, 188, 189

[216524] Love-games of animals, 99-103

[216555] Love-illusions, 72

[216575] Love-letters, 75

[216593] Love-poems, 76

[216609] Lust-murder. *See* Sadism; *also* Stabbers

[216653] "Lying Children," 203

[216676] Lying-in-bed, 307

[216695] "MAIDEN Tribute of Modern Babylon." *See Pall Mall Gazette*

[216756] Maidenhead. *See* Hymen

[216781] Mamma. *See* Breast

[216802] Manifestations of love in childhood, 73-80

[216846] Manipulations of the genital organs, non-sexual, 171

[216900] Manu-stupration, 87, 166

[216926] Marriage, 9 early. *See also* Child-marriage, 149 laws, 9 medical advice concerning, 246

[217016] Masochistic advertisements, 240-245

[217053] Masturbatio reservatus, 187

[217082] Maturation, 24

[217098] Maturity, sexual, defined, 3, 4

[217131] Matutinal erections, 171

[217157] Meatus, urethral, in the female, 23 in the male, 18

[217210] Medical ethics, 272

[217231] Membrum virile, 17

[217251] Memory, illusions of, 4-6, 125, 127 sexual differences in, 40

[217314] Menarche praecox, 114, 115 tardive, 116

[217355] Menstrual rhythm, 24, 25

[217381] Menstruation, 24, 25, 28 age at commencement in various countries, 150 precocious, 114, 115 retarded, 116 the first, causing alarm, 212, 213, 284

[217528] Mental differences between the sexes, 38-45

[217573] Methods of investigation, 4-7

[217604] Micturitional obscenities, 143

[217636] Milking movements, 172

[217660] Mind, sexual differences in, 38-45

[217696] Mirror. *See* Looking-glass

[217725] Mishandling of children, 191, 219-245

[217764] Mixed bathing, 255

[217784] Mode of sexual enlightenment, 298-301

[217823] Monks, sadistic, 239

[217845] Mons veneris, 27

[217863] Monthly period. *See* Menstruation

[217899] Moral contagion of masturbation, 201 corruption of children by paedophiles, 225-227 dangers of precocious sexuality, 192-195 insanity, 147 judgments on masturbation, 192-195

[218074] Morality. *See also* Sexual morality and custom, 249, 250 and nakedness, 256, 257, 260 sexual, Catholicism and, 274-276

[218195] Morality-fanatics, 259, 260

[218224] Morbid heredity. *See* Congenital predisposition

[218274] Mother, the, and the sexual enlightenment, 295-297

[218326] Motherhood, pre-marital, 287

[218356] Motherhood protection, 323

[218384] Music-hall artiste, 209

[218409] *Mutterschutzbewegung*, 323

[218438] NAIL-BITING, 173

[218456] Nakedness. *See also* Nude, the and sexual morality, 256, 257, 260

[218524] Narcolepsy, 185

[218541] Necrophilia, 234

[218559] Nervous system, abnormal, 146

[218590] Neurasthenia, 14, 190 from masturbation, 187 sexual. *See* Sexual neurasthenia

[218670] Neurologists and the study of the sexual life, 147

[218722] Neuropathia, 146. *See also* Congenital predisposition

[218778] Neuroses and sexual experiences (Freud's theories), 189-191, 226, 277-279

[218853] Newspaper advertisements, perverse, 240-245

[218898] Newspapers, the erotic in, 261, 262

[218935] Nocturnal emissions. *See* Sexual dreams

[218977] Non-sexual erections, 171 manipulations of the genital organs, 171

[219045] Nose-picking, 171

[219064] Nubile, defined, 3, 4

[219087] Nuns, sadistic, 239

[219108] Nymphae, 23

[219121] Nymphomania, 181

[219139] OBJECT of sexual practices, the child as, 219-245

[219190] Objective elements of the sexual enlightenment, 290, 291

[219248] Obscene conversation, 153, 156

[219280] Observation of sexual acts by children 161, 162 of sexual processes in young children, 164 of the sexual life, 6 sexual differences in, 41

[219420] Obsession by erotic ideas, 179

[219452] Occupation and sexual offences against children, 221, 232, 233 and sexual perversion, 209, 210

[219548] Offences, sexual. *See* Sexual offences

[219589] Offspring of child-marriages, 214, 215

[219629] Onanism. *See also* Masturbation defined, 87, 165 psychical, 166

[219695] Oophorectomy, effects of, 106

[219726] Operation to remove foreign bodies from vagina or female bladder, 166

[219797] Ophthalmia of the new-born, 283

[219830] Opportunity and the sexual enlightenment, 293

[219877] Orchitis, 192

[219892] Organs, genital. *See* Sexual organs

[219930] Organs, reproductive. *See* Sexual organs

[219973] Ovarian follicles. *See* Follicles

[220009] Ovaries, 24, 28 removal of. *See* Oophorectomy

[220057] Over-development of sexuality in children, 179

[220105] Oviducts. *See* Fallopian tubes

[220138] PAEDERASTY, 199

[220155] Paedophiles, responsibility of, 231-234, 264

[220201] *Pall Mall Gazette* revelations, 227

[220239] Panniculus adiposus, 103

[220265] Paradoxical sexual impulse, 13

[220297] Parallel bars and sexual stimulation, 159

[220340] Paralytic dementia, 220, 231

[220370] Parents, sexual element in fondness for, 71, 176

[220420] "Parisian Landscapes," 262

[220448] Passion, amatory, and suicide, 189

[220484] Passive character of sexual act in women, 184

[220531] Pathological, the, in the sexual life over-estimated, 147, 148

[220595] Pelvis, sexual differences in, 33, 34

[220634] Perineum, 18 muscles of, 25

[220663] Period, monthly. *See* Menstruation

[220700] Periodicity in the sexual impulse, 151