WORK: Apologia  (slug: apuleius-apologia-b8a97b)

CHAPTER: 01-apologia



[109017] 58. He understood himself that this would seem incredible; for it is said that before the second hour of the day, still fasting and unfortified with wine, he sold that testimony. So he wrote that he had learned these things in this manner: that after he returned from Alexandria, he made straight for his house, from which Quintianus had already moved out; that there, in the vestibule, he came upon many birds' feathers, and besides that the walls disfigured with soot; that he asked the reason of his slave, whom he had left behind at Oea, and the slave informed him about the nocturnal rites of myself and Quintianus. But how cunningly contrived it is, and how plausibly invented, that I, if I had wished to do anything of the sort, would not rather have done it in my own house; that this Quintianus, who stands beside me — whom I name, for honour's and praise's sake, on account of the very close friendship I have with him, and on account of his outstanding learning and most perfect eloquence — that this Quintianus, then, if he had had any birds at dinner, or, as they say, had killed any for magic's sake, had no slave-boy to sweep up the feathers and throw them outside; and besides, that the force of the smoke was so great as to make the walls black, and that Quintianus endured this disfigurement in his bedchamber as long as he lived there. You say nothing, Aemilianus; it is not plausible — unless perhaps Crassus, on his return, did not make straight for his bedchamber, but, after his manner, went directly to the kitchen hearth. But from what did Crassus's slave conjecture that the walls had been smoked precisely at night? Was it from the colour of the smoke? No doubt night-smoke is blacker, and so differs from day-smoke. And why did so suspicious and so diligent a slave allow Quintianus to move out before he had restored the house to cleanliness? Why did those feathers, as if of lead, await the coming of Crassus so long? Let Crassus not lay the charge upon his slave: he himself rather invented all this about the soot and the feathers, since not even in giving testimony can he get any farther from the kitchen.

[111158] 59. But why was the testimony read from a written deposition? Where in the world is Crassus himself? Has he gone back to Alexandria out of weariness of his house? Is he scrubbing his walls? Or, what is nearer the truth, is the gormandizer laid low by a debauch? For I myself yesterday, here at Sabrata, noticed him very conspicuously belching at you, Aemilianus, in the middle of the forum. Ask your nomenclators, Maximus — although he is better known to the tavern-keepers than to the nomenclators — yet, I say, inquire whether they have seen this Junius Crassus of Oea; they will not deny it. Let Aemilianus produce to us this most honourable youth, on whose testimony he relies. You see what time of day it is: I say that Crassus has long since been snoring drunk, or, after a second bath taken to enable him to attend the after-dinner carousal, is sweating out his wine-soaked perspiration in the baths. He speaks to you, Maximus, present though absent, through a written deposition — not but that he is so utterly lost to all shame that, even if he were under your eyes, he would lie without any blush; but perhaps he could not so much as restrain himself in his tippling to await this hour sober: or rather, Aemilianus did it of set purpose, that he might not station him under your so stern eyes, lest you should reject that brute, with his plucked jaws and foul aspect, on the very sight of his face, when you had observed the youth's head ravaged of beard and hair, his rheumy eyes, his swollen eyelids, his gaping mouth, his slobbering lips, his discordant voice, the trembling of his hands, his belching breath. His whole patrimony he licked away long ago, and nothing remains to him of his father's goods but one house, fit for retailing slander, which yet he never let out at a dearer rate than for this testimony; for that drunken lie he sold to this Aemilianus for three thousand sesterces, and there is no one at Oea who is ignorant of it.

[113115] 60. We all knew of this before it was done, and I could have hindered it by a formal protest, had I not known that a lie so foolish would harm Aemilianus, who was buying it to no purpose, rather than me, who deservedly despised it. I wished both that Aemilianus should suffer the loss and that Crassus should be set up for prostitution by the disgrace of his testimony. For the rest, the affair was carried through, the day before yesterday, by no means in secret, in the house of one Rufinus — of whom I shall speak presently — Rufinus himself and Calpurnianus acting as go-betweens and intercessors. And Rufinus accomplished this all the more gladly because he was sure that Crassus would pass on no small part of his reward to his wife, whose adulteries he knowingly winks at. I saw that you too, Maximus, in your wisdom, suspecting their cabal and conspiracy against me the moment that deposition was brought forward, spurned the whole business with your countenance. In short, although they are endowed with an unusual audacity and a troublesome impudence, yet — seeing that the testimony of Crassus had, as they perceived, smelt of the lees — they themselves did not dare to read it through, nor to lean upon it for anything. But I have recalled these things, not because I feared, with you for judge above all, the scarecrows of feathers and the stain of soot, but that it might not go unpunished in Crassus that he sold gross smoke to Aemilianus, a country bumpkin.

[114590] 61. One charge more was brought forward by them, when they were reading the letters of Pudentilla, concerning the fashioning of a certain little statue, which they say I had procured for magical sorceries, made of the choicest wood by a secret craft, and which, although it is in the shape of a skeleton, foul and horrible, I yet cultivate at great cost and call by the Greek name "king." Unless I am mistaken, I am following their footsteps in order, and, taking each point one by one, I am unweaving the whole web of slander. The fashioning of the statue, which you call secret, how can it have been secret, when you were so far from being ignorant of its maker that you summoned him to be present here? See, here is Cornelius Saturninus, the craftsman, a man both praised among his fellows for his art and approved for his character, who a little while ago, when you questioned him diligently, Maximus, recounted the whole course of the matter to you with the utmost good faith and truth: how I, when I had seen at his shop many geometrical figures of boxwood, finely and skilfully made, being attracted by his craftsmanship, asked him to work out for me certain mechanical contrivances, and at the same time to carve me some image, of whatever god he liked, to which I might make supplication after my custom, of whatever material, provided only it was of wood. So at first he tried boxwood. Meanwhile, while I was in the country, my stepson Sicinius Pontianus, who wished it done for me, obtained some little caskets of ebony from a most honourable lady, Capitolina, brought them to him, and urged him to make it rather of that rarer and more durable material; that gift would be especially welcome to me. He did accordingly, as far as the caskets sufficed. And so, fitted together piece by piece out of the little tablets to a certain thickness, a little Mercury could be wrought.

[116478] 62. All this, as I say, you have heard. Moreover, the same things were said by the son of Capitolina, a most upright young man, who is present, when you questioned him: that Pontianus had asked for the caskets, that Pontianus had brought them to Saturninus the craftsman. Nor is even this denied — that Pontianus received the finished statue from Saturninus, and afterward gave it to me as a gift. All these things being proved openly and plainly, what at all remains in which any suspicion of magic can lurk? Nay, what is there at all that does not convict you of manifest falsehood? You said that the thing was secretly made which Pontianus, a most distinguished knight, saw to the making of; which Saturninus, a man of weight and well known among his fellows for his honesty, carved openly, sitting in his own shop; which a most accomplished matron helped with her gift; which both before and after the making was known to many, both of the slaves and of the friends who used to come to me. The wood, that I sought through the whole town — and indeed sought hard for it — you were not ashamed to make up, though you know I was away at that time, though it has been proved that I ordered it to be made of whatever material.

[117705] 63. Your third falsehood was that there had been fashioned a lean, nay an utterly disembowelled, shape of a grim corpse, downright horrible and ghoulish. Now if you had ascertained so evident a sign of magic, why did you not formally call on me to produce it? Was it that you might be free to lie about a thing that was not there? Yet the means of that falsehood was taken from you by a certain happy chance of my habit. For I make it my custom, wherever I go, to carry the image of some god hidden among my books, and on feast-days to make supplication to it with incense and wine and sometimes a victim. So just now, when I heard a "skeleton" so impudently and so falsely talked of again and again, I bade someone go at a run and fetch from my lodging the little Mercury which this Saturninus fashioned for me at Oea. Hand it over, you — let them see it, hold it, examine it. There you have what that wretch called a skeleton. Do you hear the outcry of all who are present? Do you hear the condemnation of your falsehood? Are you not at last ashamed of so many slanders? Is this a skeleton, is this a ghoul, is this what you kept calling a demon? Is this image magical, or solemn and ordinary? Take it, I pray you, Maximus, and contemplate it: it is well that a consecrated thing should be handed to hands so pure and so pious as yours. See how comely its face is, and full of the bloom of the wrestling-school; how cheerful the god's countenance; how gracefully the down creeps over either cheek; how the curled hair appears on his head beneath the rim of his cap; how prettily the two little wings stand out above his temples; how festively the garment is gathered up about his shoulders. The man who dares to call this a skeleton assuredly either sees no images of the gods at all, or neglects them all; and the man, finally, who thinks this a ghoul is himself the ghoul-haunted one.

[119595] 64. But to you, Aemilianus, in return for that falsehood, may that god who is the messenger between the powers above and below grant the ill-will of both sets of gods, and ever set before your eyes the shapes of the dead to meet you, whatever there is anywhere of shades, whatever of spectres, whatever of departed spirits, whatever of ghouls — all the apparitions of the night, all the terrors of the funeral pyre, all the frights of the tomb — from which, for all that, in age and in desert you are not far off. But we of the Platonic household know nothing but what is festive and joyful and solemn and lofty and heavenly. Indeed, in its zeal for the heights, that school has explored certain things even loftier than heaven itself, and has stood on the outermost back of the universe. Maximus knows that I speak the truth, who has read in the Phaedrus, diligently, of "the place beyond the heavens" and "the back of heaven." The same Maximus understands very well — to answer you about the name also — who that "king" is, named so not first by me but by Plato: "About the king of all things are all things, and for his sake are all things" — who that king is, the cause and reason and original source of all the nature of things, the supreme begetter of the soul, the everlasting preserver of living creatures, the unwearied maker of his own world, yet a maker without labour, a preserver without care, a begetter without propagation; comprehended by no place, no time, no change whatever, and therefore conceivable by few, expressible by none.

[121145] 65. Look, I freely heighten the suspicion of magic: I do not answer you, Aemilianus, what "king" it is that I worship; nay, if the proconsul himself should ask me what my god is, I keep silence. Of the name I have for the present said enough. As for what remains, I myself am not unaware that some of the bystanders desire to hear why I chose to have my image made not of silver or gold, but of wood above all; and this, I think, they desire not so much to find fault as to learn, that they may be freed from this scruple too, when they see every suspicion of the charge abundantly confuted. Hear, then, you whose care it is to learn — but with your mind as upright and attentive as you can make it, as though you were about to hear the very words of Plato, now an old man, from the last book of the Laws: "A man of measure, in dedicating offerings to the gods, ought to give measured ones. The earth, then, and the hearth of every dwelling are sacred to all men, of all the gods; let no one, therefore, consecrate sacred things to the gods a second time" — this he forbids in order that no one may dare to set up shrines privately; for he holds it enough that the citizens have public temples for the immolation of victims — then he adds: "Gold and silver, in other cities, both in private hands and in temples, are a possession that breeds envy; ivory, from a body that has left its soul behind, is no gracious offering; iron and bronze are instruments of war; but of wood, let a man dedicate whatever he will, made of a single block, and of stone likewise." As the assent of all has declared, Maximus, and you who sit in council, I seem to have used Plato most fittingly, as the master of my life, so the patron of my cause, to whose laws you see me obedient.

[122909] 66. Now it is time to turn beforehand to the letters of Pudentilla — or rather to fetch the whole order of the matter from a little higher up, so that it may lie open most plainly to all that I, who they keep saying invaded the house of Pudentilla out of greed for gain, ought, if I had thought of any gain at all, always to have fled from that house, since in other respects too the match was anything but prosperous — indeed, hostile to me, had not the woman herself balanced so many disadvantages by her virtues. For no other cause can be found, save empty envy, which has kindled against me both this trial and, before it, many perils of my life. For why should Aemilianus be moved, even if he had truly found me out to be a magician — a man who has been injured by no deed of mine, nor by so much as the slightest word of mine, that he should seem to be going to avenge himself deservedly? Nor again does he accuse me for glory's sake, as Marcus Antonius accused Gnaeus Carbo, Gaius Mucius accused Aulus Albucius, Publius Sulpicius accused Gnaeus Norbanus, Gaius Furius accused Manius Aquilius, Gaius Curio accused Quintus Metellus. For those most learned young men undertook this, the first exercise of their forensic labour, for praise's sake, that by some notable prosecution they might become known to their fellow-citizens. This custom, granted among the ancients to young beginners as a means of displaying the flower of their talent, has long since fallen into disuse. And even if it were now common, still it would have been far from this fellow; for neither would a parade of eloquence have suited an unlettered and ignorant man, nor a desire of glory a rustic and a barbarian, nor the undertaking of advocacies an old man at the grave's edge — unless, perhaps, Aemilianus, true to his severity, has set an example, and, out of hatred for the very crimes themselves, has taken up this accusation for the integrity of his morals. But this I could scarcely have believed of Aemilianus — not this African here, but that famous Africanus and Numantinus and Censorius besides: let me not believe of this stump of a man that he has in him not only hatred of misdeeds, but even the understanding of them.

[125122] 67. What is it, then? It is clearer than anything to anyone that there is no other cause but envy which has spurred this man, and Herennius Rufinus, his instigator (of whom I shall speak presently), and the rest of my enemies, to weave together these slanders of magic. There are, then, five points which I must discuss. For, if I remember rightly, as regards Pudentilla they brought these charges: one point is that they said she had never wished to marry after her former husband, but was compelled by my incantations; the second is about her letter, which they take for a confession of magic; then, that she married at the sixtieth year of her age out of lust, and that the marriage-contract was sealed in a country house and not in town — these they brought up in the third and fourth place; the last, and likewise the most envy-laden, accusation was about the dowry. There they strove, with all their strength, to pour out all their venom; there above all they were tortured; and so they said that I extorted a great dowry, at the very beginning of our union, from a woman in love, with the witnesses removed, in a country house. All these things I shall show to be so false, so worthless, so empty, and shall refute them so easily and without any contention, that, so help me, I fear, Maximus, and you who sit in council, lest you should think the accuser was sent down and suborned by me, that, finding the occasion, I might openly extinguish the envy against me. Believe me — which the fact itself will make clear — I have to labour exceedingly hard, lest you should suppose that I cunningly devised so frivolous an accusation rather than that they foolishly undertook it.

[126804] 68. Now, while I briefly follow out the order of the matter and bring it about that Aemilianus himself, when the matter is known, must needs confess that he was led into envy of me on false grounds and went far astray from the truth, I pray you, as you have done hitherto, or even more closely if you can, attend most diligently to the very source and foundation of this trial. Aemilia Pudentilla, who is now my wife, bore, by a certain Sicinius Amicus, to whom she had previously been married, two sons, Pontianus and Pudens; and these, left orphans in the power of their paternal grandfather — for Amicus had died while his father survived — she reared diligently, with memorable devotion, for about fourteen years, yet not gladly a widow so long in the very flower of her age. But the boys' grandfather strove to betroth her, against her will, to his other son, Sicinius Clarus, and on that account frightened off the other suitors; and besides he threatened that, if she married a stranger, he would leave her sons nothing of their father's goods by his will. When the wise and singularly devoted woman saw this condition obstinately laid down, lest she should in any way harm her sons on that score, she does indeed draw up a marriage-contract with the man she was bidden to marry, with Sicinius Clarus, but in very truth, by various delays, she eludes the marriage until the boys' grandfather yielded to fate, leaving her sons his heirs in such wise that Pontianus, who was the elder, should be guardian to his brother.

[128331] 69. Freed from that scruple, when she was sought in marriage by men of the first rank, she resolved that she ought not to remain longer in widowhood; for, though she could endure the weariness of solitude, she could not bear the sickness of her body. A woman chastely modest, through so many years of widowhood without fault, without scandal, grown torpid through want of a husband and wounded by the long stagnation of her inward parts, with the inmost recesses of her womb corrupted, she was often, when pains arose, brought to the very brink of life. The physicians, together with the midwives, were agreed that the disease was caused by the lack of marriage, that the malady was growing worse day by day, that the sickness was deepening; while some bloom of her age remained, the disorder must be remedied by marriage. This counsel both others approved, and Aemilianus here above all — the very man who a little while ago, with most confident falsehood, asserted that Pudentilla had never thought of marriage before she was compelled by magical sorceries by me; that I alone had been found to violate, with charms and poisons, the as-it-were virginity of her widowhood. I have often heard it said, and not without reason, that a liar ought to have a good memory; but it did not come into your mind, Aemilianus, that, before I came to Oea, you yourself had even written letters urging her to marry, to her son Pontianus, who was then grown up and living at Rome. Produce the letter — or rather, give it to him himself: let him read it, let him convict himself by his own voice and his own words. Is this your letter? Why have you turned pale? For blush you certainly cannot. Is this your signature? — Read it, I pray you, more loudly, that all may understand how much his tongue is at variance with his hand, and how much less he is at odds with me than with himself.

[130203] 70. Did you write these things, Aemilianus, which have been read? "That she wishes and ought to marry, I know; but whom she is to choose, I do not know." Quite right of you: you did not know; for Pudentilla, who knew well your hostile malignity, confessed to you only the fact itself, but nothing about the suitor. But you, while you thought she would still be married to your brother Clarus, led on by a false hope, were even an adviser to his son Pontianus too to give his consent. And so, if she had married Clarus, a country fellow and a decrepit old man, you would say she had married long ago of her own accord, without any magic; but since she chose a young man such as you describe, you say she did it under compulsion, and otherwise had always spurned marriage. You did not know, you scoundrel, that your letter on this subject was being kept; you did not know that you would be convicted by your own testimony. Yet that letter, the witness and informer of your purpose, Pudentilla — knowing you to be light and changeable, and no less lying and impudent — chose to keep rather than to send back. As for the matter itself, she herself wrote to her son Pontianus at Rome, and fully set forth the reasons of her resolve as well. She told him all about her health: that there was nothing besides, why she should hold out any longer; that she had sought her grandfather's inheritance by a long widowhood, with contempt of her own well-being, and had increased that same inheritance by the utmost industry; that now, by the will of the gods, he himself was of an age for a wife, and his brother for the manly toga; that they should at last allow her too to relieve her solitude and her sickness; for the rest, that they should fear nothing concerning her devotion and her final disposition: that, such as she had been to them as a widow, such would she be as a wife. I will order a copy of this letter, sent to her son, to be read out.

[132144] 71. I think it can be plain enough to anyone from these things that Pudentilla was not driven from a stubborn widowhood by my incantations, but, having long since of her own accord been by no means averse from marriage, perhaps preferred me before the rest. And why this choice of so weighty a woman ought to be made a charge against me rather than an honour, I cannot discover; only I wonder that Aemilianus and Rufinus take so ill this judgment of the woman, when those very men who sought Pudentilla in marriage bear it with an even mind that I was preferred to them. And indeed, that she did this, she obeyed her son rather than her own heart. So it was done, nor will Aemilianus be able to deny it. For Pontianus, on receiving his mother's letter, flew at once from Rome, fearing lest, if she had got hold of some greedy husband, she might, as often happens, carry everything off into her husband's house. That anxiety gnawed his mind not a little: all the hopes of riches for him and his brother lay in their mother's resources. Their grandfather had left them a modest sum; their mother possessed four million sesterces, of which she owed a certain amount of money to her sons, received under no written deed, but, as was fair, on her mere good faith. This fear he muttered to himself; he did not dare to oppose her openly, lest he should seem to distrust her.

[133513] 72. When matters stood thus, between the mother's wooing and the son's fear, by chance or by fate, I arrive, on my way to Alexandria. By Hercules, I would have said "would that it had never happened," did not regard for my wife forbid me. It was the winter of the year. I, worn out by the fatigue of the journey, take to my bed for a good many days at the house of those friends of mine, the Appii, whom I name out of honour and affection. Thither came Pontianus to me; for he had been brought into acquaintance with me not so very long before, many years ago, at Athens, through certain common friends, and afterward joined to me intimately in close companionship. He does everything attentively as regards my honour, anxiously as regards my health, cunningly as regards his love; for indeed he seemed to himself to have found a most suitable husband for his mother, to whom he might, with safe warrant, entrust the whole fortune of the house. And at first, indeed, sounding my will with covert words, since he saw me eager for the road and turned away from the matter of a wife, he begs me to stay at least a little while: that he wished to set out with me; that another winter must be waited out, on account of the heat and the wild beasts of the Syrtes, since my illness had robbed me of this one. He even wins from my Appii, by many entreaties, that I should be moved to his house, to his mother's; that the lodging would be healthier for me; and besides, that I should enjoy more freely from it the prospect of the sea, which is most pleasing to me.

[135070] 73. All these things, striving with eager zeal, he carries; he commends to me his mother and his brother, this boy here. I help them not a little in our common studies; the familiarity grows greatly. Meanwhile I recover; at the request of friends I discourse somewhat in public; all who were present, filling the basilica, which was the place of the lecture, with a vast throng, among very many other most fitting things, cried out to me with one remarkable voice, begging that I should remain, that I should become a citizen of Oea. Presently, when the audience was dismissed, Pontianus, taking that for his starting-point, set upon me, interprets the consent of the public voice as a divine omen, and discloses that it is his plan, if I do not refuse, to join his mother — at whom very many gape — to me in marriage (since to me alone, he says, he trusts and entrusts everything); that, if I would not take up that burden — since it was no lovely young ward, but the mother of children, of middling looks, that was being offered me — if, weighing these things, I were keeping myself for another match for the sake of beauty and riches, I should be acting neither as a friend nor as a philosopher. It would be too long a speech, if I wished to recount what I answered to the contrary, how long and how often we bandied words between us, with how many and what kind of entreaties he set upon me, and did not let go before he at length prevailed — not but that I had already, by a whole year's constant intercourse, well observed Pudentilla and explored the endowments of her virtues, but inasmuch as, being desirous of travel, I had for a while refused the impediment of marriage. Soon, however, I wished for such a woman no less eagerly than if I had sought her of my own accord. Pontianus had also persuaded his mother to prefer me to all others, and was eager to accomplish this as soon as possible, with incredible zeal. Hardly could we win from him so much delay as this — that first he himself should take a wife, and his brother should take up the use of the manly toga; and then at length that we should be joined.

[137194] 74. Would, by Hercules, that I could pass over what must next be said without the greatest loss to my case, lest I should seem now to be reproaching with fickleness Pontianus, whose error, when he deprecated it, I freely forgave. For I confess what has been thrown in my teeth: that, after he had taken a wife, he fell away from the faith of our compact, and, his mind suddenly changed, went about to hinder, with equal obstinacy, the very thing he had before hastened with excessive zeal — in short, that, to keep our marriage from coming together, he was ready to suffer anything, to do anything; although all that so foul a change of mind, and the quarrel undertaken against his mother, is not to be charged to his own fault, but to his father-in-law, that Herennius Rufinus yonder, who has left no single man on earth more worthless than himself, or more wicked, or more befouled. In few words, as moderately as I can, I will of necessity describe the man, lest, if I keep wholly silent about him, he should have lost his labour, who stirred up this business against me with his utmost might. For this is the instigator of this little boy, this the author of the accusation, this the hirer of advocates, this the buyer of witnesses, this the little furnace of the whole slander, this the firebrand and the lash of this Aemilianus; and he boasts of it, most intemperately, before everyone, that by his contrivance I have been arraigned as a defendant. And indeed he has, in these things, something to applaud himself for. For he is the cheat of all lawsuits, the deviser of all forgeries, the architect of all pretences, the seed-bed of all evils; and likewise the very den, the haunt, the brothel of lusts and gluttonies; from his earliest years openly notorious for all manner of disgrace; once, in his boyhood, before he was disfigured by that baldness, complaisant in every unspeakable thing to those who unmanned him; soon, in his youth, in dancing pantomimes, plainly boneless and nerveless, but, as I hear, with an untaught and clumsy effeminacy; for it is denied that he had anything of the actor about him except indecency.

[139331] 75. Even at this age which he is now of — may the gods destroy him! much courtesy must be premised to your ears — his whole house is a pander's house, his whole household defiled: himself a thing of shame, his wife a she-wolf, his sons like them. Day and night, downright, his door is battered by the kicks of the youth in their sport, his windows are loud with serenades, his dining-room is in an uproar with revellers, his bedchamber lies open to adulterers; for no one has any fear of entering, except the man who has brought no price to the husband. Thus the dishonour of his own bed is his revenue. Once he made his money by his own body, now by his wife's, in the common market; with the man himself — and I do not lie — with the man himself, I say, very many strike their bargains for nights with his wife. Now there is that well-known collusion between husband and wife: those who have brought a generous fee to the woman, no one watches them, they depart at their own discretion; those who have come emptier, at a signal given are caught, as if for adulterers, and, as though they had come to learn a lesson, do not depart before they have written something. For what is a wretched man to do, fallen from a rather ample fortune, which yet he had unexpectedly come by through his father's fraud? His father, sunk in debt to very many creditors, preferred money to honour; for when he was dunned on every side with the account-books, and held, as if a madman, by all he met, "Peace!" said he, declares he cannot pay, throws away his golden rings and all the insignia of his rank, makes a composition with his creditors. Yet most of his estate he transfers, by a most cunning fraud, into his wife's name: himself needy, naked, and safe through his own ignominy, he left to this Rufinus — I do not lie — three hundred thousand sesterces to devour; for so much came to him, free and clear, out of his mother's goods, besides what his wife sought for him by her daily dowries. All which, however, in a few years, this glutton so diligently buried in his belly and squandered in revellings of every kind, that you would think he was afraid lest it be said he had anything left from his father's fraud; this just man, and of strict morals, took pains that what had been ill got should ill perish, and nothing was left him of his rather ample fortune except a wretched ambition and a bottomless gullet.

[141735] 76. As for his wife, now nearly an old woman and worn out, she refuses to feed the whole house any longer by her shame; but his daughter, carried round in vain among the richer young men at her mother's invitation, and even handed over to certain suitors for trial, had perhaps, unless she had chanced upon the easy good nature of Pontianus, still been sitting at home a widow before she was a wife. Pontianus gave her — much against our dissuasion — the false and imaginary title of marriage, not unaware that a little before, when he was about to take her, she had been abandoned, after he had had his fill, by a certain most honourable young man, to whom she had previously been betrothed. So she came to him, the new bride, secure and undaunted, her modesty stripped off, her bloom faded, her bridal veil outworn — a virgin again after a recent divorce, bringing the name of a maiden rather than her intactness. She was carried in a litter of eight bearers; you certainly saw, you who were present, how shameless a scanner of the young men she was, how immoderate a displayer of herself. Who did not recognize the mother's training, when he saw in the girl her painted mouth, her rouged cheeks, her enticing eyes? Her whole dowry had been borrowed from a creditor, to the last farthing, the day before, and indeed a larger one than that exhausted house, full of children, could afford.

[143126] 77. But this fellow, moderate as he is in substance, immoderate in hope, with avarice and want equally his portion, had already devoured, in empty anticipation, the whole four million of Pudentilla, and thinking that I must therefore be got out of the way, that he might the more easily circumvent the easy good nature of Pontianus and the loneliness of Pudentilla, begins to upbraid his son-in-law for having betrothed his mother to me; he advises him to draw back his foot, as soon as he can, from so great a peril, while it is permitted; to hold his mother's property himself rather than knowingly transmit it to a stranger; and, if he will not do so, the old hand throws a scruple into the love-sick youth, threatens that he will take his daughter away. What more? The simple young man, moreover bridled by the allurements of his new bride, he turns aside from the road at his own pleasure. He goes to his mother, the carrier of Rufinus's words; but, her gravity having been tried in vain, himself rebuked into the bargain for fickleness and inconstancy, he carries back to his father-in-law no soft answer: that to his mother, immovable apart from her most placid disposition, anger too had been added by his expostulation — no slight reinforcement of her steadfastness; that she had answered, in short, that it was not hidden from her that she was being remonstrated with at Rufinus's instigation; and that for that very reason she ought all the more to provide herself with a husband's aid against his desperate avarice.

[144655] 78. On hearing this, that pimp of his own wife was so exasperated, swelled up with such anger, blazed with such frenzy, that against a most holy and most modest woman, in the presence of her own son, he spoke things worthy of his bedchamber, cried out that she was a wanton, that I was a magician and a poisoner, in the hearing of many (whom, if you will, I shall name): that he would bring death upon me with his own hand. Hardly, by Hercules, can I govern my anger; a huge indignation rises in my mind. You, you most effeminate of men, with your hand threaten death to any man? But with what hand, pray? That of Philomela, or Medea, or Clytemnestra? And yet, when you dance these — such is the softness of your soul, such your dread of steel — you dance them without a sword. But, not to digress too far from my order: Pudentilla, after she sees that her son, against expectation, has been perverted to the opposite of her own resolve, set out for the country and wrote to him, by way of rebuke, that most notorious letter, in which, as those men kept saying, she confessed that she had been led into love and madness by my magic; which letter, however, in the presence of Pontianus's clerk and with Aemilianus writing on the other side, we copied out, under attestation, the day before yesterday, by your command, Maximus; and in it everything is found, contrary to the proclamation of those men, in my favour.

[146070] 79. And yet, even if she had called me a magician more roundly, she might be thought to have wished, by way of excuse to her son, rather to allege my compulsion than her own will. Or was Phaedra alone in inventing a false letter about love, and is not this an art familiar to all women — that, when they have begun to want anything of the kind, they prefer to seem compelled? But even if she really thought so in her heart, that I was a magician, am I therefore to be held a magician, because Pudentilla wrote this? You, with so many arguments, so many witnesses, with so long a speech, do not prove me a magician: would she prove it with a single word? And how much more weight, pray, is to be given to what is sworn to in a court than to what is written in a letter? Why do you not convict me by my own deeds, rather than by another's words? Otherwise, by the same road, many men will be arraigned for any crime you please, if whatever a man has written in his letter, out of love or hatred for someone, is to hold good. "Pudentilla wrote that you were a magician: therefore you are a magician." What if she had written that I was a consul: should I be a consul? What, if a painter, if a physician, what, finally, if innocent? Would you think me any of these, for the reason that she had said it? Nothing of the kind, of course. And yet it is most unjust to put faith, in the worse case, in one to whom you would not put it in the better — that her letter has power to ruin, but no power to save. "But," he says, "she was out of her mind, she loved you to distraction." I grant it for the moment. Are all those who are loved, then, magicians, if perchance the one who loves writes this? I believe rather, now, that Pudentilla at that time did not love me, since she wrote abroad what was plainly going to harm me.

[147887] 80. Finally, which do you wish — that she was sane, or insane, when she wrote? You will say sane? Then she had suffered nothing from magic arts. You will answer insane? Then she did not know what she wrote, and therefore no faith is to be put in her; nay rather, if she had been insane, she would not have known that she was insane. For just as he acts absurdly who says that he is silent — since by saying so in that very place he does not keep silent, and by the very profession weakens what he professes — so this is even more self-contradictory: "I am insane," which is not true unless he says it knowingly; but he is sane who knows what insanity is, since insanity cannot know itself, any more than blindness can see itself. Therefore Pudentilla was of sound mind, if she did not think herself of sound mind. I could, if I wished, say more, but I let logic go. I will read the letter itself, which cries out something far different, and which seems, as it were, deliberately prepared and fitted for this trial. Take it, you, and read, until I interrupt. — Hold back a little while what follows; for we have come to a turning-point of the matter. For so far, Maximus, as far as I at least have observed, nowhere has the woman named magic, but she has gone over the same order which I went over a little before: of her long widowhood, of the remedy for her health, of her wish to marry, of my praises, which she had learned from Pontianus, of his own urging that she should marry me above all.

[149385] 81. Thus far it has been read. There remains that part of the letter which, written likewise in my favour, turns its horns against my very self; which, sent with diligence to drive the charge of magic from me, by a memorable encomium of Rufinus has changed sides, and of its own accord sought to fix upon me the contrary opinion of certain people of Oea, as of a magician. Many things, Maximus, you have heard by report, more you have learned by reading, not a few you have ascertained by experience: but cunning so insidious, so compounded of marvellous villainy, you will deny that you ever came to know. What Palamedes, what Sisyphus, what Eurybates, finally, or Phrynondas could have devised the like? All those whom I have named, and any others besides who are memorable for guile, if they be set against this one piece of Rufinus's deceit, will plainly seem mere clowns and buffoons. O wonderful contrivance! O subtlety worthy of the prison and the rack! Who would believe it could be brought about that what had been a defence, the same — the same letters remaining — should be turned into an accusation? It is, by Hercules, incredible. But how this incredible thing was done, I will prove.

[150584] 82. There was a mother's rebuke to her son, because he, taking it from Rufinus's opinion, now kept calling a magician me, such a man as she had proclaimed me to him. The very words ran in this manner: "Apuleius is a magician, and I have been bewitched by him and am in love. Come, then, to me, while I am still in my right mind." These very words, which I have inserted in Greek, Rufinus, alone excerpting them and sundered from their context, carried round as if it were the woman's confession, and, leading the weeping Pontianus through the forum, showed them to the crowd, offered the woman's very letter to be read just so far as I have said, and concealed the rest written above and below; he kept saying they were too shameful to be shown: it was enough that the woman's confession of magic should be known. What more? It seemed plausible to everyone; the very things that had been written to clear me roused against me a monstrous odium among the ignorant. This filthy fellow ranged through the middle of the forum, raving like a Bacchanal, again and again opening the letter and crying aloud: "Apuleius is a magician; she herself says what she feels and suffers; what more do you want?" There was no one to take my part and to answer thus: "Give us the whole letter, if you please; let me look at it all, let me read it through from beginning to end. There are many things which, brought forward alone, can seem liable to slander. Anyone's speech can be misrepresented, if those things which are linked to what went before are cheated of their beginning, if certain things are suppressed at pleasure out of the order of the writing, if things said for pretence are read with the delivery of one asserting rather than of one reproaching." These things, and the like of them, might then deservedly have been said; the very order of the letter shows it.

[152444] 83. But you, Aemilianus, call to mind whether you copied out under attestation, along with me, these words too: "For, wishing to marry for the reasons I have stated, you yourself persuaded me to choose this man before all others, admiring the man and being eager to make him your own through me. But now, since malicious accusers are talking you over, suddenly Apuleius has become a magician, and I have been bewitched by him and am in love. Come, then, to me, while I am still in my right mind." I beseech you, Maximus: if letters, just as some are called vowels, had also a voice of their own; if words, as the poets say, flew abroad on wings — would not, the moment Rufinus in bad faith excerpted that letter, read a few words, knowingly kept silent about many and better ones, would not then the rest of the letters have cried out that they were being wickedly held back, would not the suppressed words have flown out of Rufinus's hands into the open, have filled the whole forum with their tumult: that they too had been sent by Pudentilla, that they too had been charged with things to say; that to a wicked and impious man, trying to commit a forgery through another's letter, they would not give ear, but would rather be heard themselves; that Apuleius had not been accused of magic by Pudentilla, but acquitted, with Rufinus for accuser? All which, even if they were not said then, yet now, when they are of more profit, appear clearer than the light. Your arts lie open, Rufinus, your frauds gape wide, the lie is uncovered: the truth, once perverted, now bears itself forth, and slander plunges, as into a deep pit.

[154072] 84. You appealed to the letters of Pudentilla: by the letters I win; and if you wish to hear also their very last clause, I will not grudge it. Say, you, with what words the woman finished her letter — the bewitched, the senseless, the mad, the love-sick woman: "I am neither bewitched nor in love. I am escaping my destiny." Do you want still more? Pudentilla cries out against you, and vindicates her own sanity from your slanders by a kind of public proclamation; and the reason, or the necessity, of her marrying she ascribes to fate, from which magic is far removed, or rather wholly abolished. For what force is left to enchantments and poisons, if fate, like a most violent torrent, can neither be held back nor driven on? Therefore, by this sentence of hers, Pudentilla has denied not only that I am a magician, but that magic exists at all. It is well that Pontianus, after his custom, preserved his mother's letters whole; it is well that the haste of the trial forestalled you, lest you should make any change in these letters at your leisure. This, Maximus, is the benefit of you and of your foresight, that, having from the beginning understood the slanders, lest they should be strengthened by time, you precipitated them, and, granting no delay, hamstrung them. Suppose now that a mother had confessed to her son, in a secret letter, something about love, as is wont. Was it right, Rufinus — I do not say pious, but even merely humane — to publish those letters, and to publish them above all by the proclamation of her son? But am I not foolish, who demand that you preserve another's modesty, you who have lost your own?

[155711] 85. But why do I complain of things past, when present things are no less bitter? To this point has that wretched boy been perverted by you, that he reads out his mother's letters, which he thinks amatory, before a proconsular tribunal, in the presence of that most holy man Claudius Maximus; that before these statues of the emperor Pius a son reproaches his mother with shameful debaucheries and throws her loves in her teeth. Who is so mild that he would not grow hot with anger? Do you, you basest of men, search out your parent's heart in such matters, watch her eyes, count her sighs, explore her affections, intercept her letters, convict her of love? Do you inquire what she does in her bedchamber, that your mother may be reckoned — I do not say a wanton, but not even a woman at all? Do you think of nothing in her but the single reverence due to a parent? O unhappy your womb, Pudentilla! O barrenness better than children! O ill-fated ten months! O thankless fourteen years of widowhood! The viper, as I hear, gnawing through its mother's womb, creeps forth into the light, and so is born by parricide: but to you, while you live and look on, harsher bites are offered by a son now grown up. Your silence is torn, your modesty is plucked, your breast is pierced, your inmost vitals are dragged forth. Are these the thanks, good son, that you repay your mother — for the life she gave, for the inheritance she acquired, for the long fourteen years of nurture? In these disciplines did your uncle school you, that, if you should learn for certain your sons would be like you, you would not dare to take a wife? There is a verse of the poet, not unknown: "I hate little boys of precocious wisdom." But a boy precocious in malice, who would not turn from and hate, when he sees, like a monster, one robust in crime before he is robust in years, harmful before he is powerful, with green boyhood, with hoary malice? Or rather, all the more noxious is this, that he is pernicious with impunity, and, not yet ripe for punishment, is already ripe for injury — injury, do I say? nay rather, for a crime against a parent, unspeakable, monstrous, intolerable.

[157873] 86. The Athenians, indeed, for the common right of humanity, out of the captured letters of Philip of Macedon, their enemy, when each was being read in public, forbade one letter to be read out, which had been written to his wife Olympias; they spared the enemy rather than divulge a husband's secret, judging that the common law of right ought to be preferred to their own vengeance. Such were enemies toward an enemy: what kind of son are you toward a mother! You see how close are the things I compare. Yet you, a son, read your mother's letters, written about love, as you say, in this assembly — in which, if you were bidden to read some too-wanton poet, you would assuredly not dare; some shame, at least, would hold you back. Nay, you would never have touched your mother's letters, if you had touched any other letters at all. But how you dared to give to be read your own letter — which, written too irreverently, too insultingly and foully about your mother, while you were still being nursed in her bosom, you had sent secretly to Pontianus, no doubt that you might not have sinned only once, and that your good deed might be taken in by his gaze! Wretch, you do not understand that your uncle suffered this to be done in order to clear himself before men, if from your letter it should be known that you, even before you came over to him, even while you were fawning on your mother, were nevertheless already a sly fox and an impious one.

[159325] 87. For the rest, I cannot bring myself to think Aemilianus so foolish as to suppose that the letters of a boy, and of one who is at the same time my accuser, will do me any harm. There was also that fabricated letter, neither written in my hand nor plausibly forged, by which they wished it to seem that the woman had been solicited by me with blandishments. Why should I use blandishments, if I trusted in magic? And by what way did the letter come to them — a letter sent, of course, to Pudentilla through some trusty person, as is wont to be done with care in such a matter? Why, besides, should I write in such faulty words, in so barbarous a style — I, whom those same men say is by no means unskilled in the Greek tongue? Why, again, should I court her with blandishments so absurd and so tavern-like — I, whom those same men say sport wittily enough in amatory verses? It is so, assuredly; it is plain to anyone: this man, who could not read Pudentilla's somewhat-too-Greek letter, read this one the more easily as his own, and commended it the more aptly. But I shall have said enough about the letters, if I add this one thing: that Pudentilla, who had written, by way of dissimulation and ridicule, "Come, then, while I am still in my right mind," after this letter summoned her sons and her daughter-in-law to her, and lived with them for about these two months. Let this pious son say what, in that time, he saw his mother do or say amiss through insanity; let him deny that she subscribed most shrewdly the accounts of the bailiffs and shepherds and grooms; let him deny that his brother Pontianus was gravely warned by her to beware of the snares of Rufinus; let him deny that he was truly rebuked because he had carried about the letter she had sent him among the crowd, and yet had not read it in good faith; let him deny that, after these things which I have mentioned, his mother married me at a country house, at a place agreed upon long before. For it had so pleased us, that we should rather be joined at a suburban villa, lest the citizens should again flock together for the doles, since not long before Pudentilla had paid out fifty thousand sesterces of her own to the people, on the day that Pontianus took a wife and this little boy was wrapped in the toga; and besides, that we might dispense with the many banquets and vexations which new husbands have, after custom, to undergo.

[161736] 88. There you have, Aemilianus, the whole reason why the marriage-contract between me and Pudentilla was sealed not in the town, but at a suburban villa: lest fifty thousand sesterces should have to be lavished again, and lest we should have to dine with you or at your house. Is the reason adequate? Yet I wonder that you so shrink from a country house, you who for the most part live in the country. The Julian law on the marriages of the orders nowhere forbids in this fashion: "Thou shalt not take a wife at a country house"; nay, if you would have the truth, a wife is taken with much better auspices for offspring at a country house than in the town, on fertile soil rather than in a barren place, on the turf of the field rather than on the flag-stones of the forum. A woman about to be a mother, let her marry in the very lap of the mother, in the standing corn, upon the fruitful clod, or let her lie a bride beneath the elm, in the very bosom of mother Earth, among the offshoots of the grasses and the layered shoots of the vines and the buds of the trees. There too that most celebrated verse in the comedies aptly fits: "for the ploughing of lawful children, for the sowing." To the ancestors of the Romans also — the Quintii and the Serrani and many others like them — not only wives, but even consulships and dictatorships were offered in the fields. I will check myself in a theme so prolix, lest I do you a favour, if I should praise the country house.

[163207] 89. But as to the age of Pudentilla, about which after these things you lied confidently enough, so that you said that she had married even at sixty years of age — about that I will answer you in few words; for there is no need, in a matter so plain, to dispute at length. Her father, after the manner of others, registered her at her birth as a daughter born to him. His records are kept partly in the public record-office, partly at home, and they are now thrust before your face. Hand these tablets, you, to Aemilianus: let him look at the thread, let him recognize the seals that are stamped upon it, let him read the consuls, let him reckon up the years which he was assigning, as sixty, to the woman. Let him prove fifty-five: then he has lied by five years. That is too little; I will deal more liberally — for he himself has bestowed many years upon Pudentilla, so I will give him back ten in turn: Mezentius has wandered along with Ulysses. Let him show the woman to be at least fifty years old. What more? That I may deal with the false-claimant, I will make twice the double of a five-year span, and at one stroke take off twenty years. Bid the consuls be reckoned, Maximus: unless I am mistaken, you will find that Pudentilla's age is now running on not much beyond the fortieth year. O bold and excessive falsehood, O lie to be punished with twenty years of exile! You lie by half as much again, Aemilianus, you dare a falsehood of one and a half times the truth. If you had said thirty years for ten, you might have seemed to err by the gesture of computation, by laying on the fingers which you ought to have curled into a circle. But when forty — which is more easily signified than the rest by the palm held out — when you increase these forty by half, you cannot have erred by the gesture of the fingers, unless perhaps, supposing Pudentilla to be thirty, you have counted the two consuls of each year.

[165129] 90. These things I let pass. I come now to the very root of the accusation, to the very motive of the sorcery. Let Aemilianus and Rufinus answer: for what gain — even if I were the greatest of magicians — should I have enticed Pudentilla to marriage by charms and poisons? And I know that very many defendants, arraigned for some crime, if any motives have been proved to exist, have nevertheless defended themselves abundantly by this one plea — that their life shrinks far from crimes of this kind, and that it ought not to tell against them that there seem to have been certain inducements to the misdeed; for not all things that could have been done are to be held as done, and the changing turns of circumstance fall out variously: that the sure index of every man is his own mind; that he who has always, with the same disposition, been disposed toward virtue or toward malice, gives a firm argument for receiving or rejecting a charge. These things, although I could deservedly say them, yet I forgive you, and I do not think it enough for myself if I have abundantly cleared myself of all you have alleged, unless I have nowhere allowed even the slightest suspicion of magic to stand. Reckon with yourselves with what confidence in my innocence, and with what contempt of you, I act: if one motive, even the least, shall be found, why I should have sought the marriage of Pudentilla for some advantage of my own; if you prove any gain, however modest, then let me be that Carmendas, or Damigeron, or Moses, or Iannes, or Apollobex, or Dardanus himself, or whoever else after Zoroaster and Hostanes has been famous among the magicians.

[166773] 91. See, I pray you, Maximus, what an uproar they have raised, because I have run over by name a few of the magicians. What am I to do with men so rude, so barbarous? Shall I teach them again that I have read these names, and many more besides, in the public libraries, among the most renowned writers? Or shall I argue that it is one thing to be acquainted with names, another to share in the art itself; and that the apparatus of learning and the memory of erudition ought not to be held a confession of crime? Or, what is far better, relying on your learning, Claudius Maximus, and on your perfect erudition, shall I scorn to answer the foolish and the unpolished on these points? Yes, I will do this rather: what they may think, I will count of no value; the thing I set out to do, I will go on to argue: that I had no motive for enticing Pudentilla to marriage by poisons. The woman's looks and age they themselves, of their own accord, disparaged, and laid it to my fault that, out of avarice, I had coveted such a wife, and indeed at our first meeting had seized a great and rich dowry. As to these things, Maximus, it is not my design to weary you with a long speech; no words are needed, since the very tablets speak far more eloquently, in which you find everything done at present and provided for the future, contrary to what those men, out of their rapacity, conjectured of me too: first of all, a modest dowry from a most wealthy woman, and that not given, but only entrusted on credit; and besides these things, that the union was made on this condition — that, if she should depart this life with no children begotten by me, the whole dowry should remain with her sons Pontianus and Pudens; but if she should die leaving one son or daughter surviving, then half the dowry should fall to the later child, the remainder to the elder ones.

[168627] 92. These things, as I say, I will prove by the tablets themselves. Perhaps not even thus will Aemilianus believe that only three hundred thousand sesterces were set down, and the recovery of them given by compact to Pudentilla's sons. Take, if you please, these tablets with your own hands, give them to your instigator Rufinus: let him read, let him be ashamed of his swollen spirit and his ostentatious beggary; since he himself, needy and naked, dowered his daughter with four hundred thousand sesterces borrowed from a creditor, while Pudentilla, a wealthy woman, was content with a dowry of three hundred thousand, and has a husband who, scorning many and often vast dowries that were offered, was content with the empty name of so small a dowry, and reckons nothing but his wife, who puts all his furniture and all his riches in the concord of marriage and in mutual love. And yet who of all men, even slightly skilled in affairs, would dare to find fault if a widow, of middling looks but not of middling age, wishing to marry, had enticed by a long dowry and an easy condition a young man not to be regretted in body or mind or fortune? A beautiful maiden, even if she be downright poor, is yet abundantly dowered; for she brings to her husband a fresh disposition of soul, the grace of beauty, the first beginnings of bloom. The very recommendation of virginity is rightly and deservedly most acceptable to all husbands; for whatever else you have received as dowry, you can, when you please — so as not to be bound by the benefit — give back, just as you received it: repay the money, restore the slaves, move out of the house, withdraw from the estates: only virginity, once received, cannot be returned; it alone remains with the husband of the dowry-goods. But a widow, such as she came to the marriage, such she departs at the divorce; she brings nothing irrecoverable, but comes already deflowered by another, by no means apt to learn what you wish, no less suspicious of her new home than she is herself already to be suspected on account of that one divorce — whether she lost her husband by death, and so is a woman of ill omen and of unlucky marriage, by no means to be desired, or has parted by repudiation, a woman having either fault, who either was so intolerable as to be repudiated, or so insolent as to repudiate. For these and other reasons widows entice their suitors with an augmented dowry. Which Pudentilla too would have done in the case of another husband, had she not found a philosopher who scorned the dowry.

[171174] 93. Come now: if I had coveted the woman for avarice's sake, what would have been more useful to me, for the possession of her house, than to sow discord between mother and sons, to alienate from her heart the affection of her children, that I might the more freely and closely possess the desolate woman alone? Was this the act of a robber — which you feign me to be? No, I was rather the author, the reconciler, the fosterer of quiet and concord and devotion; and not only did I sow no new hatreds, but I rooted out the old ones to their foundation. I urged my wife — whose whole resources, as those men say, I had already swallowed up — I urged her, I say, and at last persuaded her, that, when her sons demanded back their own money, of which I spoke above, she should restore that money without delay, in estates valued cheaply, and at whatever price they themselves wished; and besides, that out of her own estate she should give them the most fruitful fields and a great house richly furnished and a great quantity of wheat and barley and wine and oil and the other fruits, and slaves too, not fewer than four hundred, and cattle, neither few nor of mean value — that she might both make them secure as to that portion which she had assigned, and entice them, by hope, to the rest of the inheritance. These things, then, I wrung from an unwilling Pudentilla — for she will suffer me to tell it as the matter was — I extorted them from her, unwilling and angry, by mighty entreaties; I reconciled the mother to her sons, and enriched my stepsons, by this first benefit of a stepfather, with a great sum of money.

[172794] 94. This was known to the whole city. All cursed Rufinus and extolled me with praises. Pontianus had come to us, before she completed that donation, together with that unlike brother of his, and, falling at our feet, had begged pardon and forgetfulness of all that was past, weeping and kissing our hands and saying that he repented of having listened to Rufinus and the like. He begs afterward, as a suppliant, that I would clear him also to Lollianus Avitus, a most distinguished man, to whom not long before he had been commended by me on the first trial of his oratory; for he had learned that, a few days before, I had written to him a full account of everything as it had happened. This too he obtains from me. And so, having received the letter, he sets out for Carthage, where Lollianus Avitus, his consulship now nearly run out, was awaiting you, Maximus. He, having read my letter, with his eminent humanity, congratulated Pontianus on having so quickly corrected his error, and wrote back to me by him a letter — good gods, with what learning, with what grace, with what charm and at the same time pleasantness of words, downright as a good man skilled in speaking. I know, Maximus, that you will gladly hear his letter; and indeed, if I read it aloud, I will pronounce it with my own voice. Hand over, you, the letters of Avitus, that what have always been an ornament to me may now be also a safeguard. But you may let the water-clock run on; for the letters of that excellent man I long to read over and over, three and four times, at whatever cost of time.

[174367] 95. I am not unaware that, after these letters of Avitus, I ought to have brought my speech to a close. For what more wealthy eulogist, what more holy witness of my life, what more eloquent advocate, finally, could I produce? Many eloquent men of the Roman name I have diligently come to know in my life, but I have admired none equally. There is no one today, so far as my opinion goes, of any reputation or hope in eloquence, who would not far rather be Avitus, if, with envy set aside, he were willing to compare himself with him; for all the virtues of speaking, well-nigh opposite to each other, meet together in that man. Whatever speech Avitus has built, it will be so perfectly finished on every side that in it neither would Cato miss weight, nor Laelius smoothness, nor Gracchus impetuosity, nor Caesar fire, nor Hortensius arrangement, nor Calvus shrewdness, nor Sallust thrift, nor Cicero richness: in short — not to go through them all — if you hear Avitus, you would wish nothing added, nothing taken away, nor yet anything changed. I see, Maximus, how kindly you listen to what you recognize in your friend Avitus. Your courtesy invited me to say even these few things of him. But I will not so far indulge your good will as to allow myself, now almost wearied in a cause inclining downright toward its end, to begin only now upon his outstanding virtues; rather I will keep them for unspent strength and a free hour.

[175801] 96. For now, much against my will, my speech must roll back from the commemoration of so great a man to those plagues. Do you dare, then, Aemilianus, to compare yourself with Avitus? Will you assail with the charge of magic and sorcery the man whom he calls a good man, the disposition of whose mind he praises so fully in his letter? Or ought you to grieve more that I invaded the house of Pudentilla and plundered her goods than Pontianus would have grieved — Pontianus, who, for the quarrels that arose between us over a few days, at your instigation, of course, made me satisfaction even in my absence before Avitus, who gave me thanks before so great a man? Suppose that I had read the proceedings before Avitus, not his own letter. What could you, or anyone, accuse in that business? Pontianus himself credited to my gift what he had received as a donation from his mother; Pontianus rejoiced with his inmost affections that I had fallen to him as a stepfather. Would that he had returned safe from Carthage! Or, since it had been so decreed for him by fate, would that you, Rufinus, had not hindered his last disposition. What thanks he would have given me, either to my face or at least in his will! Yet the letters which he sent ahead to me from Carthage, or even already on his way, from the road — while still in health, and already sick — full of honour, full of love, allow, I pray you, Maximus, to be read a little while, that his brother, my accuser, may know how, in everything inferior, he runs the course of his life beside his brother, a man of excellent memory.

[177384] 97. Have you heard the titles which your brother Pontianus bestowed on me — calling me his parent, his lord, his master, both often at other times and especially at the very last period of his life, after . . . ? Your matching letters too I would bring forth, if I thought even a little delay worth so much. Rather I would wish to bring forward that recent will of your brother, which, though unfinished, yet most dutifully and most honourably makes mention of me. But that will Rufinus suffered neither to be drawn up nor to be completed, out of shame at the lost inheritance, which, as the price of the few months in which he was Pontianus's father-in-law, he had reckoned at a great rate of nights. Besides, he had consulted I know not what Chaldaeans, at what gain he should bestow his daughter, who — as I hear (and would they had not answered it truly) — replied first, that her husband would die within a few months; for the rest, about the inheritance, as is wont, they made up to the wish of the consulter. But, as the gods willed, like a blind beast he gaped in vain. For Pontianus, having found out the daughter of Rufinus to be of ill repute, not only did not leave her his heir, but did not even bestow on her an honourable legacy; indeed he ordered linens of about two hundred denarii to be assigned to her, by way of insult, that it might be understood that he had reckoned her in anger rather than passed her over in forgetfulness. He wrote as heirs, both in this will and in the former one which was read, his mother together with his brother; to whom, as you see, a boy still in years, Rufinus is applying that same machine of his daughter, and is thrusting some woman much older in years, the very lately wife of his brother, upon and beneath the wretched boy.

[179165] 98. But he, captured and possessed by the blandishments of the harlot girl and the enticements of her pander of a father, the moment his brother gave up the ghost, left his mother and went over to his uncle, that the more easily, with us removed, the things begun might be accomplished; for Aemilianus favours Rufinus and desires the harvest. — Ha, you rightly remind me: the good uncle too tempers and fosters his own hope in this boy, knowing that of a child who dies intestate he will be the legal heir rather than the just one. I would not, by Hercules, that this had come from me; it was not part of my moderation to break openly the silent suspicions of all; you do wrong, who have prompted it. To be plain, indeed, if you would have the truth, many wonder, Aemilianus, at this so sudden affection of yours toward that boy, after his brother Pontianus is dead, when before you were so unknown to him that often you did not even recognize your brother's son by sight when you met him. But now you show yourself so indulgent to him, and so corrupt him with indulgence, you oppose him in nothing, that by these very things you give credit to the more suspicious. We received him unmanly: you have made him a man at once. While he was ruled by us, he went to his masters: from them he now flees in great flight into the cookshop, spurns serious friends, and, with the basest young men, among harlots and wine-cups, a boy of this age plies his banqueting. He himself is the ruler of your house, himself the master of the household, himself the master of the feast; at the gladiatorial school too a frequent visitor, he is taught the names of the gladiators and their fights and wounds — by the trainer himself, indeed, quite as becomes an honourable boy. He never speaks except Punic, and what he still keeps of Greek from his mother; for to speak Latin he neither will nor can. You heard, Maximus, a little while ago — O abomination! — my stepson, the brother of Pontianus, that eloquent young man, scarcely stammering out single syllables, when you asked him whether their mother had given them what I said had been given through my exertions.

[181313] 99. I call you, then, to witness, Claudius Maximus, and you who sit in council, and you too who stand with me at the tribunal, that these losses and disgraces of his character are to be charged to this uncle here and to that candidate of a father-in-law; and that henceforth I shall count it well that such a stepson has shaken the yoke of my care from his neck, and that I shall not hereafter make supplication to his mother on his behalf. For — what I had very nearly forgotten — very lately, when Pudentilla, after the death of her son Pontianus, was making her will in ill health, I strove long against her, that she should not disinherit this boy on account of so many notable insults, so many injuries; that she should cancel a most grievous clause already, by Hercules, wholly written out, I begged with earnest entreaties; finally, that, if I should not prevail, I would part from her, I threatened: that she would grant me this favour, overcome a bad son by a benefit, free me from all envy. Nor did I desist before she did so. I am sorry that I have removed this scruple from Aemilianus, that I have disclosed to him a thing so unexpected. Behold, I pray you, Maximus, how, on hearing this, he was suddenly struck dumb, how he cast his eyes to the ground; for he had thought far otherwise, and not without reason: he knew the woman to be infected with her son's insults and bound to me by my services. Of me too there was something for him to fear: anyone, even though he scorned the inheritance as much as I, would yet not have refused to be avenged on so undutiful a stepson. This anxiety especially goaded them to accuse me: they falsely conjectured, out of their own avarice, that the whole inheritance had been left to me. I free you, as to the past, from that fear. For neither the occasion of inheritance nor of revenge could move my mind from its place. I fought with an angry mother on behalf of a bad stepson, a stepfather, as a father for the best of sons against a stepmother; nor was it enough, unless I restrained my good wife's lavish liberality toward me, far beyond what was fair.

[183422] 100. Hand over, you, the will now made by the mother against her unfriendly son, with me — whom these men call a robber — dictating each single word along with entreaties. Bid these tablets be broken open, Maximus: you will find the son the heir, but to me indeed I know not what slight thing left for honour's sake, lest, if anything in the way of mortality should befall him, I, the husband, should not have my name in my wife's tablets. Take that will of your mother — undutiful, indeed, this one truly; and why not? — in which she disinherited a most obedient husband, and wrote as heir a most hostile son; nay rather, not a son, but the hopes of Aemilianus and the marriage of Rufinus, but that drunken company, your parasites. Take it, I say, best of sons, and, laying aside your mother's amatory letters a little while, read the will rather: if she wrote anything as one insane, you will find it here, and indeed at the very beginning: "Let Sicinius Pudens, my son, be my heir." I confess, whoever reads this will think her insane. This your son, heir — who, at the very funeral of his brother, with a band of most abandoned young men called in, wished to shut you out of the house which you yourself had given; who took it grievously and bitterly that you had been left coheir to him by his brother; who at once deserted you, with your grief and mourning, and fled to Rufinus and Aemilianus from your bosom; who afterward spoke very many insults to your face and, with his uncle aiding, committed them; who bandied your name about before the tribunals; who tried to disgrace your modesty publicly by your own letters; who arraigned on a capital charge your husband, whom you had chosen, whom, as he himself objected, you loved to distraction? Open, I pray you, good boy, open the will: so you will more easily prove your mother's insanity. Why do you refuse, why do you decline, now that you have repelled your anxiety about your mother's inheritance? But I, these tablets,

[185405] 101. Maximus, here on the very spot, before your feet, I throw down, and I call you to witness that henceforth I shall hold it of less concern what Pudentilla writes in her will. Let him himself now, as he pleases, entreat his mother for the rest: for me, he has left no room to plead further on his behalf. Let him himself now — being his own master, and a man who dictates most bitter letters to his mother — soften her anger; he who could plead a cause to the end will be able to plead a prayer to good effect. For me it is long since enough, if I have not only most fully dissolved the charges brought against me, but have even rooted up, to its foundation, the very root of this trial — that is, the envy of inheritance sought. This too, lest I pass over any of the whole, before I close, I will refute as falsely alleged. You said that I had bought, in my own name, a most beautiful estate with a great sum of the woman's money. I say it was a tiny little inheritance of sixty thousand sesterces; that, moreover, not I, but Pudentilla bought it in her own name; that Pudentilla's name is in the tablets; that the tax for that little field was paid in Pudentilla's name. The public quaestor is present, to whom it was paid, Corvinius Celer, a man of distinction; the woman's guardian and authorizer is here too, a man most grave and most holy, to be named by me with every honour, Cassius Longinus. Ask, Maximus, of what purchase he was the authorizer, at what trifling price the wealthy woman bought her little field. Is it as I said? Is my name written in anywhere in this purchase? Is the very price of the little inheritance a matter of envy? Was even this, at least, bestowed on me?

[187099] 102. What else is there, Aemilianus, that I have not refuted with you for judge? What reward of my magic have you found? Why, then, should I bend Pudentilla's mind by poisons? That I might take what advantage from her? That she should name me a modest dowry rather than an ample one? O glorious charms! Or that she should bind back that dowry to her sons rather than leave it with me? What can be added to this magic? Or that, at my urging, she should give away most of her estate to her sons — she who, before me as husband, had bestowed nothing on them — and impart nothing whatever to me? O grievous sorcery — shall I call it? — or thankless benefit. Or that, in the will she was writing in anger against her son, she should leave as heir the son with whom she was offended, rather than me, to whom she was bound? This indeed I obtained with difficulty, by many enchantments. Suppose that you were pleading your cause not before Claudius Maximus, a man fair and tenacious of justice, but set up some other depraved and savage judge, a favourer of accusations, eager to condemn: give him something to go on, supply even the least plausible occasion of pronouncing in your favour; at least invent something, devise what you might answer to the man who asked you this. And since every attempt must be preceded by some motive, answer, you who say that Apuleius assailed Pudentilla's mind with magic enticements: what did he seek from her, why did he do it? Had he desired her beauty? You deny it. Had he at least coveted her riches? The dowry-tablets deny it, the donation-tablets deny it, the will-tablets deny it — in which it is shown that he not only did not greedily reach after, but even harshly repelled, the liberality of his own wife. What other motive is there, then? Why have you fallen dumb? Why are you silent? Where is that savage opening of your indictment, framed in the name of my stepson:

[189006] 103. "This man, my lord Maximus, did I set about making a defendant before you?" Why, then, do you not add: a defendant who is a teacher, a defendant who is a stepfather, a defendant who is an intercessor? But what next? "Of very many sorceries, and of the most manifest." Give me one out of the many; give me a doubtful one, or at least an obscure one, out of the most manifest. For the rest, to these things which you have objected, count whether I do not answer in a couple of words each. You polish your teeth: pardon a man his cleanliness. You look into mirrors: a philosopher ought to. You make verses: it is allowed to be done. You investigate fishes: Aristotle teaches it. You consecrate wood: Plato counsels it. You take a wife: the laws command it. She is older in years than you: it commonly happens. You went after gain: take the dowry-deed, recall the donation, read the will. And if I have beaten back all these things to the full, if I have refuted all the slanders, if in all things — not only the charges, but even the insults — I keep myself far from blame; if the honour of philosophy, which is dearer to me than my own safety, I have nowhere diminished, but rather, on the contrary, have everywhere held it fast with full sail: if these things, as I say, are so, then I can with an untroubled mind reverence your good opinion rather than dread your power, since I judge it less grievous and less to be feared to be condemned by a proconsul than, if I were disapproved by so good and so faultless a man. I have spoken.