WORK: Apologia  (slug: apuleius-apologia-b8a97b)

CHAPTER: 01-apologia



[0] 1. For my part I was certain, and held it for a settled truth, Maximus Claudianus, and you who sit with him in council, that Sicinius Aemilianus — an old man of notorious recklessness — having begun his accusation of me before you sooner than he had thought it through in his own mind, would, for want of any real charges, fill it out with abuse alone; for any innocent man can be accused, but none save the guilty can be convicted. Relying on this one point above all, I give thanks, so help me, that the opportunity and means have fallen to me, with you for judge, of clearing philosophy in the eyes of the ignorant and of vindicating myself; though these slanders, weighty as they seem at first sight, were for all that sudden enough to make the defence difficult. For, as you remember, it is now the fifth or sixth day since I had set about pleading the cause of my wife Pudentilla against the Granii, when, by prearrangement and to my surprise, her opponents' advocates began to assail me with abuse and to accuse me of magical sorcery, and at last of the murder of my stepson Pontianus. And when I perceived that these were not so much charges brought before a court as taunts thrown out in a quarrel, I myself, by repeated demands, challenged them to bring an accusation. At that point Aemilianus, seeing that you too were rather strongly moved and that the affair had passed from words into earnest, began out of his own diffidence to look for some hiding-place for his rashness.

[1489] 2. And so Pontianus, his own brother's son, whom a little before he had loudly proclaimed I had murdered — the moment he is pressed to put his name to the indictment, he forgot all about him; he fell suddenly silent about the death of his young kinsman. Yet, that he might not appear to be giving up the description of so great a crime altogether, he chose out for his accusation that one charge alone, the charge of magic, which is more easily defamed than proved. And not even that does he dare to do openly; instead, on the next day he lodges a written charge in the name of my stepson Sicinius Pudens, a mere boy, and adds that he is acting as his support — a novel manner of attacking a man through another — so that, under cover of the boy's tender years, he himself might escape punishment for a false accusation. And when you, most shrewdly, had noticed this, and on that account had ordered him once more to sustain in his own name the accusation he had laid, he promised he would do so; yet not even thus could he be brought to plead at close quarters, but, in defiance even of you, he keeps skirmishing obstinately from a distance with his slanders. So, as often as he fled from the danger of accusing, he persisted in the indulgence granted to a mere assistant. And so, even before the case came to be tried, it was easy for anyone to understand what sort of accusation this was likely to be, when the very man who had been its author and contriver was afraid to become its sponsor — and Sicinius Aemilianus especially, who, had he discovered anything true against me, would surely never have so hesitatingly arraigned on so many and so great charges a man who was a stranger to him; the same man who branded his own uncle's will, which he knew to be genuine, as a forgery, and with such persistence that, when Lollius Urbicus, a man of consular rank, had pronounced, on the advice of men of consular standing, that it ought to be held genuine and valid, this utter madman, in the face of that most authoritative verdict, swore that the will was nevertheless a fabrication — so that Lollius Urbicus could scarcely keep from his destruction.

[3643] 3. And that verdict, relying upon your fairness and my innocence, I trust will burst forth in this trial too; for a man who knowingly accuses an innocent person does so all the more easily because, as I have said, he has already been convicted of lying before the prefect of the city in a most important case. For just as every good man, once he has erred, afterwards guards against it the more anxiously, so the man of evil nature repeats his fault the more boldly, and thereafter, the oftener he offends, the more openly he offends. For shame, like a garment, is treated with the more carelessness the more worn it is. And therefore I think it necessary, for the sake of my own untarnished sense of shame, before I come to the substance of the case, to refute all these slanders. For I am undertaking the defence not of myself only, but of philosophy as well, whose greatness scorns even the slightest reproach as if it were the gravest crime — on which account, a little while ago, Aemilianus' advocates blurted out, with their hireling loquacity, many things specially invented against me, and others commonly leveled by the ignorant against philosophers in general. And although these things, babbled by such men for hire and paid out as wages of impudence, might be passed over — there being a certain license granted by custom to pettifoggers of this kind, who are wont to let out the venom of their tongues for another man's hurt — still, even for my own sake, they must be refuted in a few words, lest I, who labour diligently to admit no stain or dishonour upon myself, should seem to anyone, if I were to pass over even some trifle, to have acknowledged it rather than despised it. For it belongs to a modest and self-respecting mind, in my opinion, to be pained even by false reproaches, since even those who are conscious of some fault are nonetheless greatly disturbed and angered when they are ill spoken of, although, from the time they began to do wrong, they have grown used to being ill spoken of; for, even if others say nothing, they are themselves aware that they might justly be reproached. But the good and blameless man, having ears untrained and unused to ill report, and being unaccustomed to insult through his habit of praise, labours all the more grievously in spirit when things are said of him undeservedly which he himself could truly fling back at others. But if perchance I shall seem to be willing to defend things foolish and utterly trifling, that must be charged as a fault to those for whom it is shameful even to have brought such charges, and not laid to my account, for whom it will be honourable even to have refuted them.

[6311] 4. You heard, then, a little while ago, at the very opening of the accusation, the words spoken thus: "We accuse before you a philosopher who is handsome and — oh, the scandal! — most eloquent both in Greek and in Latin." For, unless I am mistaken, it was with these very words that Tannonius Pudens, a man assuredly not the most eloquent, opened his accusation of me. And would that he had reproached me truly with such grave crimes as beauty and eloquence! It would have been no hard matter to answer him as the Homeric Alexander answered Hector:

[6861] "The gods' renowned gifts are not to be cast away, all that they themselves bestow — though no man would take them of his own will,"

[6995] that the most glorious gifts of the gods are by no means to be scorned; gifts which nevertheless, though the gods are wont to grant them, do not fall to the lot of many who desire them. This I should have answered concerning beauty. Besides, I should have said that even philosophers are permitted to be of comely appearance: that Pythagoras, who was the first to call himself a philosopher, was the handsomest man of his age; likewise that ancient Zeno, the man of Elea, who was the first of all to resolve ambiguities in twofold fashion by a most ingenious method — that he too, this Zeno, was of striking beauty, as Plato declares; and likewise that many philosophers are recorded to have been most comely of face, who adorned the grace of their bodies with the ornaments of their characters. But this defence, as I have said, is somewhat remote from me, for, apart from my middling looks, the unbroken toil of literary labour wipes away from my body all grace, thins my frame, drains its juices, blots out its colour, and weakens its vigour. My very hair, which these men with open falsehood declared I had let grow long as an allurement to good looks — you see how charming and dainty it is, matted and tangled with neglect, like a tuft of tow, unevenly shaggy and clotted and knotted, utterly past disentangling through long carelessness not only of dressing but even of combing and parting it: enough, I think, to refute the charge of hair, which they pressed as if it were a capital offence.

[8496] 5. As for eloquence, if I had any, it ought to seem neither marvelous nor invidious that, devoted from my earliest years with all my strength to the single pursuit of letters, having spurned all other pleasures, I should have sought it up to this time of my life with a toil — I scarcely know whether beyond that of all other men — by day and by night, and at the cost and expense of good health. But let them have no fear of my eloquence, which I — if I have made any progress in it at all — rather hope for than make good. To be sure, if it is true, as they say Statius Caecilius wrote in his poems, that innocence is eloquence, then I for my part profess on that principle that I yield to no man alive in eloquence. For who, on this reckoning, would live more eloquent than I, who have never conceived a thought that I would not dare to utter? I declare myself the most fluent of speakers, for I have always counted every wrongdoing an abomination; and the most articulate, because there exists no deed or word of mine about which I could not discourse in public — as indeed I shall now discourse about those verses which they produced as if they were something to be ashamed of, written by me; when, as you observed, I was vexed with them, and could not help laughing, because they declaimed them so harshly and ignorantly.

[9825] 6. First, then, they read out, from among my lighter pieces, a little letter in verse about tooth-powder, addressed to a certain Calpurnianus; who, when he produced that letter against me, did not see — in his eagerness to do me harm — that if anything in it were made a charge against me, the matter would be one I shared with him. For that he had asked something of me to clean his teeth, the verses themselves bear witness:

[10253] Calpurnianus, greetings in these hurried lines. I have sent you, as you asked, a thing to make your teeth shine clean, a polish for the mouth, from the fruits of Arabia, a fine, white, noble little powder, a smoother of the swollen little gum, a sweeper-away of yesterday's leavings, that no foul stain of grime may show if perchance, with parted lips, you should smile.

[10625] I ask you, what is there in those verses shameful in matter or in word, what at all that a philosopher might be unwilling to own as his? Unless perhaps I am to be censured for having sent Calpurnianus a powder from the fruits of Arabia — when it would have been far more fitting that, after the filthy fashion of the Iberians, as Catullus says, he should scrub his teeth and his red gums with his own urine.

[11034] 7. I saw just now some men scarcely able to hold back their laughter, when that orator there censured cleanliness of the mouth so harshly, and pronounced the word "tooth-powder" with as much indignation as no one ever pronounced "poison." And why not? It is a charge by no means to be despised in a philosopher, that he allows nothing about himself to be unclean, suffers no part of his exposed body to be filthy and foul-smelling — and the mouth above all, of which a man makes use most frequently and in full view of all, whether he gives someone a kiss, or converses with anyone, or holds forth in a lecture-hall, or offers up prayers in a temple: for speech precedes every act of man, and speech, as the foremost poet says, sets out from the barrier of the teeth. Suppose you produced now some equally grand-sounding speaker: he would say, in his own manner, that for one who has any care at all for fine speaking, the mouth above all the rest of the body must be tended, since it is the vestibule of the mind, the gateway of speech, and the assembly-place of one's thoughts. For my own part, I would say, after my own measure, that nothing less befits a free-born and gentlemanly man than uncleanness of the mouth. For it is a part of man set in a lofty place, ready to the sight, eloquent in use; whereas in wild beasts and cattle the mouth is set low and cast down toward the feet, close to the track and to the fodder, and is scarcely ever seen except in the dead or in creatures roused to bite: but of a man, there is nothing you would gaze upon sooner when he is silent, nothing more often when he speaks.

[12651] 8. I should be glad, then, if my censor Aemilianus would answer whether he himself is ever in the habit of washing his feet; or, if he does not deny it, let him maintain that greater care for cleanliness is to be bestowed upon the feet than upon the teeth. Plainly, indeed, if anyone is, like you, Aemilianus, scarcely ever to open his mouth except for abuse and slander, I would advise him to take no care to clean his mouth and not to scour his teeth with foreign powder — teeth which he would more justly grind with charcoal from a funeral pyre — nor even to rinse them with common water: nay, let his guilty tongue, that purveyor of lies and bitterness, lie forever in its own filth and stench. For what reason, in the name of evil, is there to keep a tongue clean and bright while one's speech is foul and loathsome, to breathe black venom from a snow-white little tooth after the manner of a viper? But the man who knows he is about to deliver speech that is neither useless nor unpleasant, rightly washes his mouth beforehand, as a cup is rinsed for good drink. And why do I speak longer of one born a man? That huge beast, the crocodile that is bred in the Nile, even he, as I learn, offers his teeth to be cleaned by an innocent gaping of the jaws. For, having a wide mouth but no tongue, and mostly opened under water, many leeches fasten themselves to his teeth; and when he has come out onto the river-banks and gapes, one of the river-birds, a friendly bird, picks them out by thrusting in its beak, without any danger of harm.

[14193] 9. I pass over these matters. I come to the other verses which they call amatory, which nevertheless they read so harshly and clumsily as to stir up disgust. But what have magical sorceries to do with the fact that I praised in a poem the boys of my friend Scribonius Laetus? Or am I a magician because I am a poet? Who ever heard tell of a suspicion so plausible, a conjecture so apt, an argument so close to the point? "Apuleius made verses." If they were bad, that is a fault — yet not of a philosopher, but of a poet; if good, what do you accuse? "But he made playful and amatory verses." Are these then my crimes, and have you mistaken the name in indicting me for magic? Yet others too have made such things, even if you are ignorant of it: among the Greeks, a certain man of Teos, and one of Sparta, and one of Ceos, with countless others, and even a Lesbian woman — wantonly indeed, but with such grace that she commends to us the strangeness of her dialect by the sweetness of her songs; and among us Aedituus and Porcius and Catulus, these too with countless others. "But they were not philosophers." Will you then deny that Solon also was a serious man and a philosopher, whose is that most wanton verse: "Longing for thighs and a sweet mouth"? And what is there so wanton in all my verses, if they be matched against that one alone? — to say nothing of the writings of Diogenes the Cynic and of Zeno, founder of the Stoic school, and many more of the kind. Let me recite mine again, that they may know I am not ashamed of them:

[15734] And Critias is my delight, and you, Charinus, my well-being, a part in my love remains for you, my life; fear nothing; for though fire and fire scorch me as it will, these two flames, so I may possess them, I will endure. On this condition may I be to you what each is to himself: this you shall be to me, what the two eyes are.

[16064] Let me now recite the others too, which they read last, as if these were the most unrestrained:

[16161] Garlands of flowers, my honey, and these songs I give you. Songs I give to you, garlands to your guardian spirit, songs, that this longed-for day, Critias, may be sung, the day that returns to you each fourteenth spring; and the garlands, that your temples may bloom in this glad season, that you may adorn the flower of your youth with flowers. You in return give me your springtime for my springtime flower, that you may outdo my gifts with gifts of your own; for the woven garlands you shall give an embrace of your body, and for the roses, the kisses of your crimson lips. But should you breathe your soul into the reed-pipe, then my songs shall yield, conquered by your sweet-voiced reed.

[16856] 10. There you have my crime, Maximus, made up, as it were, like that of some disreputable reveller, out of garlands and serenades. Here you noticed that I was also censured for this — that, while the boys are called by other names, I gave them the names Charinus and Critias. On the same principle, then, let them accuse Gaius Catullus for naming Lesbia in place of Clodia, and Ticidas likewise for writing "Perilla" of one whose name was Metella, and Propertius, who says "Cynthia" but conceals Hostia, and Tibullus, because Plania was in his heart but Delia in his verse. For my part, I should censure Gaius Lucilius, iambic poet though he be, because he set the boys Gentius and Macedo by their plain names to public shame in his poem. How much more modest, after all, was the Mantuan poet, who likewise, praising in a bucolic sport the boy of his friend Pollio, and abstaining from real names, calls himself Corydon and the boy Alexis. But Aemilianus — a man more rustic than the swineherds and oxherds of Virgil, always boorish and a barbarian, yet far more austere, as he thinks, than the Serrani and Curii and Fabricii — denies that verses of this kind befit a Platonic philosopher. Even so, Aemilianus, if I show they were made after the example of Plato himself? Of whom no verses survive except love-elegies; for all the rest — because, I suppose, they were not so charming — he burned in the fire. Learn, then, the verses of Plato the philosopher to the boy Aster, if at your age you can still learn letters:

[18377] Aster, once you shone among the living as the Morning Star; now, dead, you shine as the Evening Star among the departed.

[18499] Likewise the same Plato's, on the boys Alexis and Phaedrus, in a single poem:

[18578] Now, when Alexis is no more than this — that one said only he was fair — he is gazed at, and on every side by all is admired. My heart, why point out the bone to the dogs? You will suffer for it afterward. Was it not thus we lost Phaedrus?

[18819] That I may not call to mind more, I shall make an end if I quote his last verse, on Dion of Syracuse: "O Dion, you who maddened my heart with love.

[18968] 11. But am I the foolish one, who bring up even these matters in a court of law? Or are you rather the slanderers, who bring even these into an accusation, as if any token of a man's character lay in playing with verses? Have you not read Catullus thus answering the ill-disposed?

[19250] For it is fitting that the dutiful poet himself be chaste, but for his little verses there is no such need.

[19359] The deified Hadrian, when he honoured with verses the tomb of his friend, the poet Voconius, wrote thus: "Wanton in your verse, but in your mind chaste" — which he would never have said, if charming poems were to be held proof of unchastity. I remember reading too many pieces of this kind by the deified Hadrian himself. Dare to say, if you will, Aemilianus, that what an emperor and censor, the deified Hadrian, did, and left on record as having done, was wrongly done. But do you suppose that Maximus will find fault with anything which he knows was done by me after the example of Plato? Whose verses, which I have just reviewed, are the more pure the more open they are, the more chastely composed the more frankly avowed; for to dissemble and conceal such things, and all of the kind, belongs to the sinner, but to profess and proclaim them belongs to one at play; since Nature has assigned a voice to innocence, but silence to wrongdoing.

[20306] 12. I forbear, indeed, to mention those lofty and divine doctrines of Plato, unknown to all but the rarest of the pious and unrecognized by all the profane: that there are twin goddesses named Venus, each strong with her own love and her own kind of lovers; one of them common, who, stirred by a vulgar love, lords it with immoderate and savage force over the appetite not only of human souls but even of beasts and wild creatures, binding fast in her embrace the enslaved bodies of the creatures she has struck down; but the other a heavenly Venus, endowed with the noblest love, who cares only for men, and few of those, urging her followers on with no goads or enticements toward what is base; since her love is not pleasant and wanton, but on the contrary unadorned and serious, and reconciles to her lovers, through the beauty of moral excellence, the virtues; and whenever she commends comely bodies, she keeps them far from any insult. For there is nothing else to be cherished in bodily beauty save that it puts the divine soul in mind of that beauty which it once saw, true and unalloyed, among the gods. Wherefore, as Afranius elegantly leaves it written: "The wise man will love, the rest will merely lust" — yet, if you would have the truth, Aemilianus, or if you can ever understand this, the wise man does not so much love as remember.

[21657] 13. Grant, then, your pardon to Plato the philosopher for his verses on love, lest I be obliged, against the maxim of Ennius' Neoptolemus, to play the philosopher at greater length; or, if you will not do that, I for my part will readily allow myself to be censured for verses of this kind in Plato's company. To you, however, Maximus, I owe ready thanks, that you give such attentive hearing even to these appendices to my defence, necessary because they are set off against the accusation. And therefore I ask this also — that what remains for me to say before the actual charges themselves you would hear, as you have hitherto done, willingly and carefully.

[22319] For there follows that long and censorial harangue about the mirror, over which, as if it were some horror of horrors, Pudens nearly burst himself, shouting: "The philosopher owns a mirror! The philosopher possesses a mirror!" Well, suppose I grant that I do possess one — lest you should think you have proved some charge if I were to deny it — yet it does not follow from that that I must also be in the habit of adorning myself before a mirror. For what of it? If I possessed the apparatus of the stage, would you on that ground argue that I am also accustomed to wear the trailing robe of tragedy, the saffron gown of the actor, †... the patchwork cloak of the mime? I think not. For, on the contrary, there are very many things of which I lack the possession yet enjoy the use. But if neither having a thing is proof of using it, nor not having it of not using it, and if it is not so much the possession of the mirror that is blamed as the looking into it, then you must also show this — when, and in whose presence, I looked into a mirror; since, the matter standing as it does, you reckon it more an abomination for a philosopher to see a mirror than for the uninitiated to see the sacred basket of Ceres.

[23534] 14. Come now, even if I admit that I have looked into one — what crime, after all, is it to know one's own likeness, and to carry it about, not stored up in one place, but ready at hand wherever you please in a little mirror? Or are you unaware that there is nothing more worth looking at to a man than his own form? Indeed I know that of one's sons those are the dearer who are seen to resemble us, and that a public statue of himself is granted to each man, as a reward according to his deserts, that he may behold it. Or what is the meaning of statues and images shaped by the various arts? Unless, perhaps, what has been wrought by art is held praiseworthy, but what nature offers is to be judged blameworthy — when in nature there is even more to marvel at, both the readiness and the likeness. For in all images made by hand, long labour is taken, and yet the likeness does not come out equal to that in mirrors; for clay lacks vigour, stone lacks colour, painting lacks solidity, and all of them lack motion — that which, with peculiar fidelity, reproduces the likeness, since in a mirror the image is seen marvelously rendered, and, being like, is also mobile, and obedient to every nod of the man it belongs to; the same image is always of an age with those who look upon it, from earliest boyhood to the approach of old age, it puts on all the changes of age, shares in so many different states of the body, mimics so many expressions of the same face, whether glad or grieving. But whatever has been moulded of clay, or cast in bronze, or struck in stone, or fixed in wax, or smeared on in pigment, or counterfeited by any other human art, after no long interval of time is rendered unlike, and like a corpse possesses one single, unmoving expression. So far does the polished workmanship of the mirror and its craftsman-like brightness surpass the arts of imagery in rendering a likeness.

[25436] 15. Either, then, we must follow the maxim of Agesilaus the Spartan alone, who, distrusting his own looks, would never allow himself to be either painted or sculpted; or, if the practice of all other men seems to be retained, in not rejecting statues and images, why should you think that a man's likeness ought rather to be looked upon in stone than in silver, in a panel rather than in a mirror? Or do you reckon it disgraceful to examine one's own form by constant inspection? Was not Socrates the philosopher reported even to have urged this upon his disciples of his own accord — that they should often contemplate themselves in a mirror, so that whichever of them was pleased with his own beauty should take the greater pains not to disgrace the dignity of his body by evil conduct, while whoever thought himself less commendable in form should diligently make it his business to cover his unsightliness with the praise of virtue? So far did the wisest of all men use even a mirror for the schooling of character. And Demosthenes, the foremost master of speaking — who does not know that he always rehearsed his cases before a mirror as before a teacher? So that, when that supreme orator had drawn his eloquence from Plato the philosopher, and had learned his methods of argument from Eubulides the dialectician, he sought from the mirror the final harmony of his delivery. Which, then, do you think has the greater need of care for grace in maintaining his discourse — the rhetorician at his wrangling or the philosopher at his admonishing, the man disputing for a little while before judges drawn by lot or the man forever holding discourse before all mankind, the man at law about the boundaries of fields or the man teaching about the limits of good and evil? And further — it is not only for these reasons that a philosopher ought to look into a mirror; for he must often consider not only his own likeness, but also the very principle of that likeness: whether, as Epicurus holds, images set forth from us, like certain husks streaming in continual flux from our bodies, when they strike upon something smooth and solid, are dashed back and pressed out backwards and answer in reverse; or whether, as other philosophers argue, our rays — whether liquefied in the middle of the eyes and mingled with the outer light and so united, as Plato thinks, or set forth from the eyes alone without any external support, as Archytas holds, or driven by the tension of the air, as the Stoics reckon — when they fall upon some body dense and bright and smooth, rebound at angles equal to those at which they fell, back to their own face, and so what they touch and see outside, they image within the mirror.

[28145] 16. Does it not seem to you that philosophy ought to investigate and inquire into all these things, and to examine every mirror, whether wet or dry, set to the sun? For which, besides the things I have mentioned, this reasoning too is needed: why in flat mirrors the gaze and the images appear of about equal size, but in convex and globular ones everything is diminished, while on the contrary in concave ones everything is enlarged; where and why left is exchanged with right; when the image in the same mirror now hides itself deep within, now thrusts itself outward; why concave mirrors, if held facing the sun, kindle tinder placed before them; how it comes about that rainbows are seen in the clouds in varied colours, and two suns in rival likeness — and besides these, very many other things of the same kind, which Archimedes of Syracuse treats in a vast volume, a man wonderful before all others for his subtlety in every branch of geometry, but, I rather think, for this above all to be remembered, that he had inspected the mirror often and carefully. If you knew that book, Aemilianus, and had given yourself not only to the field and the clods, but also to the reckoning-board and its dust, then — believe me — although your most hideous face differs little from that of the tragic Thyestes, yet you would surely, out of a desire to learn, look into a mirror, and would one day, leaving the plough, marvel at how many furrows of wrinkles are in your face.

[29616] But for my part I should not wonder if you take it well that I speak of that twisted face of yours, but keep silence about your character, which is far more savage. There it is: besides the fact that I am not given to quarrelling, I was also, until quite lately, glad enough to be ignorant whether you were fair or dark, and even now, by Hercules, I hardly know. This came about because you are obscure in your country pursuits, and I am occupied with study. So both the shadow of your obscurity stood in the way of anyone observing you, and I never cared to learn anyone's misdeeds, but always thought it better to cover my own faults than to hunt out other men's. And so this has befallen me with regard to you, which befalls a man who happens to stand in a place flooded with light while another watches him out of the dark. For in just the same way you indeed easily judge, out of your darkness, what I do in the open and in the public eye, while you yourself, in your lowliness...

[30603] 17. ...hidden away and shunning the light, are not in turn visible to me. As for me, whether you have slaves to till your land, or whether you yourself exchange neighbourly labour with your neighbours, I neither know nor care. But you know that I freed three slaves at Oea on the same day, and your advocate threw this in my face among the other things laid before him by you — though a little earlier he had said that I came to Oea attended by a single slave. Now I should like you to answer me this: how could I have freed three out of one — unless this too is magic? Am I to call it the blindness of lying, or the habit of it? "Apuleius came to Oea with one slave"; then, a few words chattered in between: "Apuleius freed three slaves at Oea in one day." It would not even have been credible that, having come with three, I freed them all; yet if I had done so, why should you reckon three slaves a sign of poverty rather than three freedmen a sign of wealth? You know not at all, Aemilianus, you know not how to accuse a philosopher, you who reproach me with the fewness of my household, which I ought, for glory's sake, to have falsely exaggerated — since I knew that not only philosophers, whose follower I profess myself, but even the emperors of the Roman people gloried in the fewness of their slaves. Have your advocates then not read even these things: that Marcus Antonius, a man of consular rank, kept only eight slaves at home, and Carbo — the one who seized supreme power — one fewer; but that Manius Curius, far renowned for so many crowns of honour, who led his triumph thrice through a single gate, that this Manius Curius had only two camp-servants in the field? So that man, who triumphed over the Sabines and the Samnites and over Pyrrhus, had fewer slaves than triumphs. And Marcus Cato, not waiting for others to proclaim it of him, himself left it written in his own speech that, when he set out as consul for Spain, he took only three slaves from the city; and that, since he had come to the state-villa, and these seemed too few for his use, he ordered two boys to be bought in the forum from the slave-block, and took these five into Spain. Had Pudens read this, in my opinion, he would either have refrained altogether from this abuse, or would have preferred to censure, in the matter of three slaves, the multitude of a philosopher's attendants rather than their fewness.

[33006] 18. The same man also reproached me with poverty — a charge welcome to a philosopher and to be professed unbidden. For poverty has long been the handmaid of philosophy: frugal, sober, strong with little, a rival of praise, possessed in defiance of riches, secure in her bearing, simple in her dress, sound in counsel; she has never puffed any man up with pride, never depraved any with lawlessness, never made any savage with tyranny; she neither wishes nor is able to have any delights of the belly or the loins. For these and other shameful things are the wonted nurslings of riches; if you should reckon up all the greatest crimes from the whole memory of mankind, you will find no poor man among them, just as, on the contrary, it is no idle thing that the rich figure but rarely among illustrious men; but whomever we admire for any merit, poverty nursed him from the cradle. Poverty, I say, in ancient ages the founder of all states, the discoverer of all arts, guiltless of all sins, bountiful of all glory, crowned with every praise among all nations. For the same poverty, among the Greeks, was just in Aristides, kind in Phocion, vigorous in Epaminondas, wise in Socrates, eloquent in Homer. The same poverty also founded the empire of the Roman people from its beginning, and for that empire she sacrifices to this day to the immortal gods with a ladle and an earthen dish. But if there sat as judges in this case Gaius Fabricius, Gnaeus Scipio, Manius Curius, whose daughters, because of poverty, went to their husbands with dowries given from the public purse, carrying with them their domestic glory and the public money — if Publicola, the expeller of kings, and Agrippa, the reconciler of the people, whose funerals, because of their slender means, were furnished by the Roman people from a collection of small coins — if Atilius Regulus, whose little farm, on account of the like want, was tilled at public expense — if, in short, all those ancient lines of consular and censorial and triumphal rank were sent back for a brief enjoyment of the light to this trial, and could hear it — would you dare to reproach a philosopher with poverty...

[35166] 19. ...before so many poor consuls? Or does Claudius Maximus seem to you a fit audience for mocking poverty, because he himself has obtained a rich and ample estate? You are mistaken, Aemilianus, and you are far astray as to this man's mind, if you measure him by Fortune's indulgence rather than by philosophy's standard — if you do not think that a man of so austere a school and of such long service is more a friend to a curbed moderation than to a luxurious abundance, and approves of Fortune as one approves a tunic, rather neat than long; for that too, if it is not worn close but trails, hinders and trips a man up no less than a dangling fold. Indeed, in all the things we use for the duties of life, whatever exceeds a fitting moderation runs to excess for a burden rather than a use. And so immoderate riches too, like huge and oversized rudders, sink rather than steer, because they have a vain abundance and a harmful excess. Nay, even among the wealthier sort, I see those especially praised who live with no noise, with modest style, with their means concealed, and who manage great riches without ostentation, without pride, under the appearance of a moderate fortune, like poor men. But if even the rich seek some image and colour of poverty as proof of their modesty, why should the poorer man be ashamed of that which we exercise not in pretence but in truth?

[36546] 20. I can indeed raise with you a dispute even about the very word: that none of us is poor who is unwilling to have the superfluous, and is able to have the necessary, which by nature are exceedingly few. For he will have the most who desires the least; for he will have as much as he wishes who wishes for the least. And therefore riches are not better reckoned in estates and in lending at interest than in the very mind of a man, which, if it is needy through avarice and insatiable for every gain, will not be satisfied even by mountains of gold, but will always beg for something to increase what it has already gotten. And this is the true confession of poverty; for all desire of acquiring comes from a belief in want, and it does not matter how great that may be which you lack. Philus did not have so large an estate as Laelius, nor Laelius so large as Scipio, nor Scipio so large as Crassus the Rich — and yet not even Crassus the Rich had so large as he wished; so that, while he surpassed all men, he was surpassed by his own avarice, and seemed rich to everyone else rather than to himself. But on the contrary, those philosophers whom I have mentioned, wishing for nothing beyond what they could have, but with their desires and their means in agreement, were rightly and deservedly rich and happy. For you become poor through the want of craving, rich through the contentment of not needing; since the one is discerned by want from desire, the other by disdain from abundance. Therefore, Aemilianus, if you wish me to be reckoned poor, you must first prove me avaricious. But if nothing is wanting in my mind, I care not how much is wanting in external things, in which neither praise lies in abundance nor blame in want.

[38285] 21. But suppose these things were otherwise, and that I am poor because Fortune begrudged me riches, and these — as commonly happens — were either diminished by a guardian, or snatched away by an enemy, or not left to me by a father: is this to be cast in a man's teeth, poverty, which is laid as a fault to none of the animals — not to the eagle, not to the bull, not to the lion? If a horse abounds in his own virtues, so that he is a steady carrier and a swift runner, no one reproaches him with poverty of fodder: will you lay it to me as a fault, not the crookedness of some deed or word, but that I live in a slender household, that I have rather few possessions, feed more sparingly, dress more lightly, dine more meagerly? And yet I, on the contrary — however small these things seem to you — I judge them many and even excessive, and I desire to confine myself to fewer, that I may be the more happy the more I am gathered in. For the health of the mind, just like that of the body, is unencumbered, while weakness is full of trailing folds, and it is a sure sign of infirmity to need many things. To live, exactly as to swim, a man is the better the freer he is of his load; for in this storm of human life too, light things likewise serve to keep us up, heavy things to sink us. Indeed I have learned that the gods chiefly excel men in this — that they need nothing for their own use; and therefore he among us who needs the fewest things is the most like to a god.

[39763] 22. Accordingly I took it kindly when, by way of insult, you said that my whole estate was a wallet and a staff. Would that I were of so great a soul that I required nothing whatever beyond that furniture, but bore worthily that same equipment which Crates sought of his own accord, after casting away his riches! Crates, I say — if you give any credit, Aemilianus — a man rich and noble at home among the chief men of Thebes, for love of this garb which you cast in my teeth, gave his large and ample estate to the people, dismissed many slaves from his service and chose solitude, scorned for a single staff his many fruit-bearing trees, exchanged his most splendid villas for a single wallet, which afterwards, having found out its usefulness, he even praised in a poem, bending to this purpose the Homeric verses by which Homer ennobles the island of Crete. I will quote the beginning, that you may not think I have invented these things for my defence:

[40722] "There is a city in the midst of the wine-dark mist..."

[40779] — and then the rest, so marvelous that, had you read it, you would have envied me my wallet more than my marriage to Pudentilla. Do you reproach philosophers with the wallet and the staff? Then you would reproach the cavalry with their trappings, and the infantry with their shields, and the standard-bearers with their banners, and finally those who triumph with their white four-horse chariots and the palm-broidered toga. These, indeed, are not the trappings of the Platonic school, but the insignia of the Cynic family. Yet for all that, the wallet and staff are to Diogenes and Antisthenes what the diadem is to kings, the general's cloak to commanders, the cap to pontiffs, the staff to augurs. Diogenes the Cynic, indeed, when contending with Alexander the Great about the true nature of kingship, gloried in his staff in place of a sceptre. And Hercules himself, the unconquered — since these things, like the trappings of beggars, are too sordid in your eyes — Hercules himself, I say, the surveyor of the world, the purger of wild beasts, the tamer of nations, that god, even he, when he traversed the lands, a little before he was taken up into heaven for his virtues, was clothed in no more than a single hide, and attended by no more than a single staff.

[42048] 23. But if you count these examples as nothing, and have summoned me not to plead a cause but to give an account of my property, then — that you may be ignorant of nothing of my affairs, if indeed you are ignorant — I declare that there was left to me and my brother by my father a little under two million sesterces, and that this has been moderately diminished by me through long travel and prolonged studies and frequent acts of generosity. For I have helped most of my friends, and shown gratitude to very many teachers, and even increased the dowries of some men's daughters; nor indeed should I have hesitated to spend even my whole patrimony, in order to acquire for myself that which is greater — the contempt of patrimony. But you, Aemilianus, and men of your kind, uncultured and boorish, are in truth worth just as much as you have, like a barren and luckless tree, which begets no fruit of itself, and is prized only at the value of the timber in its trunk. And yet, Aemilianus, be sparing hereafter to cast poverty in anyone's teeth — you who, until quite lately, used to plough alone with a single little donkey, over three days against the timely rain, the little farm at Zarath which your father left you as your sole inheritance. For it is not long since the frequent deaths of your kinsmen propped you up with unmerited inheritances — whence, rather than from that most hideous face of yours, you have come by the name of Charon.

[43497] 24. As for my native country, that it is situated on the very border of Numidia and Gaetulia, you have shown out of my own writings, in which I professed myself — when I was holding a public discourse in the presence of Lollianus Avitus, a man of consular rank — to be half-Numidian and half-Gaetulian; nor do I see what there is for me to be ashamed of in that, any more than there was for Cyrus the Elder, that he was, by mixed descent, half-Mede and half-Persian. For it is not where a man was born, but how he is in his conduct, that should be looked to, nor in what region, but on what principle, he has set about living his life. To the greengrocer and the innkeeper it is rightly granted to commend their cabbage and their wine by the nobility of the soil — Thasian wine, Phliasian cabbage; for those nurslings of the earth are much helped to a better flavour by a fertile region, a rainy sky, a gentle wind, a sunny clime, and a juicy soil. But to a man's mind, immigrating from outside into the lodging of the body, what can be added or taken away, of these things, toward virtue or vice? When have not various natures arisen in all nations, although some seem more conspicuous for folly or for shrewdness? Among the dullest Scythians was born the wise Anacharsis, among the clever Athenians the fool Meletides. And I have not said this because I am ashamed of my country, even though we were still the town of Syphax. Yet when he was conquered, we passed by gift of the Roman people to King Masinissa, and afterward, by a fresh settlement of veteran soldiers, we became a most splendid colony, in which colony I had a father who, as a leading man, held the office of duumvir, having passed through all the honours; and his place in that commonwealth I, from the time I began to share in the senate, maintain — in no way degenerate, I hope — with equal honour and esteem. Why, then, did I bring these things forward? That you, Aemilianus, may be less angry with me hereafter, and rather grant me pardon, if through carelessness I happened not to choose that Attic Zarath of yours, to be born in it.

[45606] 25. Were you not ashamed to fling such charges, with such assurance, in the hearing of such a man as this — to bring forward at once things trifling and mutually contradictory, and yet to reproach me with both? Or did you not accuse me on opposite grounds? Of the wallet and staff, on the score of austere dignity; of the verses and the mirror, on the score of frivolity; of one slave, as a miser; of three freedmen, as a spendthrift; besides, of Greek eloquence and a barbarian homeland? Why then, after all, do you not rouse yourselves and bethink you that you are speaking before Claudius Maximus — before a man austere and busied with the affairs of the whole province? Why, I say, do you not take away these empty insults? Why do you not show what you alleged — monstrous crimes, and forbidden sorceries, and unspeakable arts? Why is your speech feeble in matter and vigorous only in clamour?

[46505] For now I come to the very charge of magic, which, kindled with huge uproar to my discredit, has burnt out — to the disappointment of all — in I know not what old wives' tales. Have you ever seen, Maximus, a flame rise from stubble, with a clear crackle, a broad glare, a swift increase, but, the fuel being slight, a fleeting blaze and no remains? There you have that accusation: begun in quarrelling, swelled with words, void of arguments, destined after your verdict to leave no remains of slander. All of which, for Aemilianus, was aimed at this one point — that I am a magician; and therefore I am minded to ask his most learned advocates what a magician is. For if, as I read in very many authors, "magus" is in the Persian tongue what "priest" is in ours, what crime, after all, is it to be a priest, and to know duly, and understand, and be versed in the laws of ceremonies, the sanctity of sacred rites, the right of religious observances — if indeed magic is that which Plato interprets, when he records with what disciplines the Persians imbue a boy who is being brought up to rule a kingdom? I remember the very words of that divine man, which you, Maximus, may recognize along with me: "And when the boy is twice-seven years old, they hand him over to those whom they call the royal tutors; these are four chosen men of the Persians who have been judged the best in the prime of life — the wisest, the most just, the most temperate, and the most courageous. Of these, the one teaches the magic of Zoroaster the son of Oromazes — and this is the worship of the gods — and he teaches also the duties of a king.

[48128] 26. Do you hear, you who rashly accuse magic, that it is an art acceptable to the immortal gods, fully skilled in worshipping and venerating them — pious, surely, and knowing things divine, ennobled from of old by its founders Zoroaster and Oromazes, the high-priestess of the heaven-dwellers — seeing that it is taught among the first of royal accomplishments, and that no one among the Persians is rashly allowed to be a magus, any more than to be a king? The same Plato, in another discourse, on a certain Zalmoxis, a man of Thracian race but of the same art, left it thus written: "And the charms are the noble words." If this is so, why should I not be permitted to know either the good words of Zalmoxis or the priestly rites of Zoroaster? But if, after the vulgar fashion, these men take a "magus" to be, in the strict sense, one who, by a communion of speech with the immortal gods, has power, by a certain incredible force of incantations, over everything he wishes — then I greatly wonder why they were not afraid to accuse a man whom they confess to have so great a power. For a power so hidden and divine cannot be guarded against, as other things can. He who summons an assassin to court comes attended; he who accuses a poisoner takes his food more scrupulously; he who arraigns a thief guards his goods. But he who brings on a capital charge a magus such as these men describe — with what attendants, with what precautions, with what guards is he to ward off a blind and inevitable destruction? With none, of course; and therefore a charge of this kind is not for the man who believes it to bring.

[49742] 27. But these things are generally, by a certain common error of the ignorant, cast at philosophers, so that some of them — those who investigate the bare and simple causes of bodies — they reckon irreligious, and on that account say that they deny the gods: as Anaxagoras, and Leucippus, and Democritus, and Epicurus, and the other patrons of the nature of things; while others — those who search out the providence of the world more curiously and celebrate the gods more devoutly — these the common folk indeed call magicians, as if they also knew how to do the things they know are done; as of old were Epimenides, and Orpheus, and Pythagoras, and Ostanes; and afterward, likewise suspected, were the purifications of Empedocles, the daemon of Socrates, the Good of Plato. I congratulate myself, then, that I too am numbered among so many and so great men.

[50603] But for the rest, the things that were brought forward by them to prove the charge — empty and foolish things — I simply fear that you may count them charges only because they were brought forward. "Why," says he, "did you seek out certain kinds of fish?" As if it were not lawful for a philosopher to do, for the sake of knowledge, what would be lawful for a glutton for the sake of his appetite. "Why did a free woman marry you after thirteen years of widowhood?" As if it were not rather to be wondered at that for so many years she did not marry. "Why, before she married you, did she write I know not what in a letter, of how it seemed to her?" As if anyone ought to render the reasons of another's opinion. "But, being older, she did not spurn a young man." This very thing, then, is an argument that there was no need of magic — that a woman should wish to marry a man, a widow to marry a bachelor, an older woman a younger. And there are others like these: "Apuleius has something at home which he worships devoutly." As if it were not rather a crime to have nothing that you worship. "A boy fell down in Apuleius' presence." Why, what if a young man, what if even an old man, had collapsed while I stood by, hindered by some bodily ailment or slipping on the slippery ground? Is it by such arguments that you prove magic — the falling of a little boy, the marriage of a woman, and the buying of fish?

[52014] 28. For my part, I might at small risk content myself with what I have already said, and conclude my plea; but since I have plenty of water left over, in proportion to the length of the accusation, come, if it seems good, let us consider each point. And I, for my part, will not deny anything that is alleged, whether it be true or false, but will confess it just as if it were done, so that all this great multitude, which has gathered from every side in such numbers to hear, may plainly understand that against philosophers nothing can be said truly, nor even falsely invented, which they would not, out of confidence in their innocence — though they might deny it — yet rather choose to defend. First, then, I will refute their arguments and prove that they have nothing to do with magic; next, even if I were a magician in the highest degree, I will nevertheless show that there was neither any cause nor any occasion for them to try me on any charge of sorcery. There also I will discuss the matter of false jealousy, and of the woman's letters wrongly read and still more wickedly interpreted, and of the marriage of myself and Pudentilla, and will show that it was undertaken by me for duty's sake rather than for gain. And this our marriage was — to Aemilianus here — a source of monstrous, I cannot say how great, anguish and vexation; thence arose all the anger and rage and at last the madness of undertaking this accusation. And if I show all this plainly and clearly, then at last, Claudius Maximus, I will call you and all who are present to witness, that this boy Sicinius Pudens, my stepson, under cover of whom and by whose wish I am accused by his uncle, was lately torn from my care — after his brother Pontianus, who was both older in years and better in character, met his death — and so was savagely turned, by no fault of mine, against me and against his own mother, abandoning liberal studies and rejecting all discipline; and that, by the wicked rudiments of this accusation, he is likely to grow more like his uncle Aemilianus than his brother Pontianus.

[54097] 29. Now, as I set out to do, I will proceed to all the ravings of this Aemilianus, beginning with that which, as you observed, was stated at the outset as if it were the strongest ground for the suspicion of magic — that I sought out certain kinds of fish at a price through certain fishermen. Which, then, of these tells against me as suspicion of magic? That fishermen sought out a fish for me? (No doubt, then, the business ought to have been given to embroiderers or carpenters, and so the work of each trade exchanged, if I wished to avoid your slanders — that a carpenter might net me a fish, and a fisherman in return plane wood for me.) Or did you gather that little fish were sought for sorcery, from the fact that they were sought at a price? (No doubt, if I had wanted them for a banquet, I should have got them for nothing.) Why then do you not arraign me on many other counts as well? For I have often bought wine and vegetables and fruit and bread for a price. By that reasoning you decree famine to all the dainty-sellers; for who will dare to buy provisions from them, if it is laid down that all eatables which are got with money are wanted not for dinner but for magic? But if no suspicion remains either in the fishermen hired for a fee to do what they always do — to catch fish — (none of whom, however, did they produce as witnesses, since none existed), nor in the price itself of the merchandise (the amount of which, however, they fixed at nothing, lest, if they had named a small price, it should be despised, or a large one, it should not be believed) — if, as I say, there is no suspicion in these things: let Aemilianus answer me, by what nearest sign he was led to an accusation of magic.

[55816] 30. "You seek fish," he says. I will not deny it. But, I ask you, is a man who seeks fish a magician? I think it no more so than if I were seeking hares, or boars, or fattened fowl. Or have fish alone something hidden, unknown to others but better known to magicians? If you know what this is, you are surely a magician; but if you do not know, you must needs confess that you accuse what you do not understand. Can you be so unschooled in all letters, in all the very tales of the common folk, that you cannot even invent these things plausibly? For what is there in a fish — a dull and cold thing, or anything at all sought from the sea — fitted to kindle the fire of love? Unless perhaps this led you into your lie, that Venus is said to have risen from the sea. Listen, if you please, Tannonius Pudens, to how many things you have failed to know, you who took fish as an argument for magic. But if you had read Virgil, you would surely have known that other things are wont to be sought for this purpose; for he, as far as I know, enumerates soft fillets, and rich vervain, and male frankincense, and threads of different colours, and besides, brittle laurel, durable clay, meltable wax — and no less the things he wrote in his serious work:

[57063] Plants of ripening growth, with the milk of black poison, are sought, reaped by moonlight with bronze sickles; sought too is the love-charm torn from the forehead of a new-born foal, snatched away before its mother could seize it.

[57295] But you, the accuser of fish, assign to magic far different instruments — not to be wiped from tender foreheads, but to be cut from scaly backs; not to be torn from the ground, but to be drawn from the deep; not to be reaped with sickles, but to be hooked with barbs. Finally, in his sorcery the poet names poison, you name a relish; he names herbs and twigs, you scales and bones; he plucks the meadow, you ransack the wave. I would have recalled to you Theocritus' parallels too, and others of Homer's, and very many of Orpheus', and would have fetched much from the Greek comedies and tragedies and histories, had I not noticed a while ago that you were unable to read Pudentilla's Greek letter. Therefore I will touch upon one Latin poet only, the very verses which those who have read Laevius will recognize:

[58110] 31. all manner of love-charms they dig up from everywhere: the famous "antipathes" is sought, little wheels, nail-parings, fillets, little roots, herbs, twigs, two-tailed lizards as decoys, the lure of whinnying mares.

[58330] These and other things, far more plausibly than fish, you would have feigned that I sought (for to these, perhaps, through the report widely spread abroad, there might have been some credit), had you possessed any learning at all; but in truth, for what purpose does a fish, once caught, serve, except, when cooked, for a feast? For the rest, it seems to me to help nothing toward magic. I will say whence I conjecture this. Most men, who reckoned Pythagoras a follower of Zoroaster and likewise skilled in magic, have nevertheless handed down to memory that, when he had noticed, near Metapontum on the coast of that Italy of his — which he had made a supplementary Greece — a drag-net being hauled by certain fishermen, he bought the chance of their cast, and, the price being paid, ordered the fish that had been caught to be at once loosed from the nets and given back to the deep; which fish, assuredly, he would not have let go from his hands, had he found anything in them useful for magic. But that singularly learned man and emulator of the ancients remembered that Homer — a poet of much knowledge, or rather pre-eminently skilled in all things — had ascribed all the power of drugs not to the sea but to the earth, when he made mention of a certain sorceress in this fashion: "She who knew as many drugs as the broad earth nourishes." And likewise elsewhere in his verses: "where the grain-giving land bears very many drugs, many good when mixed, and many baleful." And yet never in Homer did anyone work a cure with anything of the sea or fishy: neither Proteus his shape, nor Ulysses his trench, nor Aeolus his wind-bag, nor Helen her mixing-bowl, nor Circe her cup, nor Venus her girdle. But you alone, of all human memory, are found to transfer the power of herbs and roots and twigs and pebbles — as if by some confusion of nature — from the highest mountains into the sea, and to sew it deep into the bellies of fish. Therefore, just as Mercury, the carrier of incantations, and Venus, the allurer of the soul, and the Moon, accomplice of the night, and Trivia, mistress of the shades, used to be summoned to the magicians' rites — so hereafter, on your authority, Neptune with Salacia and Portunus and all the chorus of Nereus shall be transferred from the tides of the straits to the tides of love.

[60649] 32. I have said why I do not think there is any business between magicians and fish. Now, if it seems good, let us grant Aemilianus that fish are even wont to help toward magic powers. Does it then follow that whoever seeks them is himself a magician? On that reckoning, the man who seeks a small galley will be a pirate, and the man who seeks a crowbar a burglar, and the man who seeks a sword an assassin. You will name nothing in all the world so harmless that it cannot do some hurt in some way, nor anything so cheering that it cannot be construed toward sorrow. And yet not all things are therefore dragged toward a worse suspicion — as if you should suppose that frankincense and cassia and myrrh and the rest of such perfumes are bought only for a funeral, when they are got for medicine too, and for sacrifice. For the rest, by the same fish-argument you will reckon that Menelaus' companions also were magicians, who, as the foremost poet says, drove off hunger near the island of Pharos with bent hooks; you will refer to the same heading divers, too, and dolphins, and sea-onions, and likewise all gluttons who buy at great cost from the fishermen, and the very fishermen, who by their art procure fish of every kind. Why, then, do you ask? I am unwilling, indeed, nor do I count it necessary, to tell you; but do you, of yourself, if you can, prove that I sought them for this purpose. As if I had bought hellebore, or hemlock, or the juice of the poppy, and likewise other things of the same kind, of which the moderate use is wholesome but the mixing or the quantity is harmful — who would bear it with an even mind, if you arraigned me for poisoning on the score of these, because a man can be killed by them?

[62376] 33. Let us see, however, what kinds of fish were so necessary to possess and so rare to find, that they were rightly sought with a stated reward. They named three in all: about one they were mistaken, about two they lied. Mistaken, in that they said it was a sea-hare, which was an altogether different fish, brought to me unbidden, for inspection, by our slave Themison, who is not unskilled in medicine, as you heard from him himself; for the hare he has not yet even found. But I profess that I seek out the rest too, having given the task not only to fishermen but also to my friends, that whatever fish of a less-known kind should turn up, they should either describe its form to me, or, if they cannot do that, show me the thing itself alive, or even dead. Why I do this I will presently explain. But my most cunning accusers — so they think themselves — lied, when, to put a finish to their slander, they invented that I had sought two sea-creatures by indecent names; which that Tannonius, since he wished the genitals of either sex to be understood, but, through his stammering, that great pleader could not bring himself to utter them, after much and long hesitation, at last named the male sea-creature by I know not what circumlocution, foully and basely; but the female part, finding no decent way to say it, took refuge in my writings, and read from a certain book of mine: "let her cover the cleft of the thighs with the screen of her thigh and the veil of her hand.

[63859] 34. Here, too, with his characteristic gravity, he turned it to my reproach that I was not even ashamed to speak baser things in a decent fashion. But I, on the contrary, might more justly reproach him, that one who publicly professes himself a patron of eloquence should babble basely even of things decent to say, and should often, in matters by no means difficult, stammer, or fall altogether silent. For tell me — if I had said nothing about the statue of Venus, and had not named the "cleft," with what words, after all, would you have brought that charge so well suited both to your folly and to your tongue? Or is there anything more foolish than to conjecture a likeness of things from the nearness of their names? And perhaps you imagined you had hit very acutely upon it, in feigning that I sought these two sea-creatures for magical allurements — the "veretilla" and the "virginal"; learn, then, the Latin names of things, which I have on that account named in various ways, that, being fresh instructed, you may accuse again. Remember, nonetheless, that it would be as ridiculous an argument to claim that obscene sea-things were wanted for the affairs of love, as if you were to say that a sea-comb was sought for combing the hair, or a hawk-fish for fowling, or a boar-fish for hunting boars, or a sea-skull for raising the dead. I answer, then, to this passage of yours, contrived no less stupidly than absurdly, that I sought these sea-trifles and shoreline rubbish neither for a price nor for nothing.

[65379] 35. This, too, I answer besides — that you did not know what you were feigning I had sought. For most of these worthless things which you named lie heaped and piled on all shores, and, without anyone's labour, when the little waves are however lightly stirred, roll out of their own accord. Why then do you not say that by the same labour, at great cost, through very many fishermen, I sought from the shore a ribbed shell with its grooved covering, a smooth pebble, and besides, the claws of crabs, the cups of sea-urchins, the tongues of cuttlefish, finally splinters, straws, little ropes, and the worm-eaten oyster-shells of Pergamum, and at last moss and seaweed, and the rest of the sea's leavings, which everywhere along the shores are driven by the winds, spat up by the brine, tossed to and fro by the storm, and abandoned in the calm? For to these things which I have mentioned suspicions can be fitted, in the same way, from their names, no less than to the others. You say that things spurious and bewitching, taken from the sea, can serve the affairs of love, because of the likeness of names: why might not, from the same shore, a pebble (calculus) serve the bladder (vesica), a shell (testa) a testament (testamentum), a crab (cancer) for ulcers (ulcera), seaweed (alga) for the shivering-fit (quercera)? Truly, Claudius Maximus, you are a man of too great patience and of an almost excessive kindness, who have, by Hercules, so long endured these argumentations of theirs; for my part, when these things were urged by them as if grave and conclusive, I laughed at their folly and marveled at your patience.

[67003] 36. But for the rest — why I have already come to know very many fish, and am unwilling to remain ignorant of certain ones — let Aemilianus learn, since he so far concerns himself with my affairs; although he is now in the declining stage of life and in the sunset of old age, yet, if it seems good, let him receive instruction, late indeed and posthumous; let him read the monuments of the ancient philosophers, that he may at last understand that I was not the first to inquire into these things, but that my forebears did so long ago — I mean Aristotle and Theophrastus and Eudemus and Lyco and the other lesser followers of Plato, who left very many books on the breeding of animals, on their diet, on their parts, and on every difference among them. It is well that the cause is pleaded before you, Maximus, who, by your erudition, have surely read Aristotle's many-volumed works "On the Generation of Animals," "On the Anatomy of Animals," "On the History of Animals," and besides, his innumerable "Problems," and then those of the rest of the same school, in which various matters of this kind are treated. And if it was honourable and glorious for them to write down things sought out with such great care, why should it be base for us to investigate them — especially when I strive to write the same things, more methodically and concisely, in Greek and in Latin, and in all of them either to supply what was omitted or to fill out what was defective? Permit, if there is leisure, some passages of my magical writings to be read, that Aemilianus may know that I seek out and diligently explore more than he supposes. Bring out, you there, one of my Greek books, which my friends and assistants happened to have here, "On Questions of Natural Science," and that one especially in which more matters concerning the kinds of fish are treated. Meanwhile, while he is looking for it, I will tell a story fitting to the case.

[68933] 37. The poet Sophocles, the rival and survivor of Euripides — for he lived to extreme old age — when he was accused by his own son of dementia, on the ground that he was now doting through age, is said to have brought out his "Oedipus at Colonus," that most excellent of his tragedies, which he happened to be then composing at that very time, and to have read it to the judges, and to have added nothing further for his defence, except that they might boldly condemn him for dementia if the old man's verses displeased them. Thereupon, I learn, all the judges rose up before so great a poet, bore him up with marvelous praises for the ingenuity of his plot and the loftiness of his eloquence, and came not so very far short, all of them, from condemning the accuser instead for dementia.

[69723] Have you found the book? You have made me glad. Come, then, let us try whether my own writings can be of service to me in court too. Read a little from the beginning, then some passages about fish. And you, meanwhile, while he reads, hold back the water-clock.

[69985] 38. You have heard, Maximus, things most of which, no doubt, you had read in the ancient philosophers. And remember that these are volumes written by me about fish alone — which of them are begotten by their mating, which take shape from the slime, how often and at what season of the year the females of each kind are in heat and the males rut, by what members and on what grounds nature has distinguished those that are viviparous from those that are oviparous (for so I render in Latin what the Greeks call zoiotoka and oiotoka) — and, not to go laboriously through the generation of animals, then on the difference and the diet and the members and the ages and very many other things, necessary indeed to know, but out of place in a court of law. I will also order a few passages to be read from my Latin writings bearing on the same expertise, in which you will notice both memorable matters and rare to learn, and also names even unfamiliar to the Romans and, so far as I know, uncoined to this day — names which nevertheless, by my labour and study, are so derived from the Greek that they are yet struck in Latin coin. Or let your advocates, Aemilianus, tell us where they have read these words pronounced in Latin. I will speak of water-creatures only, and will not touch the other animals except in their common differences. Listen, then, to what I shall say. Soon you will cry out that I am running through magical names after the Egyptian or Babylonian rite: cartilaginous fish, mollusks, soft-shelled crustaceans, gristle-spined fish, hard-shelled creatures, sharp-toothed fish, amphibians, scaly fish, plated fish, skin-finned fish, web-footed creatures, solitary fish, gregarious fish — I could even go on; but it is not worth wasting the day on these, that I may have time to come to the rest. Meanwhile, recite these few things which I have mentioned, set forth in Latin by me.

[71881] 39. Which, then, do you think — for a philosopher not of the rude and unlearned Cynic recklessness, but one who remembers that he belongs to the school of Plato — which do you think shameful for him: to know these things or not to know them, to neglect them or to attend to them, to recognize how great is the rational order of providence even in these things, or to believe about the immortal gods what his mother and father told him? Quintus Ennius wrote his "Hedyphagetica" in verse; he enumerates countless kinds of fish, which, of course, he had carefully come to know. I remember a few verses; I will recite them:

[72502] As the sea-weasel of Clupea surpasses all, so the mussels of Aenus, and the rough oysters most plentiful at Abydus. At Mytilene is the scallop, and near Ambracia the boar-fish of Charadrus. At Brundisium the bream is good; if it be large, take it. Know that the boar-fish is best at Tarentum; at Surrentum see you buy the sturgeon, and the glaucus at Cumae. And why have I passed over the parrot-wrasse, the very brain, almost, of supreme Jove — (this is caught, big and good, near the homeland of Nestor) — the black-tail, the thrush-wrasse, the merle-wrasse, and the sea-shade. At Corcyra the polyp, and the fat skulls of the maigre, the purple-fish, the little murex, the mussels, and the sweet sea-urchins too.

[73218] He adorned others, also, in many verses, and told where in the world each of them is found, and how, roasted or in sauce, it tastes best; nor is he for that reproached by the learned. Let me not be reproached, then, who write down, in their own elegant terms, in Greek and in Latin, things known to very few.

[73528] 40. When I have said enough of this, then receive another point. For what, after all, if, being neither unstudious nor unskilled in medicine, I seek certain remedies from fish? For indeed there are very many, both scattered and sown abroad in all other things by the same bounty of nature, and likewise some in fish. Or do you think that to know remedies and to seek them out belongs to a magician rather than to a physician — rather, in short, than to a philosopher, who is to use them not for gain but for help? The ancient physicians, indeed, knew even charms as remedies for wounds, as Homer, the surest authority of all antiquity, teaches, who makes the blood flowing from Ulysses' wound be stanched by an incantation. For nothing that is done for the sake of bringing health is criminal. "But," he says, "for what purpose, save an evil one, did you cut open a fish, which the slave Themison brought to you?" As if I had not said a little before that I write about the parts of all animals, about their position and number and cause, and that I both explore with zeal and enlarge upon Aristotle's books of "Anatomies." And indeed I marvel exceedingly that you know of only one little fish inspected by me, when by now I have inspected very many, wherever and whenever they have been offered — especially since I do nothing in secret, but all things in the open, so that any chance bystander, even a stranger, may be present, after the manner and practice of my teachers, who say that a free and high-minded man ought, wherever he goes, to carry his mind on his very forehead. This very little fish, which you call a sea-hare, I showed to very many who were present; nor do I even yet decide what they call it, unless I should inquire more carefully, since I find no description of this fish's properties even among the ancient philosophers, although it is the rarest of all and, by Hercules, worth recording; for that fish alone, so far as I know, while it is otherwise boneless, has twelve bones, in the likeness of pigs' knuckle-bones, connected and chained together in its belly. Had Aristotle known this, he would surely never have failed to put it on record — he who recorded, as a great thing, that the little fish called the codling alone of all has its heart placed in the middle of its belly.

[75836] 41. "You cut open a fish," he says. Who would tolerate that this is a charge in a philosopher, which would have been none in a butcher or a cook? "You cut open a fish." Is it because it was raw that you accuse it? If I were rummaging in the belly of a cooked one, and digging out its little livers — just as that little boy Sicinius Pudens learns to do, at your house, from his own dainties — you would not think the matter worth accusing; and yet it is a greater crime in a philosopher to eat fish than to inspect them. Or is it lawful for soothsayers to search out the entrails, but not lawful for a philosopher to contemplate them — a philosopher who knows himself to be the diviner of all animals, the priest of all the gods? Do you accuse in me that which both I and Maximus admire in Aristotle? Unless you expel his books from the libraries and wrest them from the hands of the studious, you cannot accuse me. But on this I have said almost more than I ought.

[76803] Now, besides, see how they confute themselves. They say that the woman was sought by me with magic arts and sea-allurements at that very time when they will not deny that I was in the inland mountains of Gaetulia, where fish are to be found only after the floods of Deucalion. Which I rejoice that these men do not know I have read — Theophrastus' "On Creatures that Bite and Sting," too, and Nicander's "Theriaca"; for otherwise they would demand that I be put on trial for poisoning as well. But indeed I took up this business from reading and from emulating Aristotle, with no small encouragement from my own Plato, who says that he who investigates these matters "plays in life a game that brings no regret.

[77516] 42. Now, since their case about fish has been sufficiently laid bare, receive another, contrived with equal stupidity, but far more idly and wickedly. They themselves knew that the fish-argument was futile and would come to nothing, and besides that its novelty was ridiculous (for who ever heard tell that fish are wont to be scaled and unbacked for magical sorceries?), and that they had better feign something from matters more widely current and even believed. And so, after the prescription of opinion and report, they invented that a certain boy, charmed by an incantation, with witnesses removed, in a secret place, with a little altar and a lamp and a few conscious witnesses, where he was bewitched, fell down, and afterward was roused not knowing himself. Nor did they dare to advance their lie further; for, that the tale might be complete, this too ought to have been added — that the same boy foretold many things by prophecy. For this is the profit we get from incantations: foretelling and divination; and not only by the opinion of the vulgar, but also by the authority of learned men, is this marvel concerning boys confirmed. I remember reading, in the philosopher Varro, a man most carefully learned and erudite, among other things of the same kind, this also: that at Tralles, when men were consulting by magical inquiry about the outcome of the Mithridatic war, a boy, gazing at a reflection of Mercury in water, sang in a hundred and sixty verses the things that were to come. And likewise that Fabius, when he had lost five hundred denarii, came to Nigidius to consult him; that boys, roused by an incantation, disclosed where the purse was buried, with part of the money, and how the rest had been distributed; that even one denarius of that number was held by Marcus Cato the philosopher — which Cato confessed he had received from his footman among the offerings of Apollo.

[79417] 43. These and other things I read in very many authors about magic and boys; but I am of doubtful judgment whether to say it can be so or to deny it — although I believe Plato when he holds that, between gods and men, certain powers of the divine, intermediate by nature and place, are set, and that these govern all divinations and the marvels of magicians; nay, I even reflect with myself that the human soul, and especially that of a boy, being simple, can, whether by the diversion of incantations or by the soothing of perfumes, be lulled to sleep, and estranged into a forgetfulness of present things, and, for a little while, the memory of the body being removed, be brought back and return to its own nature, which is, of course, immortal and divine, and so, as if in some slumber, foretell things to come. But in truth, however these matters stand, if any credit is to be given to such things, that prophetic boy — whoever he may be — ought, so far as I hear, to be chosen as both comely and unblemished in body and shrewd in mind and eloquent of speech, so that in him either the divine power may worthily lodge, as in a good house (if indeed it is enclosed in the boy's body), or his own soul, being roused, may be quickly brought back to its own power of divination, which, being readily implanted in it and wounded by no forgetfulness and dulled, may be easily resumed. For not from every wood, as Pythagoras used to say, ought a Mercury to be carved. If this is so, name the boy who was sound, unmaimed, gifted, comely, whom I thought worthy to initiate with a charm. But Thallus, whom you named, needs a physician rather than a magician; for the poor wretch is so wasted by the falling-sickness that, often three or four times a day, frequently without any incantations, he collapses, and racks all his limbs with convulsions, ulcerous of face, bruised on forehead and back of the head, dull of eye, gaping of nostril, faltering of foot. The greatest magician of all is he in whose presence Thallus has stood for any length of time: so generally, sinking with his malady as with sleep, does he topple over.

[81540] 44. And yet you said that he was overthrown by my charms, because he happened once to fall down in my presence. Most of his fellow-slaves are present, whom you demanded to be produced. They can all tell you why they spit at the sight of Thallus, why no one dares to dine with him from the same dish or drink from the same cup. And why do I speak of slaves? You see them yourselves; deny that Thallus, long before I came to Oea, was wont to fall down with that malady, and was frequently shown to physicians; let his fellow-slaves, who are in your service, deny it: I will confess myself convicted of everything, unless... [the text is corrupt here] he was long ago banished to distant fields, that he might not contaminate the household: which that it was so done cannot even be denied by them. For this reason he could not be produced by us today. For as all this accusation was rash and sudden, two days ago Aemilianus served notice on us that we should produce fifteen slaves before you. Fourteen are present, who were in the town. Thallus alone, as I said, because he is far away in exile, about a hundred miles off — Thallus alone is absent, but we have sent someone to fetch him at full speed. Ask, Maximus, the fourteen slaves whom we produce, where the boy Thallus is and how well he is doing; ask the slaves of my accusers. They will not deny that he is a most loathsome boy, of rotten and diseased body, epileptic, barbarous, rustic. A fine boy you have chosen indeed, whom one might bring to a sacrifice, whose head one might touch, whom one might clothe in a pure cloak, from whom one might look for an oracle! By Hercules, I wish he were here: I would have handed him over to you, Aemilianus, and would have held him while you questioned him; already, in the middle of the inquiry, here, before the very tribunal, he would have turned his savage eyes upon you, foaming would have spat in your face, would have clenched his hands, shaken his head, and at last collapsed into your bosom.

[83540] 45. The fourteen slaves you demanded I produce. Why do you not use them for any inquiry? You ask for one boy, and that an epileptic, whom you know to have long been absent, just as I do. What other slander is more evident? Fourteen slaves are present at your request, and you pretend not to see them; one little boy is absent, and him you arraign. Finally, what do you want? Suppose Thallus were present: do you want to prove that he fell down in my presence? I confess it of my own accord. Do you say it was done by a charm? Of this the boy knows nothing, and I refute that it was done; for that the boy is epileptic not even you will dare to deny. Why then should his falling be attributed to a charm rather than to his disease? Or could it not have happened that, by chance, in my presence, he suffered the same thing which he often suffered at other times in the presence of many? But if I thought it a great matter to throw down an epileptic, what need was there of a charm, when burnt jet-stone, as I read in the natural philosophers, beautifully and easily tests this disease — by whose smell men commonly try, even in slave-markets, the health or sickness of those for sale? Even a potter's wheel, whirled round, not without difficulty seizes a man of the same malady with its giddiness, so that the spectacle of its spinning weakens an already wounded mind; and a potter is far more potent to throw down epileptics than a magician. You demanded in vain that I produce slaves: I, not without cause, demand that you name what witnesses were present at this expiatory rite, when I, as you say, pushed the falling Thallus. You name one only, that little boy Sicinius Pudens, in whose name you accuse me; for he says that he was present. Even if his boyhood were no objection to the testimony's reliability, yet his being an accuser would rob it of credit. It would have been easier, Aemilianus, and far more telling, for you to say that you yourself were present and that from that rite you began to lose your wits, rather than to make over the whole business, as a child's plaything, to boys. A boy fell, a boy saw: did some boy, too, do the enchanting?

[85701] 46. Here Tannonius Pudens, cunningly enough, when he saw that this lie too was growing cold and was now all but hissed off the stage by the looks and murmurs of all, in order to detain at least the suspicions of certain people by hope, said that he would produce other boys who had likewise been enchanted by me, and so passed over to another sort of argument. Which, although I might pretend not to notice, yet, as I do with everything, this too I challenge of my own accord. For I am eager that those boys be produced, whom, I hear, have been encouraged to lie by the hope of freedom. But I say no more: let them produce them. I demand, then, and insist, Tannonius Pudens, that you fulfil your promise. Bring forth those boys in whom you trust: produce them, name who they are. You may use my water-time for this. Speak, I say, Tannonius. Why are you silent, why do you delay, why do you look about you? But if this man does not know what he learned, or has forgotten the names, then you, Aemilianus, come forward, say what you charged your advocate to do, produce the boys. Why have you turned pale? Why are you silent? Is this to accuse, is this to lay so great a charge — or is it to make a mockery of Claudius Maximus, so great a man, and to harass me with slander? But if perchance your advocate has slipped in a word and you have no boys to produce, at least make some use of the fourteen slaves whom I produced.

[87123] 47. Or why did you demand that so large a household be brought forward? Accusing me of magic, you served notice for fifteen slaves: why, if you were accusing me of violence, how many slaves, after all, would you demand? So then, fifteen slaves know something, and it is hidden. Or is it not hidden, and is it magic? You must necessarily confess one of these two things: either that the thing was not unlawful, in which I did not fear so many witnesses; or, if it was unlawful, that so many witnesses ought not to have known of it. This magic, as far as I hear, is a thing put under the ban of the laws, forbidden from of old by the Twelve Tables on account of incredible blightings of crops, and is therefore hidden no less than foul and horrible, generally kept watch through the nights and buried in darkness, solitary as to witnesses and muttered in incantations — to which not only few of slaves, but even few of free men, are admitted: and do you wish fifteen slaves to have been present? Was it a wedding, or some other crowded ceremony, or a seasonable banquet? Do fifteen slaves share in a magic rite, like the fifteen men appointed to perform the sacred rites? But for what purpose should I have admitted so many in number, if even a few are too many for a secret? Fifteen free men are a populace, as many slaves a household, as many fettered men a chain-gang. Or was their multitude necessary as a help, to hold the expiatory victims for a long time? But you named no victims except hens. Or was it to count the grains of incense, or to throw down Thallus?

[88691] 48. You said, too, that a free woman, suffering from the same malady as Thallus, was brought to me at my house, whom I promised to cure, and that she too, enchanted by me, fell down. As I see, you have come to accuse a wrestling-master, not a magician: thus you say that all who came near me fell. Yet Themison the physician, by whom the woman was brought to me for inspection, denied — when you asked him, Maximus — that she suffered anything further than that I asked her whether her ears rang, and which of them more; and when she answered that her right ear was too much disturbed, I at once dismissed her. Here I, Maximus, although for the present I diligently refrain from your praises, lest anywhere, for the sake of this case, I should seem to flatter you, yet cannot but praise your shrewdness in questioning. For a while ago, when these things were being discussed, and they said the woman was enchanted, and the physician who had been present denied it, you asked, very prudently indeed, what profit there had been to me in enchanting her. They answered: "That the woman might fall." "What then? Did she die?" you say. They denied it. "What, then, do you say? What good did it do Apuleius, if she fell?" For so beautifully and persistently did you ask a third time, as one who knew that the reasons for all deeds must be more diligently examined, and that the causes are more often inquired into, while the deeds are granted; and that for this very reason the advocates of litigants are called pleaders of causes, because they set forth why each thing was done. But to deny a deed is an easy matter, and needs no advocate: to show that a deed was rightly or wrongly done — that, indeed, is far more arduous and difficult. In vain, then, is it inquired whether a thing was done, which had no bad cause for being done. So the man charged with a deed is freed, before a good judge, from the scruple of the inquiry, if he had no motive for sinning. Now, since they have proved the woman neither enchanted nor thrown down, and I do not deny that she was inspected by me at the physician's request, I will tell you, Maximus, why I asked that about the ringing of the ears — not so much to clear myself in that matter, which you have already prejudged to border on neither fault nor crime, as that I might not pass over in silence anything worthy of your ears and consonant with your learning. I will tell it, then, as briefly as I can; for you are to be reminded by me, not instructed.

[91183] 49. Plato the philosopher, in that most illustrious "Timaeus," having framed the whole world with a certain heavenly eloquence — he, then, after he had most skilfully discoursed about the three powers of our soul too, and had most aptly taught why each of our members was fashioned for us by divine providence, reckons up the cause of all diseases under three heads. The first cause he assigns to the first elements of the body, if the very qualities of the elements — the moist and the cold, and the two opposite to these — do not agree; and this comes about when any one of them has either exceeded its measure or removed from its place. The next cause of diseases lies in the fault of those things which, already compounded from the simple elements, have nonetheless coalesced into one kind — such as the kind of blood, and of flesh, and of bone, and of marrow, and further, those things which are mixed from these single substances. Thirdly, in the body, the concretions of various bile and turbid breath and thick humour are the latest provokers of sicknesses.

[92250] 50. Of which number the chief is the matter of the falling-sickness, of which I have begun to speak, when the flesh dissolves, by a hostile fire, into a thick and foaming humour, and, breath being generated from the same source, from the whiteness of the compressed air there flows a whitish and swollen corruption. For if that corruption breathes out to the exterior of the body, it spreads with more disgrace than harm; for it marks the outer skin of the breast with white blotches and varies it with every kind of stain. But whoever this has befallen is never afterward attacked by the falling-sickness; thus he balances a most grievous sickness of the mind by a slight disfigurement of the body. But if that pernicious sweetness, held within and joined with black bile, has raged and spread through all the veins, and then, having forced a way to the topmost head, has mingled its dread flux with the brain, it forthwith weakens the royal part of the soul, which, strong in reason, has taken its seat in the crown of a man's head as in a citadel and palace. For it overwhelms and disturbs its divine ways and wise passages; which it does with less harm during sleep, when it presses, with a moderate strangling that is the forerunner of the falling-sickness, those who are full of drink and food. But if it has so far increased that it is poured even over the head of the waking, then indeed, by a sudden clouding of the mind, they grow numb, and, the body dying, the soul failing, they fall. This our people have truly named not only the major sickness and the falling-sickness, but even the divine sickness — just as the Greeks call it the "sacred disease" — namely because it does violence to the rational part of the soul, which is by far the most holy.

[94013] 51. You recognize, Maximus, Plato's reasoning, expounded as clearly as I could for the occasion; and I, trusting it, and judging the cause of the divine sickness to be when that plague has flowed back into the head, do not at all seem to have inquired about nothing when I asked whether that woman had a heavy head, a stiff neck, throbbing temples, ringing ears. But that she confessed the more frequent ringings in her right ear was a sign that the disease was driven deep within; for the right parts of the body are the stronger, and therefore leave the less hope of recovery when they too succumb to sickness. Aristotle indeed left it written in his "Problems" that, in whatever epileptics the disease begins from the right, theirs is the harder to cure. It would be tedious, if I wished to review Theophrastus' opinion too about the same disease; for he too has an excellent book on epileptics. To whom, nonetheless, in another book, which he wrote on grudging animals, he says that the cast skins of geckos are a remedy — which they cast off, like old age, after the manner of other serpents, at fixed seasons; but unless you snatch them away at once, whether by malignant foreknowledge or by natural appetite, they straightway turn and devour them. I have mentioned these things on this account, and have diligently named at once the discussions and the books of noble philosophers, and have wished to touch upon none of the physicians or the poets, that these men may cease to wonder if philosophers, by their own learning, know the causes of diseases and their remedies. Therefore, since a sick woman was brought to me to be inspected for the sake of treatment, and since it is agreed, both by the confession of the physician who brought her to me and by my own reasoning, that this was rightly done, either let them lay it down that to cure diseases belongs to a magician and a malefactor, or, if they dare not say this, let them confess that, in the case of the epileptic boy and woman, they have leveled empty and utterly tumbling slanders.

[96066] 52. Nay rather, if you would have the truth, Aemilianus, you are the epileptic one, who have already fallen by so many slanders. For it is no graver to collapse in body than in heart, to topple over with the foot rather than with the mind, to be spat upon in the bedchamber than to be execrated in this most splendid assembly. But you, perhaps, think yourself sound, because you are not kept at home, but follow your madness wherever it has led you. And yet match, if you will, your own frenzy with the frenzy of Thallus: you will find no great difference, except that Thallus rages against himself, while you rage against others too. For the rest, Thallus rolls his eyes, you the truth; Thallus clenches his hands, you your advocates; Thallus is dashed against the pavements, you against the tribunals; finally, he does whatever he does in sickness, and sins unknowingly: but you, wretch, offend knowingly and wittingly, so great is the force of the disease that goads you on; you allege the false for the true, you make a crime of the undone as of the done, the man whom you clearly know to be innocent you nevertheless accuse as guilty.

[97207] 53. There is more besides — a point I passed over. There are things you admit you do not know, and yet these same things you make a charge of, as if you knew them. For you say that I kept certain objects wrapped in a little linen cloth among the household gods of Pontianus. What those wrapped things were, and of what kind, you confess you do not know, nor is there anyone else who saw them; yet you maintain they were the instruments of magic. Let no one flatter you, Aemilianus: there is no cunning in this accusing of yours, nor even any impudence — lest you should think there is. What is it, then? It is the wretched frenzy of an embittered mind, and the pitiable madness of a raw and unripe old age. For in pretty nearly these words you addressed a judge so weighty and so clear-sighted: "Apuleius kept certain things wrapped in a bit of linen among the household gods of Pontianus. Since I do not know what these things were, on that very account I maintain that they were magical. Believe me, then, in what I say, because I say what I do not know." What splendid arguments, and how plainly they convict the accused! "It was so, since I do not know what it was." You alone, Aemilianus, have been found out to know even the things you do not know; so far above all men have you been carried in your folly — seeing that the most skilful and acute of the philosophers say that not even the things we see are to be trusted, while you make assertions even about the things you have neither ever beheld nor heard of. If Pontianus were alive and you were to question him as to what was in that wrapping, he would answer that he did not know. There stands the freedman who to this day holds the key of that place and stands on your side: he says that he never looked inside, although he himself opened it, being the keeper of the books that were stored there, almost daily, and shut it again; that he often went in with us, much oftener alone; that he saw the linen lying on the table without any seal, without any fastening. And why not? Magical articles were being hidden inside it: I kept it all the more carelessly for that, I exposed it carelessly to be freely searched and inspected at pleasure, even to be carried off, I entrusted it to another's keeping, I left it to another's discretion. What, then, do you wish to be believed at this present? That the thing which Pontianus did not know — Pontianus, who lived with me in an unbroken intimacy — is known to you, whom I never saw except before the tribunal? Or that what the freedman, constantly at hand and with every opportunity of inspecting it, did not see, you saw — you who never came near the place? Finally, grant that what you did not see was such as you say: yet, you fool, if today you had intercepted that little cloth, whatever you produced out of it, I should deny was magical.

[100059] 54. I even allow you this: imagine whatever you like, invent it, devise something that could appear magical: yet even so I would contend with you about it. I should say either that it had been planted, or received as a remedy, or handed down in a religious rite, or enjoined in a dream; there are a thousand other grounds on which I could refute you truly, by common usage and the most familiar custom of religious observance. As it is, you demand that a thing which, even if it had been seized and held, would nevertheless do me no harm before a good judge, should condemn me on the strength of an empty suspicion, uncertain and unknown. Perhaps you will say again, as you are wont: "What, then, was that which you wrapped in linen and laid up, of all places, among the household gods?" Is that your way, Aemilianus? Do you accuse like this — questioning the defendant about everything, bringing forward nothing ascertained yourself? "Why do you look for fish? Why did you examine a sick woman? What did you keep in the cloth?" Did you come to accuse or to interrogate? If to accuse, then prove the things you say yourself; if to interrogate, do not pronounce beforehand what the thing was, since you are obliged to ask precisely because you do not know. But indeed, on these terms all men will be set up as defendants, if the man who has lodged an information against anyone is under no necessity of proving it, while he has every facility of questioning. For in this way, just as a charge of magic is fastened on someone, anything at all that a man may have done will be thrown in his teeth. "You set the mark of a vow on the thigof some statue: therefore you are a magician; or else, why did you mark it? You offered silent prayers to the gods in a temple: therefore you are a magician; or else, what did you pray for?" On the other hand: "You prayed for nothing in the temple: therefore you are a magician; or else, why did you not entreat the gods?" In like manner, if you have set down some offering, if you have sacrificed, if you have taken a sprig of vervain. The day would fail me, if I wished to follow out all the things for which a slanderer would in the same way demand a reason. Especially as everything whatsoever that is stored, that is sealed, that is shut away and kept in the house, will all, by the same argument, be called magical, or be dragged out of the storeroom into the forum and into court.

[102481] 55. How great these matters are, and of what kind, Maximus, and how wide a field is opened to slander by this path of Aemilianus, and what sweats are brought upon the innocent by this one little cloth, I could indeed dispute at greater length; but I will do what I set out to do: I will confess even what is not necessary, and, when questioned by Aemilianus, I will answer. You ask, Aemilianus, what I kept in the cloth. Now, although I could altogether deny that any cloth of mine was placed in the library of Pontianus, and, even if I were to grant fully that there was one, could still say that nothing was wrapped in it — and if I were to say this, I could be refuted neither by any testimony nor by any argument, for there is no one who touched it, the one freedman, as you say, who saw it — yet, I say, for all I care, let it have been crammed full. Think of it so, if you will, as once the companions of Ulysses thought they had found a treasure, when they were pilfering a bag full of nothing but wind. Do you wish me to tell you what sort of things they were that I wrapped in the cloth and entrusted to the household gods of Pontianus? Your wish shall be granted. I have shared in very many sacred initiations in Greece. Certain tokens and memorials of these, given to me by the priests, I diligently preserve. I say nothing unusual, nothing unknown. Even the initiates of Father Liber alone, you who are present, know what you keep hidden at home and venerate in silence apart from all the uninitiated. But I, as I said, have learned manifold sacred rites, very many ceremonies, and various religious observances, out of zeal for truth and duty toward the gods. Nor do I compose this for the occasion; for it is now about three years since, in the first days after I had come to Oea, discoursing in public on the majesty of Aesculapius, I declared these same things openly and recounted how many rites I knew. That discourse is most widely current, is commonly read, passes through everyone's hands, commended to the devout people of Oea not so much by my eloquence as by the mention of Aesculapius. Let someone say, if anyone perhaps remembers, the opening of that passage. — Do you hear, Maximus, the many who prompt it? Why, look, the very book is offered me. I will order these very words to be read out, since you show

[104817] 56. by your most kindly look that you do not find such a hearing burdensome. — Can it then seem strange to anyone who has any recollection of religion, that a man initiated into so many mysteries of the gods should keep at home certain holy tokens of the sacred rites, and should wrap them in a linen cloth, which is the purest of coverings for things divine? For wool, the sluggish body's excrement, stripped from the sheep, is from the very precepts of Orpheus and Pythagoras a profane garment; whereas the spotless crop of flax, sprung from the earth among the choicest of fruits, is used by the most holy priests of the Egyptians not only for clothing and covering, but for veiling sacred things as well. And I know that some men, and chief among them this Aemilianus, make a jest of mocking things divine. For, as I hear from some of the people of Oea who know him, he has to this day made supplication to no god, has frequented no temple; if he passes any shrine, he counts it a sin to lift his hand to his lips in reverence. Indeed, even to the gods of husbandry, who feed and clothe him, he gives no first-fruits of any crop or vine or flock; in his farm stands no chapel, no place or grove is consecrated. Why do I speak of grove and chapel? Those who have been there say they have not seen even one anointed stone or one garlanded bough within his borders. Two surnames, therefore, have been bestowed on him: Charon, as I said already, for the grimness of his face and his temper; but the other, which he hears with more pleasure, for his contempt of the gods — Mezentius. And so I readily understand that these enumerations of so many initiations seem to him mere trifles, and that perhaps, out of this defiance of the divine, he cannot bring himself to think true what I have said — that I keep, most reverently, the tokens and memorials of so many sacred rites. But I would not turn my hand for what Mezentius thinks of me; to the rest, however, I declare in the clearest voice: if anyone is present who shares in those same solemnities of mine, let him give the sign, and you may hear what things I keep. For I, in truth, shall never be driven by any peril to divulge to the profane what I have received under the seal of silence.

[107063] 57. As I think, Maximus, I seem to have satisfied the mind of anyone, even the most hostile, and, as regards the cloth, to have wiped away every stain of the charge; and now, with good warrant of safety, I am ready to pass from the suspicions of Aemilianus to that testimony of Crassus which they read out after these matters as if it were the weightiest of all. You heard read from a written deposition the testimony of a certain glutton and desperate gormandizer, Junius Crassus, that I had repeatedly performed nocturnal rites in his house, together with my friend Appius Quintianus, who lodged there for hire. And this, Crassus says, although at that time he was actually at Alexandria, he yet learned from the smoke of the torch and the feathers of birds. To be sure, while he was making the round of the drinking-parties at Alexandria — for this Crassus is a man who not unwillingly creeps off by daylight into the cookshops — in that reek of the tavern he caught, like a fowler, the feathers wafted from his own household gods, and recognized the smoke of his own house, risen afar from his ancestral roof. If he saw it with his eyes, then he is more keen-sighted than the prayers and longings of Ulysses; for Ulysses, gazing for many years from the shore for the smoke rising from his own land, vainly strained to catch it; but Crassus, in the few months of his absence, saw that same smoke without any effort, sitting in a wine-shop. Or if, on the other hand, he perceived the reek of his own house with his nostrils, then again he surpasses dogs and vultures in keenness of scent; for to what dog, to what vulture of the Alexandrian sky, could anything smell all the way from the borders of Oea? This Crassus is indeed a consummate gormandizer, and not unskilled in every kind of smoke; but assuredly, given his zeal for drinking, by which alone he is reckoned, the breath of wine would reach him at Alexandria more easily than that of smoke.