WORK: Poetics  (slug: aristotle-poetics-6c4430)

CHAPTER: 01



[0] Let us here deal with Poetry, its essence and its several species, with the characteristic function of each species and the way in which plots must be constructed if the poem is to be a success; and also with the number and character of the constituent parts of a poem, and similarly with all other matters proper to this same inquiry; and let us, as nature directs, begin first with first principles.

[403] Epic poetry, then, and the poetry of tragic drama, and, moreover, comedy and dithyrambic poetry, and most flute-playing and harp-playing, these, speaking generally, may all be said to be representations of life.

[616] But they differ one from another in three ways: either in using means generically different or in representing different objects or in representing objects not in the same way but in a different manner.

[820] For just as by the use both of color and form people represent many objects, making likenesses of them— some having a knowledge of art and some working empirically—and just as others use the human voice; so is it also in the arts which we have mentioned, they all make their representations in rhythm and language and tune, using these means either separately or in combination.

[1200] For tune and rhythm alone are employed in flute-playing and harp-playing and in any other arts which have a similar function, as, for example, pipe-playing.

[1358] Rhythm alone without tune is employed by dancers in their representations, for by means of rhythmical gestures they represent both character and experiences and actions.

[1529] But the art which employs words either in bare prose or in metres, either in one kind of metre or combining several, happens up to the present day to have no name.

[1694] For we can find no common term to apply to the mimes of Sophron and Xenarchus and to the Socratic dialogues:

[1804] nor again supposing a poet were to make his representation in iambics or elegiacs or any other such metre— except that people attach the word poet(maker)to the name of the metre and speak of elegiac poets and of others as epic poets. Thus they do not call them poets in virtue of their representation but apply the name indiscriminately in virtue of the metre.

[2166] For if people publish medical or scientific treatises in metre the custom is to call them poets. But Homer and Empedocles have nothing in common except the metre, so that it would be proper to call the one a poet and the other not a poet but a scientist.

[2422] Similarly if a man makes his representation by combining all the metres, as Chaeremon did when he wrote his rhapsody The Centaur, a medley of all the metres, he too should be given the name of poet. On this point the distinctions thus made may suffice.

[2676] There are certain arts which employ all the means which I have mentioned, such as rhythm and tune and metre—dithyrambic and nomic poetry, for example, and tragedy too and comedy. The difference here is that some use all these at once, others use now one now another.

[2944] These differences then in the various arts I call the means of representation.