WORK: De Medicina  (slug: celsus-aulus-cornelius-de-medicina-846bd1)

CHAPTER: 07



[108248] 26 Sometimes we are compelled to draw off the urine by hand when it is not passed naturally; either because in an old man the passage has collapsed, or because a stone, or a blood-clot of some sort has formed an obstruction within it; but even a slight inflammation often prevents natural evacuation; and this treatment is needed not only for men but sometimes also for women. For this purpose bronze tubes are made, and the surgeon must have three ready for males and two for females, in order that they may be suitable for every body, large and small: those for males should be the longest, fifteen finger-breadths in length, the medium twelve, the shortest nine; females, the longer nine, the shorter six. They ought to be a little curved, but more so for men, and they should be very smooth and neither too large nor too small. Then the man must be placed on his back, in the way described for anal treatment, on a low seat or couch; while the practitioner stands on his right side, and taking the penis of the male patient in his left hand, with his right hand passes the pipe into the urethra; and when it has reached the neck of the bladder, the pipe together with the penis is inclined and pushed on right into the bladder; and when the urine has been evacuated, it is taken out again. The woman's urethra is both shorter and straighter, like a nipple placed between the inner labia over the vagina, and this requires assistance no less often though it is attended by somewhat less difficulty. Sometimes too a stone slips into the urethra itself, and lodges not far from its orifice, because this becomes narrower further down. The stone should if possible be extracted either by an earscoop or by the instrument with which a stone is drawn out in the course of lithotomy. If this cannot be done, the foreskin is drawn as far forwards as possible over the glans and tied there by a thread. Then to one side of the penis a longitudinal incision is to be made and the stone taken out, after which the prepuce is released. This is done in this way so that an intact portion of skin covers the incision into the penis, and urine flows out naturally.

[110403] Now that mention has been made of the bladder and of stone, this seems the proper place to describe what treatment is to be adopted in cases of calculus, when it is impossible otherwise to afford relief; but it is most inadvisable to undertake it hastily, since it is very dangerous. This operation is not suitable for every season or at any age or for every lesion, but it must be used in the spring alone, in a boy who is not less than nine years of age and not more than fourteen, and if the disease is so bad that it cannot be relieved by medicaments, or endured by the patient without shortly bringing his life to a close. Sometimes even a rash line of treatment is successful, but it generally disappoints, especially in this sort of case, where the types and seasons of danger are very numerous, and these I will describe along with the treatment itself. Therefore when it has been decided to make trial of this last resource, for some days beforehand the patient's body is to be prepared by dieting, so that he takes a moderate amount of food which is wholesome, and not glutinous, and drinks water. Meanwhile he should also take walking-exercise to encourage the stone to descend to the neck of the bladder. Whether this has happened is recognized by the insertion of the finger, as I shall point out in the course of the treatment. When that is assured and the boy has been kept fasting from the previous day, then the operation is carried out in a warm room, and in the following manner. A strong and well-trained man, seated on a high stool, seizes the boy from behind and draws him backwards until his buttocks rest on the man's knees. When the boys' legs have been drawn up, the man orders him to put his hands behind his knees, and to pull upon them as much as he can, and at the same time the man keeps them in this position. But if a stronger person is to be treated, two strong men are seated on stools, side by side, and both the stools and the adjacent legs of the men are lashed together, so that they cannot be separated. Then the patient is seated in the same way as above upon the knees of the two men; and according to their position, one man takes hold of the patient's left leg, the other of the right, whilst at the same time the patient pulls upon his own hams. Whether one or two men hold the patient, they press downwards with their chests upon the patient's shoulders. Hence it results that the hollow between the iliac regions above the pubes is outstretched without any folds, and as the bladder is crammed into a narrow space the calculus can easily be seized hold of. In addition, moreover, two strong men should be put to stand at the sides, and they by standing there prevent the man or men who holding the boy from slipping. Then the surgeon having carefully pared his nails and anointed his left hand, gently introduces two fingers, the index and the middle, first one and then the other, into the anus; next he places the fingers of his right hand upon the hypogastrium, but lightly, lest if the two sets of fingers should press around the calculus with any force, the bladder may be injured. And in this procedure we must not act with haste, as in most cases, but so that safety is the first consideration; for an injury to the bladder causes spasm with danger of death. And the stone is first sought for about the neck of the bladder; when found there it is expelled with less trouble. And this is why I said there should be no operation except when the stone has been recognized by its special signs. But if the stone is not found at the neck of the bladder, or if it has slipped backwards, the fingers are placed against the base of the bladder, while the surgeon's right hand too is placed above the stone and gradually follows it downwards. When the stone has been found, and it must fall between his hands, it is guided downwards with special care the smaller and the smoother it is, lest it escape. This is that the bladder may not be too often disturbed. Therefore the right hand of the surgeon is always kept above the stone whilst the fingers of the left press it downwards until it arrives at the neck of the bladder: and it must be pressed towards this so that if oblong, it comes out end on; if flat it lies crossways; if cubical, it rests on two of its angles; if any part is larger, the smaller part comes out first. In the case of a spherical stone, it is clear that the shape makes no difference, except that if any part is the smoother this should be in front. When the stone has now got there, then the skin over the neck of the bladder next the anus should be incised by a semilunar cut, the horns of which point towards the hips; then a little lower down in that part of the incision which is concave, a second cut is to be made under the skin, at a right angle to the first, to open up the neck of the bladder until the urinary passage is opened so that the wound is a little larger than the stone. For those who make a small opening for fear of a fistula, which in this situation the Greeks call rhyas, incur this same danger to a greater degree, because the stone, when it is pressed down with force, makes a way out for itself unless it is given one. And this is even more harmful if the shape of the stone or its roughness has caused any additional trouble. As a consequence bleeding and spasm may be set up. And even if the patient survives he will have, nevertheless, a much wider fistula if the neck of the bladder has been torn, than he would have had if it had been cut. Now when the urethra has been laid open, the stone comes into view; its colour is of no importance. If it is small, it can be pushed outwards with the fingers on one side, and extracted by those on the other. If large, we must put over the upper part of it the scoop made for the purpose. This is thin at the end, beaten out into a semicircular shape, smooth on the outer side, where it comes into contact with the body, rough on the inner where it touches the stone. The scoop must be rather long, for a short one has not the strength to extract. When the scoop has been put in, it should be moved to each side to see whether the stone is held, because if it has been well grasped, it is moved with the scoop. This is required lest when the scoop begins to be drawn forward, the stone should slip inwards and the scoop cut into and lacerate the wound opening, and I have noted above how dangerous this is. When it is certain that the stone is sufficiently held, almost simultaneously a triple movement is to be made; first towards each side, then outwards, this in such a way that the movement is gentle and the stone is at first drawn outwards but little; this done the one end is to be raised so that the scoop may stay further in, and more easily draw out the stone. But if at any time the stone cannot be properly caught from above, it will have to be taken hold of from one side. This is the simplest method of operation. But various contingencies call for some further observations. There are some stones which are not merely rough but also spinous, which if they have come down to the neck of the bladder of their own accord may be extracted without any danger. But it is not safe to search for these within the bladder and draw them out, for when they have wounded the bladder they cause a speedy death from spasm, and much more so if a spinous stone sticks to the bladder, and when being drawn down has folded it over. Now it may be inferred that the stone is at the neck of the bladder, when the patient has difficulty in passing water: or that the stone is spinous, when he passes bloody urine in drops. And it is most important that the calculus should be felt under the fingers, and that the operation should not be proceeded with unless this is assured. And then too the fingers must be applied gently, lest they wound by pressing forcibly: the incision is then made. Many use a scalpel here also. Since this is rather weak, and may meet some projecting part of the stone, and while cutting the flesh over the projection fail to divide what is in the hollow beneath, but leave something which necessitates a second operation. Meges made a straight blade, with a wide border on its upper part, semicircular and sharp below. This knife, with its handle grasped between the two fingers, index and middle, and the thumb put into the back of the blade, was so pressed down that any projection upon the stone might be cut through along with the flesh. By this means it followed that he made one opening of a sufficient size. But in whatever way the neck of the bladder is laid open, any rough stone should be extracted gently, and no force used to hasten matters.

[119121] A sandy stone is made evident before the operation by the sandy urine which is passed, and in the course of it, since it does not present a uniform resistance to the fingers in the rectum, and in addition it breaks up. Again soft stones and those composed of numerous small ones which only lightly adhere together, are indicated when the urine shows scalelike particles. All these should be brought out gently by changing as before the position of the fingers in turn, without injury to the bladder, yet so as not to leave behind in it any scattered remnants which will render the after-treatment difficult. When anything of this kind comes into view it is to be extracted by the fingers or scoop. And if there are several stones they are to be extracted one by one, but if a very small stone remains over it had better be left. For it is difficult to find it in the bladder, or when found it easily escapes again. In such a prolonged search the bladder is injured and fatal inflammations set up; so that some who have not been operated on have died after the bladder has been for a long while and in vain pushed about by the fingers. There is the additional reason that a small stone is later moved forward with the urine into the wound and so removed. If, however, at any time the stone appears too large to extract without tearing the neck of the bladder, it is to be split up; hence Ammonius the inventor of this process was surnamed lithotomus. This is done as follows: the scoop is passed over the stone, so that it easily keeps hold of the stone, even when it is struck; next an instrument is used of moderate thickness, its front end tapering yet blunt, and when this is put against the calculus, and its other end struck, it splits up the stone, great care being taken that the instrument does not come into contact with the bladder itself, and that no fragment from the broken calculus cuts into it.

[121032] Now these operations are similar in females too, yet there are some particulars to be mentioned about them. Since in women when the stone is small, the use of the knife is unnecessary because the stone is forced by the urine into the neck of the bladder which is shorter and more yielding in females than in males. Therefore the stone often escapes of itself, and if it sticks in the first part, which is narrower, yet it may be extracted by the scoop described above without any harm. But for larger stones the treatment is the same. Except that in the case of a virgin the fingers are passed as in males, in the case of a woman into the vagina. Then the incision is to be made in a virgin just under the left labium, in a woman between the urethra and pubic bone, and in both instances by a transverse wound. There is no need to be frightened if there is freer bleeding from a woman.

[121919] When the stone has been extracted, if the patient is strong and has not suffered excessively, it is well to let the bleeding go on, so that less inflammation may follow. Besides it is not unfitting for him to move about a little, in order that any blood clot still inside may drop out. But if again the bleeding does not cease of its own accord, it must be stopped lest all his strength be used up; and in weaker patients this is to be done immediately after the operation; since just as there is the risk of spasm from pushing about the bladder, so there is a second danger that in the absence of medicaments so much blood may be lost as to prove fatal. To prevent this the patient should be seated in a bath of strong vinegar to which a little salt has been added; under this treatment the bleeding generally stops, and it also has an astringent effect on the bladder so that the inflammation there is lessened. But if this is not successful, cups are to be applied on groins and hips and above the pubes. As soon as sufficient blood has been drawn away or the bleeding checked, the patient should be so placed on his back that his head is low, his hips a little raised; and two or three layers of linen soaked in vinegar are to be applied over the wound. Then after two hours he should be put into a hip bath and lean back in the hot water, so that the water covers him from his knees to his navel, while the rest of his body is wrapped up, except that his hands and feet are exposed, in order that he may be less exhausted and remain in the bath longer: the usual result is free sweating. And his mouth and face must be wiped with a sponge from time to time, and an end put to this hot bath whenever it becomes harmful by weakening the patient. Afterwards the patient is freely rubbed with oil, and a dressing of soft wool applied, soaked in warm oil, covering the pubes and hips and groins as well as the wound itself, which had previously been covered with a similar dressing, but of lint. From time to time this dressing is to be saturated with the warm oil in order that cold may not reach the bladder, and that the sinews may be gently softened. Some make use of heating plasters; these do more harm by their weight pressing upon the bladder, and by irritating the wound, than they do good by their heating. For the same reason not even a bandage is required. On the next day if there is difficulty in breathing, if urine is not passed, if the region about the pubes swells prematurely it may be recognized that a blood clot has collected in the bladder; for this the fingers are introduced into the rectum as before and the bladder stroked gently so as to break up clots; thus they subsequently escape by the wound. It is not inappropriate to inject vinegar mixed with soda into the bladder through the wound by means of an ear syringe, for in this way also clotted blood is broken up; and it is proper to do this even on the first day if we are afraid that there is a clot inside, especially when weakness prevents the patient from moving about to eliminate it. The treatment afterwards is the same, sitting in a hot bath, a pad and wool prepared as before as dressings. But a boy should not be put so often into the hot water nor kept in so long as an adolescent; a weak patient as a robust one; one with a slight inflammation as one severely inflamed; a patient with a relaxed body as one in good tone. Meanwhile, if the patient sleeps and breathes regularly and his tongue is moist and there is only moderate thirst and the hypogastrium is flat, if there is not much pain and but moderate fever, we may assume that the treatment is doing well. In such cases the inflammation generally ends on the fifth or seventh day; when it has passed off, the hip bath becomes unnecessary; whilst the patient is on his back the wound is just to be fomented enough with hot water to wash away any urine that irritates. Now the medicaments to be applied should be suppuratives, and if the wound seems to need cleaning, it is to be smeared with honey, or if that irritates it can be tempered with rose oil. The nine-drug plaster seems the most suitable at this stage of the treatment for it contains both suet as a suppurative, and honey to clean the wound, also marrow, best from a calf; its contents are particularly efficient in preventing the establishment of a fistula. But lint at this period is not to be applied directly to the wound, but it may be properly put on over medicaments to keep them in place. When, however, the wound is clean, it is to be healed by applying plain lint. During this period, however, when the course of the treatment has not gone well, various dangers arise. These may be expected: if there is persistent insomnia, laboured breathing, a dry tongue, great thirst, a distended hypogastrium; if the wound gapes; if the urine as it escapes does not irritate the wound; if there is some livid discharge by night and day alike before the third day; if the patient does not answer or replies slowly; if there are severe pains; if after the fifth day high fever oppresses the patient and a distaste for food persists; if he finds more ease by lying on his stomach. But the worst complication is spasm of the sinews and bilious vomiting before the ninth day. But when there is danger of inflammation the best treatment is by abstinence, food in small quantities and at stated intervals, and at the same time fomentations and the other things described above.

[127404] 27 The nearest danger is canker. This is recognized if the discharge, whether from the wound, or through the penis, is a malodorous sanies, also something of the nature of blood-clot, and thin bits of flesh like flocks of wool; and in addition to this if the margins of the wound become dry; if there is pain in the groins; if the fever does not subside and it increases at night, if there are irregular shivering-fits as well. We must examine in what direction the canker is spreading. If to the penis, that part becomes hard and red and is painful to the touch, and the testicles swell; if into the bladder itself, anal pain follows, the hips harden, the legs cannot be easily stretched. But if to either side, this fact is clear to the eyes, and the gangrene shows the same marks on both sides, but smaller on that less affected.— But first it is important that the patient shall lie properly, that is, that the same part should always be uppermost and that that should be the part where the disease is spreading. Thus if the direction is into the penis, the patient is laid on his back; if into the bladder, on his belly; if into one side, then he lies on the more sound one. Coming to the treatment, the man should be placed in a bath containing a decoction of horehound or of cyprus or of myrtle; and the same fluid boiled is injected into the wound with a syringe; then is put on a plaster of lentils with pomegranate rind, both of which have been boiled in wine, or a similar decoction of blackberry, or of olive leaves, or of other material which I have set out as suitable for arresting and cleaning wounds affected by canker. Dry medicaments of this sort may be blown in through a quill. When the gangrene begins to come to a standstill, the wound is washed with honey wine, but at this stage a cerate should be avoided, for by softening the tissues it predisposes to that very malady: we must rather smear on washed lead with wine, over that the same spread on linen. By such measures it is possible to effect a cure, but we must not ignore the fact that when canker has once started, the stomach is often affected, since the bladder is closely associated with it; hence, it happens that food is not kept down, or when it is retained, not digested, nor is the body nourished; and thus the wound cannot clean, nor gain flesh: and these facts necessarily hasten death. But while it is in no way possible to save such cases as these, yet a method of treatment should be observed from the very first for a long while, in which of course due regard must be had to food and drink. For at first only fluid food should be given; when the wound has cleaned food of the middle class; greens and salted fish are always unsuitable. The amount of drink should be moderate, for if too little is drunk, the wound becomes inflamed, the patient suffers from insomnia and gets weaker; if too much is drunk, the bladder fills frequently and so is irritated. It is too obvious to need repetition that nothing except water is to be drunk. Now it generally happens under such a diet that the bowels do not act. They are to be moved by a clyster containing either fenugreek or mallow. The same decoction mixed with rose oil is to be injected into the wound itself through an ear syringe whenever the urine causes irritation and stops the wound from cleaning. General all the urine escapes at first through the wound; then in the course of healing it divides, and part begins to pass through the penis until the wound has completely closed; and this occurs at times in the third month, at times not before the sixth month, and occasionally not for a year. And we need not despair of the firm healing of the wound, unless the neck of the bladder has been roughly ruptured, or when owing to gangrene many large portions of the flesh have sloughed away and some fibrous tissue too. But the greatest care must be taken that no fistula, or only a very small one, is left there. With this object as the wound tends to form a scar, the patient should lie with his thighs and legs stretched out, except only when the stones have been soft and sandy: for then the bladder is slower in cleaning itself: and so it is necessary to keep the wound open longer, and only when there is nothing more to come out of the bladder is the wound allowed to heal. If the margins of the wound stick together, before the bladder has been cleaned, and pain and inflammation recur, the wound should be reopened, either by the finger, or by the reversed end of a probe, in order that what is causing the pain may be let out; and after such evacuation, when for some time clear urine has passed, then at length cicatrizing applications are put on; and as prescribed above, the legs are kept extended with the feet close together as much as possible. But if there seems to be danger of a fistula, from the causes mentioned above, a leaden tube should be put into the anus to make the closing of the fistula easier, or at any rate to narrow it, whilst the legs are kept extended and the thighs and ankles tied together until the scar has assumed its final form.

[132523] 28 And whilst the foregoing can occur both in males and females, there are also some troubles which are peculiar to females, especially that occasionally their genitals do not allow of coitus, the orifices having coalesced. And this sometimes happens even in the mother's womb; sometimes when ulceration has occurred in those parts, and through bad treatment there the margins have become united during healing. If the condition is congenital a membrane obstructs the vulvar orifice; if due to ulceration flesh has filled the same. The membrane should be incised along two lines crossing one another like the letter X, great care being taken that the urethra is not injured; then the membrane is to be cut away all round. But if flesh has grown there, it must be laid open with a single straight cut; next when the margin has been seized either with a forceps or hook, a fine strip must be cut away from it, after which there is inserted wool rolled lengthwise (the Greeks call it lemniscus), dipped in vinegar, and over this is bandaged on greasy wool wetted with vinegar: this is changed on the third day and the wound treated like other wounds; and as soon as it begins to heal, a lead tube smeared with a cicatrizing ointment is passed in, and over this the same application applied until the cut surface has cicatrized.

[133849] 29 Again when a woman has conceived, if the foetus, already nearly at term, dies inside and cannot get out of itself, an operation must be done, which may be counted among the most difficult; for it requires both extreme caution and neatness, and entails very great risk. But this shows, and not this only, how marvellous beyond all else is the womb. To begin with then the woman should be placed on her back across the bed, so that the iliac regions are compressed by her own thighs; by this means both her hypogastrium is in full view of the surgeon and the foetus is forced towards the mouth of the womb. This, after the death of the foetus contracts, but later on usually dilates a little. The surgeon making use of this opportunity should first insert the index finger of his greased hand, and keep it there until the mouth is opened again, and then he should insert a second finger, and the other fingers on the like opportunity, until the whole hand can be put in. To allow of this, much depends both on the size of the vagina, and the resistance of its sinewy tissues, and the patient's constitution, and also her strength of mind, especially since on occasion even both hands have to be passed in. It is also important that the hypogastrium and extremities should be kept very warm, that inflammation should not have begun, but that the treatment should be adopted without delay. For if the abdomen is already distended, the hand cannot be inserted nor can the foetus be extracted without the greatest suffering, and fatal spasm of the sinews often follows, accompanied by vomiting and tremor. But when the hand has reached the dead foetus its position is immediately felt. For it lies head on or feet foremost, or crosswise; generally, however, so that there is either a hand or foot within reach. It is the object now of the surgeon to direct it with his hand either into a head or even into a foot presentation, if it happens to be presenting otherwise: and if there is no other course, when a hand or foot is grasped, the trunk is straightened: for grasping a hand converts the presentation into a head one, grasping a foot into a foot presentation. Then if the head is nearest, a hook must be inserted which is completely smooth, with a short point, and this it is right to fix into an eye or ear or the mouth, even at times into the forehead, then this is pulled upon and extracts the foetus. But not every moment is proper for the extraction; for should this be attempted when the mouth of the womb is contracted, as there is no way out, the foetus is torn away from the hook, and its point then slips into the mouth of the womb itself; and there follows spasm of the sinews and great risk of death. Therefore whilst the mouth is contracted we should wait, and draw gently on the hook when it dilates, and so at these opportunities gradually extract the foetus. Now the right hand should pull the hook whilst the left is inserted within and pulls the foetus, and at the same time guides it. It also often happens that such a foetus is distended by fluid, and from it a foul sanies discharges. If so, the abdomen of the foetus is bored into by the index finger, when by escape of the fluid, the foetus is made smaller; then it is gently to be delivered by the hands alone. For if a hook is inserted it readily slips out of the soft little body, when the danger noted above is incurred. If the foetus has been turned to present by the feet it is also not difficult to extract; for the feet are grasped by the doctor's hands, and it is readily drawn out. But if the foetus is lying crosswise and cannot be turned straight, the hook is to be inserted into an armpit and traction slowly made; during this the neck is usually bent back, and the head turned backwards to the rest of the foetus. The remedy then is to cut through the neck, in order that the two parts may be extracted separately. This is done with a hook which resembles the one mentioned above, but has all its inner edge sharp. Then we must proceed to extract the head first, then the rest, for if the larger portion be extracted first, the head slips back into the cavity of the womb, and cannot be extracted without the greatest risk. Should this, however, happen, a folded pad is placed upon the woman's hypogastrium, and then a man strong, but not untrained, must stand on her left side, and place his two hands over the hypogastrium and press one over the other so that the head is forced to the mouth of the womb, when it must be extracted by the hook as described above. But if one foot presents whilst the other remains behind with the trunk, anything which has been drawn out must be cut away piecemeal; and if the buttocks begin to engage in the mouth of the womb they are to be pushed back and the foot of the foetus found and then drawn forwards. There are also other difficulties, which make it necessary to cut up and extract a foetus which does not come out whole. Now as soon as the foetus has been extracted it should be handed to the assistant to hold on his upturned hands, and the surgeon with his left hand must draw gently upon the navel cord, so as not to rupture it, whilst he passes his right hand along it up to what they called the secundines, which was the envelope of the foetus within the womb. When his hand has grasped the secundines including the whole of the blood vessels and membranes he brings them down from the womb in the same manner, and extracts the whole together with any retained blood clot. Then when the thighs have been tied together the woman is put to bed in a moderately warm room, which is free from draughts. Over the hypogastrium is placed greasy wool dipped in vinegar and rose oil. The rest of the treatment followed is the same as for inflammation and for wounds which are in the sinews.

[139672] 30 Lesions of the anus also, when they do not yield to medicaments, require the aid of surgery. If, therefore, any fissure has persisted so long that it has become hard and callous, it is best to move the bowels by a clyster, then apply a hot sponge to soften the fissures and cause them to protrude. When brought into view each is excised and made into a fresh wound; then soft lint is put on and over this a pad smeared with honey, and all is covered with soft wool, fixed by a bandage; on the next and following days all the other emollient medicaments are to be used, which I said above, were required by such lesions when recent, and for the first few days at any rate the patient must live on fluids; then some food is gradually added, but of the class prescribed in the same passage. If however any pus arises in these fissures as the result of inflammation, as soon as it becomes evident, it is to be cut into, lest the anus itself suppurate. But this must not be done hastily, for if cut before it matures the inflammation is very much increased, and pus is somewhat more freely formed. Here too a light diet and emollient dressings are necessary.

[140830] The tumours, which are called condylomata, when hardened are treated by the following method. First of all the bowel is clystered; then the tumour is seized with a forceps close to its roots and cut away. After this, the same course of treatment is followed as that described above; only if there is any excrescence it is repressed by copper scales.

[141181] The mouths of veins which discharge blood are removed as follows. When any patient is losing blood, fasting is indicated, and a rather severe clystering of the bowel, to make the openings more prominent, and thus what may be called the little heads of the veins all come into view. Then if a head is very small and has a thin base it must be tied by a flax thread, a little above where it joins the anus. A sponge squeezed out of hot water is next to be applied until it becomes livid, then with a finger-nail or scalpel it is to be scratched off above the knot. Unless this is done great pain follows, and sometimes even difficulty in urinating. If the head is larger and the base broader, it is seized by one or two hooks, and an incision made a little above the base; in doing this nothing of the head should be left nor anything taken away from the anus. This is accomplished by not drawing upon the hooks either too much or too little. When the incision has been made, a pin should be passed through, and under the pin the head is tied round with a linen thread. If there are two or three, the lowest must be dealt with first; if more, they are not all treated at once, to avoid having tender scars in several places at once. If there is bleeding, it is taken up in a sponge; then lint is put on, the thighs and groins anointed, as well as the parts near the wound; over it is applied a cerate and a poultice of barley meal, and this part must be filled up with soft wool and then bandaged. The next day, the patient should sit in hot water and after that have the same poultice applied. Twice a day, before and after the operation, the necks and thighs are to be anointed with a liquid cerate; and the patient must be kept in a warm room. After five or six days, the bits of linen are removed by the aid of an earscoop. If the little heads do not come away at the same time, they are to be removed by the finger; then by the same soothing medicaments which I have described above, the wounds are healed up. After the trouble has been ended I have already noted elsewhere what must be done.

[143278] 31 We next pass from the foregoing subjects to the legs, and if varicose veins occur there, they are removed by a procedure which is not difficult. To this place I have put off also the treatment of the small veins which cause trouble in the head, also of varicose veins on the abdomen, because it is all the same. Any vein therefore which is troublesome may be shrivelled up by cauterizing or cut out by surgery. If a vein is straight, or though crooked is yet not twisted, and if of moderate size, it is better cauterized. This is the method of cauterization: the overlying skin is incised, then the exposed vein is pressed upon moderately with a fine, blunt, hot cautery iron, avoiding a burn of the margins of the incision, which can easily be done by retracting them with hooks. This step is repeated throughout the length of the vein, generally at intervals of four fingers' breadth, after which a dressing is put on to heal up the burns. But excision is done in the following way: the skin is similarly incised over the vein, and the margins held apart by hooks; with a scalpel the vein is separated from surrounding tissue, avoiding a cut into the vein itself; underneath the vein is passed a blunt hook; the same procedure is repeated at the intervals noted above throughout the course of the vein which is easily traced by pulling on the hook. When the same thing has been done wherever there are swellings, at one place the vein is drawn forward by the hook and cut away; then, where the next hook is, the vein is drawn forwards and again cut away. After the leg has thus been freed throughout from the swellings the margins of the incisions are brought together and an agglutinating plaster put on over them.

[145000] 32 But if the fingers, either before birth or later on account of ulceration of their adjacent surfaces, adhere together, they are separated by the knife; after that each finger is separately enclosed in a plaster without grease, and so each heals separately. If after ulceration of a finger, a badly formed scar has made it crooked, in the first place a poultice is tried, and if this is of no avail, which is generally the case with old scars and tendon injuries, we must see whether the trouble is in the tendon, or in the skin only. If it is in the tendon, it should not be touched, for the condition is incurable; if in the skin, the whole scar should be cut out, which had generally become hard and so did not allow the finger to be extended. When it had been thus straightened a new scar must be allowed to form there.

[145827] 33 When gangrene has developed between the nails and in the armpits or groins, and if medicaments have failed to cure it, the limb, as I have stated elsewhere, must be amputated. But even that involves very great risk; for patients often die under the operation, either from loss of blood or syncope. It does not matter, however, whether the remedy is safe enough, since it is the only one. Therefore, between the sound and the diseased part, the flesh is to be cut through with a scalpel down to the bone, but this must not be done actually over a joint, and it is better that some of the sound part should be cut away than that any of the diseased part should be left behind. When the bone is reached, the sound flesh is drawn back from the bone and undercut from around it, so that in that part also some bone is bared; the bone is next to be cut through with a small saw as near as possible to the sound flesh which still adheres to it; next the face of the bone, which the saw has roughened, is smoothed down, and the skin drawn over it; this must be sufficiently loosened in an operation of this sort to cover the bone all over as completely as possible. The part where the skin has not been brought over is to be covered with lint; and over that a sponge soaked in vinegar is to be bandaged on. The remaining treatment is that prescribed for wounds in which suppuration is to be brought about.