WORK: On Oratory  (slug: cicero-marcus-tullius-on-oratory-6f2b26)

CHAPTER: 03-book-3



[110219] 187. And these things indeed have been said by those philosophers whom you most esteem, Catulus; which I therefore the more often attest, that, by praising authorities, I may escape the charge of trifling.' 'Of what trifling, pray?' said Catulus; 'or what can be brought forward more elegant than that discussion of yours, or said altogether more subtle?'

[110576] 188. 'But indeed I fear,' said Crassus, 'lest these things seem either too difficult for these men to pursue, or, because they are not handed down in that common teaching, lest we seem to wish them to appear greater and more difficult.' Then Catulus said: 'You err, Crassus, if you think that either I or any of these expect from you these everyday and common labours. Those things which you say, we wish to be said; and not so much to be said, as to be said in that manner of yours; and this I answer to you, not for myself alone, but for all these, without any hesitation.'

[111153] 189. 'For my part,' said Antonius, 'I have now found him whom, in that little book which I wrote, I had said I had not found—the eloquent man. But I have not interrupted you, even for the sake of praising, lest anything should be diminished by a single word of mine from this so scanty time of your discourse.'

[111465] 190. 'By this rule, then,' said Crassus, 'our speech is to be shaped both by exercise and by the pen, which both adorns and polishes other things and this most of all. Nor yet is this of so much labour as it seems, nor are these things to be directed by the keenest rule of the metricians or musicians; this only is to be brought about by us: that the speech do not flow loosely, that it do not wander, that it do not halt too soon, that it do not run out too long, that it be distinguished by members, that it have completed turnings. Nor is perpetuity, and, as it were, a circling of words, always to be used; but often the speech is to be cut up into more minute members, which yet, the members themselves, are to be bound by rhythms.

[112204] 191. Nor let the paean or that heroic disturb you: they will of themselves meet the speech; they, I say, will offer themselves and answer unbidden. Let only that habit of writing and speaking be such, that the thoughts be ended by words, and the joining of those words spring from the lofty and free rhythms—chiefly the heroic, or the former paean, or the cretic—but let it settle variously and distinctly. For likeness is chiefly noted in the coming to rest. And, if the first and last feet are preserved by this method, the middle ones can lie hid, provided only the circuit itself of the words be not shorter than the ears expect, or longer than the strength and the breath can bear.

[112892] 192. But the clauses I think are to be even more diligently observed than the foregoing, because in these especially are the perfection and the completion judged. For in a verse the first and the middle and the last part is equally regarded—which is weakened, if there be a stumble in whatever part; but in a speech few discern the first parts, most the last: which, since they appear and are understood, are to be varied, lest they be rejected either by the judgements of minds or by the satiety of the ears.

[113403] 193. For two or about three are the last feet to be preserved and marked, provided only the foregoing be not shorter and abrupt; which ought to be either chorees, or heroes, or alternating, or in that latter paean which Aristotle approves, or in the cretic equal to it. The alternations of these will effect that neither shall those who hear be sated by the disgust of likeness, nor we seem to do, on purpose, that which we shall do.

[113838] 194. But if that Antipater of Sidon, whom you well remember, Catulus, was wont to pour forth hexameter verses and others in various measures and rhythms on the spur of the moment, and the exercise of a man so ingenious and of so good a memory prevailed so far that, when he had thrown himself by mind and will into verse, the words followed—how much more easily, in prose, exercise and habit being applied, shall we attain it!

[114266] 195. But let no one wonder at this, in what manner the common crowd of the unskilled note these things in hearing, since both in every kind and in this very one there is a certain great force and incredible power of nature. For all men, by a certain silent sense, without any art or reason, distinguish what is right and what is wrong in arts and reasonings; and as they do this in pictures and in statues and in other works, for the understanding of which they have less of equipment from nature, so they show it much more in the judgement of words, rhythms, and voices; because these are fixed in the common senses, and nature has not willed that anyone be utterly devoid of these things.

[114958] 196. And so all are moved not only by words artfully placed, but also by rhythms and voices. For how few there are who hold the art of rhythms and measures! Yet in these, if there be offence even a little—so that something be made shorter by contraction or longer by lengthening—whole theatres cry out. What, does not the same thing happen in voices, so that not only choirs and harmonies, but even single performers out of tune are cast out by the multitude and the people, and indeed by their very selves?

[115467] 197. It is wonderful that, although there is the greatest difference in performing between the learned and the rude, there is no great difference in judging. For art, since it has proceeded from nature, would seem to have done nothing at all, unless it move and delight by nature; and there is nothing so akin to our minds as rhythms and voices; by which we are both roused and inflamed, and soothed and made languid, and often led to mirth and to sadness; the highest force of which is more fitted to songs and chants—not neglected, as it seems to me, by Numa, that most learned king, and by our ancestors, as the lyre and pipes of the solemn banquets and the verses of the Salii indicate; but most of all cultivated by ancient Greece. Would that you had preferred to discuss these and like matters, rather than these childish transferences of words!

[116320] 198. But as the common crowd, in a verse, if there be a fault, sees it, so, if anything halts in our speech, it feels it; but it does not pardon the poet, while it allows us license: yet all, in silence, discern that what we have spoken is not apt and perfect. And so those men of old—as we see even today some not a few—when they could not make a circuit and, as it were, an orb of words (for that indeed we have but lately begun either to be able or to dare), used to say three words or two, or some even single ones; who, in that infancy, nevertheless held to that natural thing which the ears of men demanded—that the things they said should be equal, and that they should use equal breathing-spaces.

[117026] 199. I have set forth, almost as I could, those things which I thought pertained most to the adornment of speech. For I have spoken of the praise of single words, I have spoken of their joining-together, I have spoken of rhythm and form; but if you require also the habit and, as it were, some colour of speech, there is both a certain full, yet rounded, kind, and a slender, not without sinews and strength, and that which, partaking of either kind, is praised by a certain mean. Upon these three figures a certain colour of grace ought to sit, not smeared on with rouge, but diffused from the blood.

[117629] 200. Then at last this orator of ours is so to be shaped, both in words and in thoughts, that, in the manner of those who use arms or the palaestra, he think that he must have a method not only of avoiding or striking, but also that he be moved with grace, as those who are versed in the handling of arms . . . But words and thoughts are shaped almost innumerably, which I know well enough is known to you; but between the shaping of words and that of thoughts there is this difference, that the shaping of words is destroyed, if you change the words, while that of thoughts remains, whatever words you wish to use.

[118246] 201. Which indeed, although you do it, yet I think you are to be admonished not to think there is anything else of the orator that is distinguished and admirable, except, in single words, to hold those three things—that we use transferred words frequently, sometimes coined ones, but rarely also very antique ones. In continuous speech, again, when we shall have held both the smoothness of joining and that method of rhythms which I have mentioned, then the whole speech is to be distinguished and made frequent, as with lights, by thoughts and by words.

[118803] 202. For both the lingering upon one thing moves very much, and the brilliant explanation, and the placing, as it were, of matters almost under the very sight, as though they were being transacted; which both avail most in the setting-forth of a matter, and toward illuminating that which is set forth, and toward amplifying it; so that to those who hear, that which we shall augment seems to be as great as the speech can effect. And contrary to this is often a running-over, and a signifying of more to be understood than you have said, and a brevity distinctly cut, and an extenuation, and, joined to this, a banter not abhorrent from the precepts of Caesar;

[119466] 203. and a digression from the matter, in which, when there shall have been delight, then the return to the matter ought to be apt and neat; and a setting-forth of what you are about to say, and a separation from that which has been said, and a return to the proposition, and a repetition, and an apt conclusion of the reasoning; then, for the sake of augmenting or diminishing, an exaggeration and hyperbole of the truth; and a question, and, near akin to this, as it were, an inquiry, and a setting-forth of one's own opinion; then that which especially, as it were, creeps into the minds of men—a dissembling, saying one thing and signifying another; which is very pleasant, when it is handled not by the straining of speech, but by conversation; then doubt, then distribution, then correction, either before or after you have spoken, or when you reject something from your own self; there is also a fortifying beforehand of that which you are about to assail, and a transferring to another;

[120462] 204. communication, which is, as it were, a deliberation with those very men before whom you speak; the imitation of manners and life, either in persons or without them, a certain great ornament of speech and apt especially for conciliating minds, and often also for moving them;

[120743] 205. the feigned introduction of persons, even the weightiest light of amplification; description, the introduction of error, the impulse to mirth, anticipation; then those two things which most move, likeness and example; partition, interruption, contrast, reticence, recommendation; a certain free, even unbridled, utterance for the sake of amplification; anger, rebuke, promise, deprecation, entreaty, a brief turning-aside from the proposition—not like that former digression—justification, conciliation, wounding, wish, and execration. With these lights, well-nigh, thoughts illuminate speech.

[121343] 206. But of the speech itself, as of arms, there is both a menacing, as it were, and a kind of thrust for use, and a handling for grace itself. For both the doubling of words sometimes has force, at other times charm, and a word a little changed and turned aside, and the frequent repetition of the same word, now from the beginning, now its turning to the end, and an onset upon the same words, and a concourse, and a joining, and a progression, and a certain distinguishing of the same word more often placed, and a recalling of the word, and those which similarly end, or which fall similarly, or which are matched, equal to equal, or which are similar among themselves.

[122018] 207. There is also a certain gradation, and a turning-about, and a neat transposition of words, and the contrary, and the dissolute, and declination, and reprehension, and exclamation, and diminution, and that which is placed in many cases, and that which, drawn from single matters set forth, is referred to single ones, and a reason subjoined to the proposition, and likewise a reason supplied in things distributed, and concession, and again another doubt, and something unforeseen, and enumeration, and another correction, and dispersion, and the continued, and the interrupted, and image, and an answer to one's own self, and change, and disjunction, and order, and relation, and digression, and circumscription.

[122737] 208. For these things, well-nigh, and things like these—or even more than these can be—are such as illuminate speech by thoughts and by the shapings of words.' 'These indeed,' said Cotta, 'I see, Crassus, that you have poured out without definitions and without examples, because you think they are known to us.' 'For my part,' said Crassus, 'I did not think those things which I said above to be new to you either, but I obeyed the wish of you all.

[123188] 209. But concerning these matters that sun there has admonished me to be the briefer, which, itself now sinking, has compelled me too to roll out these things almost headlong. But yet the demonstration and the teaching of this kind is itself common; the practice, however, is the weightiest and, in this whole study of speaking, the most difficult.

[123538] 210. Wherefore, since concerning all the adornment of speech the topics are all, if not laid open, at least pointed out, let us now see what is apt—that is, what is most becoming in speech. Although this indeed is plain, that one single kind of speech does not suit every cause, nor every hearer, nor every person, nor every occasion; for both capital cases require a certain sound of words, and another sound is required by private and small matters;

[123991] 211. and one kind of speaking deliberations demand, another encomiums, another trials, another conversations, another consolation, another rebuke, another disputation, another history. It matters too who hear—the senate, or the people, or the judges; whether many or few or single; and of what sort; the very orators too, of what age, honour, authority they are, must be considered; the time, of peace or of war, of haste or of leisure.

[124429] 212. And so in this place there is nothing at all that seems able to be taught, except that we should choose the figure of speech—the fuller, the slenderer, and likewise that middle one—accommodated to what we shall be treating. It will generally be permitted to use the same ornaments at one time more vigorously, at another more subduedly; and to be able, in every matter, to do what is becoming is of art and of nature, to know what is becoming on each occasion is of prudence.

[124911] 213. But all these things are even as they are delivered. Delivery, I say, in speaking alone holds sway; without this the highest orator can be of no account, while a middling one furnished with this can often surpass the highest. To this Demosthenes is said to have given the first place, when he was asked what was first in speaking; to this the second, to this the third; whence even better seems to me that saying of Aeschines; who, when on account of the disgrace of the trial he had withdrawn from Athens and betaken himself to Rhodes, being asked by the Rhodians, is reported to have read that excellent speech which he had delivered against Ctesiphon, in opposition to Demosthenes; and when it had been read through, he was asked on the next day to read also that which had been delivered on the other side by Demosthenes, on behalf of Ctesiphon: which, when he had read it with a most sweet and mighty voice, all marvelling, "How much more," said he, "would you marvel, if you had heard the man himself!" by which he sufficiently signified how much there is in delivery, since he thought that the same speech would be another thing, the deliverer being changed.

[126083] 214. What was there in Gracchus—whom you better remember, Catulus—which, when I was a boy, was so greatly extolled? "Whither shall I betake myself, wretched man? Whither shall I turn? To the Capitol? But it is wet with my brother's blood. Or home? That I may see my mother, wretched, lamenting and cast down?" Which were so delivered by him with the eyes, the voice, the gesture, that even his enemies could not restrain their tears. These things I say at greater length, because this whole kind the orators—who are the actors of the very truth—have abandoned; while the imitators of truth, the actors of the stage, have seized upon it.

[126721] 215. And without doubt in every matter truth surpasses imitation; but if it could of itself effect enough in delivery, we should assuredly have no need of art; but because the emotion of the mind, which is chiefly to be declared or imitated in delivery, is often so disturbed that it is obscured and almost overwhelmed, those things which obscure it are to be shaken off, and those which are eminent and ready are to be taken.

[127149] 216. For every motion of the mind has from nature its own countenance and sound and gesture; and the whole body of a man, and all his countenance and all his voices, like the strings in a lyre, so sound as they have been struck by the motion of the mind. For the voices, like strings, are stretched, which answer to each touch—sharp, grave, quick, slow, great, small; among all which, however, there is in each kind a middling tone; and from these too have flowed yet more kinds—smooth, rough, contracted, diffused, with breath sustained or interrupted, broken, split, with a bent sound attenuated, inflated;

[127759] 217. for there is none of these kinds which is not handled by art and moderation. These are set before the actor, as colours before the painter, to vary. For anger takes to itself one kind of voice, sharp, excited, frequently broken off: "my brother himself urges me, wretched, to give my children to the jaws . . ." and those things which you brought forward a while ago, Antonius—"have you dared to sever them from yourself . . ."—and "will anyone heed this? bind ye . . ."—and almost the whole Atreus. Commiseration and grief take another, flexible, full, interrupted, with a tearful voice: "whither now shall I turn? what journey shall I begin to enter? to my father's house? or to the daughters of Pelias?" and that—"O father, O fatherland, O house of Priam!" and what follows—"all these I saw set on fire, and Priam's life reft from him by violence."

[128617] 218. Fear takes another, low, hesitating, cast down: "in many ways am I beset—by disease, by exile, and by want; then terror, when I am unsouled, expectorates all wisdom from me; my mother threatens a terrible torment of my life and death; than which there is no one of so firm a spirit and of so great confidence but that his blood flees back in terror and he grows pale with fear." Force takes another, strained, vehement, threatening with a certain incitation of weight: "again Thyestes comes to assail Atreus, again now attacks me and rouses me from my quiet; a greater mass, a greater evil, must be stirred up by me, wherewith I may crush and curb his bitter heart." Pleasure takes another, poured out, gentle, tender, gladdened and relaxed: "but when she brought the garland to bind the nuptials, she bore it to you, when she feigned to give it eagerly to herself, then, playfully, learnedly and daintily, she brought it to you." Trouble takes another, without commiseration, weighty and overspread with a single pressure and tone: "at what season Paris joined Helen in unwedded wedlock, I then was with child, with the months already fulfilled for bringing forth; at the same time Hecuba bore Polydorus in her last childbirth."

[129853] 219. (the rest of this section is taken up by these passages.)

[129917] 220. But all these movements gesture ought to follow—not this stage-gesture expressing the words, but declaring the whole matter and meaning not by demonstration but by signification, with this strong and manly bending of the sides, drawn not from the stage and the actors, but from arms or even from the palaestra; the hand, again, less expressive, following the words with the fingers, not expressing them; the arm thrown out somewhat far, as a certain weapon of speech; the stamping of the foot in contentions, either at the beginning or at the ending of them.

[130482] 221. But all is in the countenance; and in that itself the dominion belongs wholly to the eyes; wherefore our old men did the better, who did not greatly praise even Roscius when masked; for all delivery is of the mind, and the countenance is the image of the mind, the eyes its indicators: for this is the one part of the body which can effect as many significations as there are movements of the mind; nor indeed is there anyone who can effect the same with eyes closed. Theophrastus indeed says that a certain Tauriscus, an actor, was wont to say that he who, in acting, delivered his lines gazing at any one fixed thing, performed with his back turned.

[131140] 222. Wherefore there is great moderation of the eyes; for the appearance of the mouth is not to be too much changed, lest we be carried off either to absurdities or to some distortion; it is the eyes, by whose now intensity, now relaxation, now glance, now mirth, we may signify the motions of our minds aptly with the very kind of speech; for delivery is, as it were, the speech of the body, and therefore ought the more to agree with the mind; and the eyes nature has given us, as to a horse or a lion their mane, their tail, their ears, to declare the motions of the mind.

[131717] 223. Wherefore in this delivery of ours, next after the voice, the countenance prevails; but that is governed by the eyes. And in all these things which belong to delivery there is a certain force given by nature; wherefore by this even the unskilled, by this the common crowd, by this in short barbarians are most moved: for words move no one save him who is joined by the fellowship of the same tongue, and keen thoughts often fly past the perception of men not keen; delivery, which bears before it the motion of the mind, moves all men; for by the same motions of the mind all men are stirred, and they recognize them in others by the same marks and betray them in their own selves.

[132405] 224. But to the use and praise of delivery, without doubt, the voice holds the greatest part; which first is to be wished for by us; then, of whatever sort it shall be, it is to be cherished; concerning which that matter—in what manner the voice is to be tended—is nothing now to this kind of precept-giving: for my part, however, I think very much that it is to be tended; but this seems not abhorrent from the office of this our discourse, that, as I said a little before, in very many things that which is most useful, that, by some means or other, is also most becoming. For toward maintaining the voice nothing is more useful than frequent change; nothing more pernicious than straining poured out without intermission.

[133131] 225. What is more apt, for our ears and for the sweetness of delivery, than alternation and variety and change? And so the same Gracchus—as you can hear, Catulus, from Licinius your client, a lettered man, whom that man kept by him as a slave at hand—was wont, when he addressed the assembly, to have a skilled man with a little ivory pipe, who stood secretly behind him, to sound quickly that note by which he might either rouse him when slack or recall him from straining.' 'I have heard it, by Hercules,' said Catulus, 'and have often marvelled at the man's diligence, and likewise at his learning and knowledge.'

[133749] 226. 'For my part,' said Crassus, 'I have indeed, and I grieve that those men fell into such guilt in the commonwealth; although such a web is being woven, and such a method of living is being shown to posterity in the state, that we may now desire to have men like those citizens whom our fathers did not endure.' 'Cease, I beseech you, Crassus,' said Julius, 'that discourse of yours, and bring yourself back to the pipe of Gracchus; the method of which I do not yet plainly understand.'

[134240] 227. 'In every voice,' said Crassus, 'there is a certain middle, but proper to each voice: from this to ascend the voice by degrees is both pleasant—for to shout from the beginning is a rustic thing—and that same is salutary for strengthening the voice; then there is a certain extreme of straining, which yet is more inward than the sharpest shouting, to which the pipe will not suffer you to proceed, and will recall you even from the very straining; there is likewise, on the contrary, a certain deepest point in relaxation, to which one descends, as it were, by degrees of sounds. This variety, and this course through all the sounds of the voice, will both protect itself and bring sweetness to delivery. But you will leave the piper at home, and carry with you to the forum the sense of this habit.

[135046] 228. I have set forth what I could, not as I wished, but as the straits of time have compelled me; for it is a wise thing to lay the blame upon time, when, even if you wished it, you could not bring forward more.' 'But indeed,' said Catulus, 'you have gathered all things together, as far as I can judge, so divinely, that you seem not to have taken them from the Greeks, but to be able to teach these very things to the Greeks themselves; and I for my part rejoice that I have been made a partaker of this discourse; and I should wish that my son-in-law, your companion, Hortensius, had been present; who indeed I am confident will be pre-eminent in all those praises which you have embraced in your speech.'

[135757] 229. And Crassus said: 'Do you say he will be? I for my part judge that he is so already, and judged it then, when, in my consulship, he defended in the senate the cause of Africa, and lately even more, when he spoke on behalf of the king of Bithynia. Wherefore you see rightly, Catulus; for I perceive that nothing is wanting to that young man, either from nature or from learning:

[136141] 230. on which account it is the more for you, Cotta, and for you, Sulpicius, to be watchful and to labour; for he grows up no middling orator, as it were, into your generation, but one of most keen genius and of burning zeal and of excellent learning and of singular memory; whom, although I favour him, yet I wish to excel his own age—but that he should outrun you, who are so much his elders, is scarcely honourable.' 'But now let us rise,' said he, 'and refresh ourselves, and at length relax our minds and our care from this strain of disputation.'