WORK: On Oratory  (slug: cicero-marcus-tullius-on-oratory-6f2b26)

CHAPTER: 02-book-2



[109885] 196. for when I remembered that the man whom I knew to have been consul, a commander adorned by the senate, had ascended the Capitol in ovation, this same man, when I saw him afflicted, weakened, mourning, brought to the utmost danger, I did not attempt to stir pity in others before I myself was seized by pity. I felt indeed at that time that the judges were greatly moved, when I raised up the sad and squalidly clad old man, and when I did those things which you, Crassus, praise—not by art, of which I know not what to say, but by a great motion of mind and grief, that I tore his tunic, that I showed his scars.

[110504] 197. When Gaius Marius, present and seated, much aided the mournfulness of my speech with his own tears, and when, frequently appealing to him, I commended his colleague to him, and called him himself as advocate to defend the common fortune of commanders, that appeal to pity was not without my own tears, not without grief, nor the imploring of all the gods and men and citizens and allies; in all which words, which were then uttered by me, if my grief had been absent, my speech would have been not only not piteous, but even to be laughed at. Wherefore I teach you this, Sulpicius—a good and learned master, forsooth—that in speaking you may be able to grow angry, to grieve, to weep.

[111195] 198. Although why should I teach you this, who in accusing my comrade had kindled so great a conflagration, not by speech only, but much more by the force and grief and ardour of your mind, that I scarcely tried to approach to extinguish it? For you had everything superior in the cause: you brought into judgement violence, flight, stoning, the cruelty of the tribune in the grave and pitiable downfall of Caepio; then it was agreed that the chief man both of the senate and of the state, Marcus Aemilius, had been struck with a stone; that Lucius Cotta and Titus Didius had been driven by force from the temple, when they wished to interpose their veto against the bill, no one could deny.

[111888] 199. There was added that you, a young man, were thought to complain of these things on behalf of the commonwealth with the highest dignity; while I, a man of censorian rank, could scarcely seem to defend honourably enough a seditious citizen, cruel in the calamity of a man of consular rank. The judges were the best citizens, the forum was full of good men, so that scarcely a slight indulgence of excuse was granted me, that nevertheless I defended one who had been my quaestor. Here what shall I say—that I employed some art? I will tell what I did; if it please, you will set my defence in some place of art.

[112503] 200. I collected the kinds, vices, dangers of all seditions, and drew that speech from all the variety of the times of our commonwealth, and so concluded that I said that, although all seditions had always been troublesome, yet some had been just and well-nigh necessary. Then I treated those things which Crassus just now mentioned: that neither could the kings have been driven out of this state, nor the tribunes of the plebs created, nor the consular power so often diminished by plebiscites, nor appeal—that patroness of the state and avenger of liberty—given to the Roman people, without the dissension of the nobles; and that, if those seditions had been to the safety of this state, it was not therefore at once, if any movement of the people had been made, to be set down to Gaius Norbanus as a nefarious crime and a capital offence. But if it had ever been granted to the Roman people that it should seem to be roused justly—which I showed had often been granted—no cause had been juster than that one. Then I turned and converted the whole speech to inveighing against Caepio's flight, to bewailing the destruction of the army: so I both refreshed by my speech the grief of those who mourned their own, and renewed the minds of the Roman knights, before whom as judges the cause was then pleaded, to hatred of Quintus Caepio, by whom they themselves had been alienated on account of the courts.

[113910] 201. When I perceived that I had taken possession of the trial and of my own defence—because I had both won over to myself the goodwill of the people, whose right I had defended even in conjunction with sedition, and had turned the whole minds of the judges to our cause, whether by the calamity of the state, or by the grief and longing for their kinsmen, or by their own hatred toward Caepio—then I began to mingle with this vehement and fierce kind of speech that other kind of which I disputed before, of gentleness and mildness: that I was contending on behalf of my comrade, who, by the custom of our ancestors, ought to be to me in the place of a son, and on behalf of well-nigh all my reputation and fortunes; that nothing more disgraceful could happen to me as to my estimation, nothing more bitter as to my grief, than if I, who was thought often to have been a saviour to citizens most utterly strangers to me, yet my own fellow-citizens, could not bring aid to my own comrade.

[114900] 202. I begged of the judges that they would concede this to my age, to my honours, to my deeds, if they saw me affected with a just and pious grief; especially if in other causes they had understood that I had always deprecated everything for the dangers of friends, never anything for myself. Thus in that whole defence and cause, what seemed to lie in art—that I should speak about the Apuleian law, that I should explain what it was to diminish majesty—I touched and skimmed over very briefly; by those two parts of the speech, of which the one has commendation, the other excitement, which are least polished by the precepts of the arts, that whole cause was handled by me, so that I seemed both most keen in renewing the odium against Caepio, and most gentle in declaring my own character toward my connections: thus, the minds of the judges being moved rather than instructed, your accusation, Sulpicius, was then vanquished by us.

[115839] 203. Hereupon Sulpicius said: 'Truly, by Hercules, Antonius, you recall those things; for I never saw anything that so slipped out of one's hands as that very cause then slipped from me. For when—as you said—I had handed over to you not a trial but a conflagration, what an opening was yours, immortal gods! what fear! what hesitation, what stumbling and dragging of words! How at the outset you held to that one thing which men gave you toward pardon—that you were speaking on behalf of a man most closely bound to you, your own quaestor! How first you fortified your way to obtaining a hearing.

[116437] 204. But behold, when I thought you had effected nothing else but that men should think you must be pardoned, defending a wicked citizen, because of the bond of connection, you began to creep on secretly, while others yet suspected nothing, but I was now in great dread, that you were defending not that sedition of Norbanus, but the anger of the Roman people, and that anger not unjust, but deserved and due. Then what topic was passed over by you against Caepio? How you mingled all those things—hatred, envy, pity! And this not only in the defence, but even against Scaurus and my other witnesses, whose testimonies you refuted not by refuting, but by fleeing to the same impulse of the people;

[117136] 205. which when they were just now recalled by you, for my part I desired no precepts; yet that very demonstration of your defences I think to be no slight doctrine.' 'And yet, if you please,' said he, 'we will hand down also those things which we are wont to follow in speaking and which we especially aim at; for now long life and the practice of the greatest matters have taught us, so that we may grasp by what things the minds of men are moved.

[117587] 206. For my part I am wont first to consider whether the cause demands it; for neither in small matters are these torches of speaking to be applied, nor before men so disposed that we can avail nothing toward bending their minds by speech, lest we be thought worthy either of ridicule or of hatred, if we either act tragedies in trifles or attempt to tear up those things which cannot be moved.

[117983] 207. Now, since these things are for the most part especially to be worked upon by speech in the minds of the judges, or of whoever they shall be before whom we plead—love, hatred, anger, envy, pity, hope, gladness, fear, vexation: we feel that love is won, if we seem to defend, in justice, that which is useful to the very men before whom we plead, or if we labour on behalf of good men or at least of those who are good and useful to them; for this matter wins love the more, that defence of virtue, affection; and it profits more, if a hope of future usefulness is set forth, than the recalling of a past benefit.

[118602] 208. One must strive to show that in the matter which you defend there is either dignity or usefulness, and that he to whom you would win this love has referred nothing to his own advantage and has done nothing at all for his own sake; for men's own advantages are envied, but their zeal for serving others is favoured.

[118923] 209. And at this point one must see, lest those whom we wish to be loved for their benefactions, we seem to extol too much their praise and glory, which is wont most of all to be envied; and from these same topics we shall learn both to build up hatred against others and to remove it from ourselves and ours; and these same kinds must be handled in either rousing or appeasing anger; for if you magnify that which is pernicious or useless to the very men who hear, hatred is created; but if that which is against good men, or against those whom each least ought to have so treated, or against the commonwealth, then is roused, if not so bitter a hatred, yet an offence not unlike envy or hatred;

[119621] 210. likewise fear is struck in either from their own dangers or from common ones: the former, that proper one, is more inward; but this common one too must be brought to the same likeness. Equal and one method is of hope, gladness, vexation; but I scarcely know whether of all the movements envy be by far the keenest, nor is less of strength needed in repressing it than in rousing it. But men envy most their equals or inferiors, when they feel themselves left behind, and grieve that those others have flown ahead; but the superior too are often vehemently envied, and the more if they boast themselves too intolerably and pass beyond the equality of common right by the eminence of their dignity or fortune; which if they must be inflamed, it must especially be said that they were not gained by virtue, then even by vices and faults, then, if they are more honourable and weighty, yet that those merits are not so great as the insolence and disdain of the man.

[120589] 211. But for appeasing it, it must be said that those things were gained by great labour, by great dangers, and were conferred not for his own advantage but for that of others; and that he, if he seems to have gained any glory, yet, although that be not an unfair wage of danger, is not delighted by it, and casts it all off and lays it down; and altogether it must be brought about—since most men are envious, and this is the most common and perpetual fault, and a pre-eminent and flourishing fortune is envied—that this opinion be diminished and that fortune, eminent in reputation, seem mingled with labours and miseries.

[121215] 212. Now pity is moved, if he who hears can be brought to refer those things which are bewailed of another to his own affairs, which he has either borne bitterly or fears, so that, looking at another, he frequently returns to himself; and while the single cases of human miseries are gravely received, if they are spoken of mournfully, then afflicted and prostrate virtue is most lamentable. And as that other part of the speech, which by the commendation of uprightness ought to preserve the appearance of a good man, must be gentle, as I have often now said, and lowered, so this, which is undertaken by the orator to change the minds and to bend them by every method, must be intent and vehement.

[121916] 213. But there is a certain likeness, difficult to distinguish, in these two kinds, of which we wish one to be gentle, the other vehement; for both from that gentleness, by which we win those who hear, something ought to flow into this keenest force by which we rouse the same men, and from this force something of spirit must sometimes be breathed into that gentleness; nor is there any speech more tempered than that in which the harshness of contention is seasoned by the humanity of the orator himself, while the remission of gentleness is firmed by a certain weight and contention.

[122504] 214. But in either kind of speaking, both that in which force and contention is sought, and this which is accommodated to life and character, both the beginnings ought to be slow and likewise the endings spun out and prolonged. For neither should one leap at once into that kind of speech—for it is wholly removed from the cause, and men first desire to hear that very thing which is proper to their judgement—nor, when you have entered upon that method, should one quickly depart;

[122987] 215. for not, as an argument, as soon as it is set down, is caught up, and a second and third is demanded, so can you, as soon as you have introduced it, move pity or envy or anger: the very reasoning confirms an argument, and as soon as it is sent forth, it cleaves; but that kind of speech requires not the instruction of the judge, but rather his disturbance, which no one can attain except by much and various and copious speech, and a like contention of delivery;

[123457] 216. wherefore those who speak either briefly or in a lowered way can instruct the judge, but cannot move him, in which is everything. Now this is plain, that the faculty for opposite sides of all matters is supplied from the same topics. But an argument must be resisted either by reproving those things which are taken for proving it, or by demonstrating that what they wish to conclude does not follow from the premises nor is a consequence; or, if you do not so refute it, something must be brought for the contrary side, which is either weightier or equally weighty.

[124030] 217. But those things which are done either gently, for winning over, or vehemently, for moving, must be taken away by contrary emotions, so that goodwill be removed by hatred, envy by pity. But sweet, and often very useful, is jesting and wit; which, even if all other things can be handed down by art, are at least proper to nature and certainly require no art: in which you, in my opinion, Caesar, far excel others; on which account you can even more be either a witness to me that there is no art of wit, or, if there is any, you above all can teach it to us.

[124595] 218. 'For my part,' said he, 'I think it easier to dispute about any matter by a man not unurbane than about wit itself. And so, when I had seen certain Greek books inscribed "about things laughable," I had come into some hope that I could learn something from them; but I found many laughable and salty sayings of the Greeks—for both the Sicilians excel in this kind, and the Rhodians and the Byzantines, and beyond the rest the Attics; but those who tried to deliver a certain method and art of this matter turned out so saltless that nothing of theirs is laughed at except their very saltlessness;

[125197] 219. wherefore to me at least this matter seems in no way able to be handed down by teaching. For since there are two kinds of wit, one diffused evenly through all the discourse, the other very acute and brief, the former was called by the ancients banter (cavillatio), this other railing (dicacitas). Each thing has a light name. No wonder; for this whole thing—to move laughter—is light.

[125588] 220. But yet, as you say, Antonius, I have seen much profit very often gained in causes by charm and wit. But since in that kind of continuous pleasantry art is not required—for nature fashions and creates men as imitators and witty narrators, with countenance and voice and the very kind of speech helping—then indeed in this other kind of railing what place has art, when the witty saying ought to be sent forth and to cleave before it can seem to have been able even to be thought of?

[126077] 221. For what could this my brother be helped by art, when, asked by Philippus what he was barking at, he answered that he saw a thief? What in his whole speech could Crassus, whether before the centumviri against Scaevola, or against the accuser Brutus, when he spoke on behalf of Gnaeus Plancius? For that which you, Antonius, attribute to me, must by the opinion of all be conceded to Crassus; for scarcely anyone besides him will be found excelling in either kind of charm: both that which is in the continuity of discourse, and this which is in quickness and in a saying.

[126655] 222. For that whole continuous Curian defence against Scaevola overflowed with a certain hilarity and jesting; it had not those brief sayings; for he spared the dignity of his adversary, in which he preserved his own; which is most difficult for witty and railing men—to have regard to men and times, and to hold back those things which occur when they can be said most saltily; and so some witty men interpret this very thing not without point;

[127102] 223. for they say that Ennius says that a wise man can more easily keep down a flame in his burning mouth than hold back good sayings—these good sayings, of course, which are salty; for these sayings are now called by their own proper name. But as Crassus held back these against Scaevola, and in that other kind, in which there were no stings of insult, eluded that cause and disputation, so against Brutus, whom he hated and whom he judged worthy of insult, he fought with either kind.

[127591] 224. How many things he said about the baths which that man had lately sold, how many about his lost patrimony! And those brief sayings—when that man said he was sweating without a cause, 'no wonder,' he said, 'for you have just come out of the baths.' There were countless others, but no less pleasant was that continuous one: for when Brutus had raised up two readers, and given to the one Crassus's speech about the colony of Narbo to read, to the other that about the Servilian law, and had set side by side passages contradictory to one another about the commonwealth, our friend here most wittily gave the three little books of Brutus's father about the civil law to three men to read.

[128284] 225. From the first book: 'It chanced that we were in the Privernate country.' 'Brutus, your father testifies that he left you the Privernate estate.' Then from the second book: 'We were at Alba, I and my son Marcus.' 'A wise man, evidently among the first of our state, knew this whirlpool; he feared lest, when the son should have nothing, nothing should be thought left to him.' Then from the third book, in which he made an end of writing—for so many are the genuine books of Brutus, as I heard Scaevola say—'We chanced to sit down at Tibur, I and my son Marcus.' 'Where are these estates, Brutus, which your father left you, recorded in public documents? And had he not had you already grown up,' he said, 'he would have composed a fourth book and left it written that he had even bathed in the baths with his son.'

[129106] 226. Who, then, is there who would not confess that Brutus was no less refuted by this charm and these jests than by those tragedies which the same man acted, when by chance, in the same cause, the old woman Junia was being carried out for burial? By the immortal gods, what a thing was that, how great a force! how unexpected! how sudden! when, his eyes fixed, his whole gesture threatening him, with the highest weight and quickness of words: 'Brutus, why do you sit? What do you wish that old woman to announce to your father? What to all those whose images you see borne? What to your ancestors? What to Lucius Brutus, who freed this people from kingly domination? What do you do? To what matter, to what glory, to what virtue are you devoted? To increasing your patrimony? But that is not the mark of nobility.

[129923] 227. But suppose it were, nothing is left; lusts have squandered it all. Or to the civil law? It is your father's. But it will say that you, when you were selling the house, did not even except for yourself your father's chair among the fixtures and movables. Or to military affairs? You who have never seen a camp! Or to eloquence? Which is not in you, and whatever there is of voice and tongue, you have bestowed it all upon that most disgraceful trade of calumny! Do you dare to look upon the light? You to gaze on these men? You to be in the forum, you in the sight of the citizens? You not to shudder at that dead woman, you not at the very images? Whom you have left yourself no place not only to imitate, but not even to set up.'

[130661] 228. But these things were tragic and divine; while witty and urbane things were countless even from one assembly; for there was never a greater contention, nor before the people a weightier speech, than that of this man against his colleague lately in the censorship, nor one more seasoned with charm and pleasantry. Wherefore, Antonius, I agree with you in both points—that wit often greatly profits in speaking, and that it can in no way be handed down by art: this indeed I wonder at, that you have attributed so much to us in that kind and have not borne off the palm of this matter too to Crassus.'

[131267] 229. Then Antonius said: 'I should indeed have so done, were it not that sometimes I envy this Crassus a little; for to be ever so witty and salty is not in itself too much to be envied; but since he is of all men the most graceful and most urbane, and at the same time both is and seems the most weighty and severe—which has befallen him alone—it seemed to me scarcely to be borne.' Hereupon, when Crassus himself had smiled, 'And yet,' said Antonius, 'though you denied, Julius, that there is an art of wit, you opened up something which seemed to need a precept: for you said that regard ought to be had for the men, the matter, the time, lest the jest detract anything from weightiness; which indeed is wont above all to be observed by Crassus. But this is a precept for omitting wit, when there is no need of it; we, however, are inquiring how we may use it, when there is need—as against an adversary, and especially if his folly can be made sport of; against a witness who is foolish, eager, frivolous, if men seem likely to listen readily.

[132316] 230. Altogether those things are more acceptable which we say when provoked than those which we say first; for both the quickness of talent is greater, which appears in answering, and answering is the mark of good-nature; for we seem as though we would have been quiet, had we not been provoked—as in that very assembly nothing was said by this man, which at least seemed wittily said, which he did not say when challenged in answer; but there was so great weight in Domitius, so great authority, that what was thrown out by him seemed rather to be relieved by charm than to be broken by contention.'

[132918] 231. Then Sulpicius said: 'What then? Shall we suffer Caesar—who, although he concedes wit to Crassus, yet labours much more at that study himself—not to unfold for us this whole kind of jesting, what it is and whence it is drawn, especially since he confesses that there is so great a force and usefulness in salt and urbanity?' 'What if,' said Julius, 'I agree with Antonius saying that there is no art of salt?'

[133334] 232. When Sulpicius had fallen silent at this, 'As though indeed,' said Crassus, 'there were any art of these very things of which Antonius has now long been speaking: there is a certain observation, as he himself said, of those things which avail in speaking; which, if it could make men eloquent, who would not be eloquent? For who could not learn these things either easily or at least in some way? But I think there is this force and this usefulness in these precepts, not that we be led by art to find what we should say, but that we may either be confident that those things which we attain by nature, by zeal, by exercise, are right, or understand that they are faulty, when we have learned to what they should be referred.

[134066] 233. Wherefore, Caesar, I too ask this of you, that, if it seems good to you, you dispute about this whole kind of jesting what you think, lest perchance some part of speaking, since you so wished, seem to have been omitted in such an assembly and in so careful a discourse.' 'For my part,' said he, 'since you exact the contribution from a guest, Crassus, I will not bring it about that, if I shrink away, I give you some cause for refusing. Although I am often wont to wonder at the impudence of those who act gesture on the stage with Roscius looking on; for who can move himself, whose faults that man does not see? So I now, with Crassus listening, will first speak about wit, and will teach—a pig teaching the orator, as they say—him whom, when Catulus lately heard him, he said that others ought to be hay.'

[134882] 234. Then he said: 'Catulus was jesting, especially since he himself so speaks that he seems to be fed on ambrosia. But let us hear you, Caesar, that we may see the rest of Antonius.' And Antonius said: 'Very few things indeed remain to me; but yet, now wearied with the labour and the journey of my disputation, I will rest in Caesar's discourse as in a very opportune lodging.' 'And yet,' said Julius, 'you will say my hospitality is not too liberal; for I will thrust you and cast you out into the road as soon as you have tasted ever so little.

[135432] 235. And, lest I detain you longer, I will very briefly set forth what I think about that whole kind. About laughter there are five things to be inquired: one, what it is; second, whence it is; third, whether it belongs to the orator to wish to move laughter; fourth, how far; fifth, what are the kinds of the ridiculous. And as for that first—what laughter itself is, in what way it is roused, where it is, in what manner it arises and so suddenly bursts forth that, wishing to hold it, we cannot, and how at the same moment it seizes the sides, the mouth, the veins, the eyes, the countenance—let Democritus see to that; for it does not pertain to this discourse, and, if it did pertain, I should yet not be ashamed to be ignorant of that which not even those knew who professed it.

[136218] 236. But the place and region, as it were, of the ridiculous—for that is next inquired—is contained in a certain baseness and deformity; for these things are laughed at, either alone or chiefly, which mark and designate some baseness, not basely. But—to come to that third point—it is plainly the orator's to move laughter; either because the very hilarity wins goodwill toward him by whom it has been roused; or because all admire the acuteness often placed in a single word, especially of one answering, sometimes also of one provoking; or because it breaks the adversary, hinders him, makes light of him, deters him, refutes him; or because it signifies that the orator himself is a polished man, that he is learned, that he is urbane; most of all because it mitigates and relaxes sadness and severity, and often loosens by a jest and laughter odious matters which are not easily dissolved by arguments.

[137126] 237. But how far the ridiculous is to be handled by the orator must be most diligently seen—which we had placed in the fourth place of inquiry. For neither conspicuous wickedness, joined with crime, nor again conspicuous misery, is laughed at when assailed: men wish the criminal to be wounded by some greater force than the ridiculous; they do not wish the wretched to be mocked, unless perchance they boast themselves; but most of all must the affection of men be spared, lest you rashly speak against those who are loved.

[137652] 238. This moderation, then, must first be applied in jesting; and so those things are most easily made sport of which are worthy neither of great hatred nor of the greatest pity; wherefore all the material of the ridiculous is in those vices which are in the life of men who are neither beloved nor calamitous nor those who seem to be hurried off to punishment for a crime; and these things, prettily handled, are laughed at.

[138079] 239. There is also in deformity and the vices of the body a pretty enough material for jesting; but we ask the same thing which in other matters is most to be asked—how far; in which not only is this enjoined, that nothing be said saltlessly, but also, even if you could say something most ridiculously, both must be avoided by the orator, lest the jest be either scurrile or mimic. What things of this kind are we shall the more easily understand when we come to the very kinds of the ridiculous. For there are two kinds of wit, of which one is handled by a thing, the other by a saying:

[138669] 240. by a thing, when sometimes something is narrated as a kind of little tale, as once you, Crassus, against Memmius, that he had eaten Largus's arm, when he had quarrelled with him at Tarracina about a sweetheart: a salty narrative, and yet feigned by yourself; you added a close: that all Tarracina then had inscribed on every wall the letters L. L. L. M. M.; when you asked what that was, a certain old townsman told you,

[139096] 241. 'Biting Memmius mangles Largus's arm (Lacerat Lacertum Largi Mordax Memmius).' You perceive how witty this kind is, how elegant, how oratorical, whether you have something true that you can narrate—which yet must be sprinkled with little lies—or whether you feign. But the virtue of this kind is, that you so set forth the deeds that the characters of him about whom you narrate, his speech, his looks, may all be expressed, so that to those who hear those things seem then to be done and to happen.

[139602] 242. In a thing there is likewise the ridiculous which is wont to be taken from a certain distorted imitation, as the same Crassus: 'By your nobility, by your family!' What else was there in which the assembly laughed, except that imitation of countenance and voice? But when he said, 'By your statues!' and with arm extended even added something a little of gesture, we laughed more vehemently. Of this kind is that Roscian imitation of an old man: 'These things, Antipho, I sow for you, he says; it is old age, when I hear it.' And yet this whole thing is so ridiculous by its very kind, that it must be handled most cautiously; for it belongs to mimes and to mimics, if the imitation is excessive, as does obscenity. The orator ought to steal the imitation, so that he who hears may imagine more than he sees; let him likewise display his own ingenuousness and modesty by avoiding baseness of words and obscenity of things.

[140530] 243. These two, then, are the kinds of that ridiculous which is placed in a thing, which are proper to continuous wit, in which the characters of men are described and so portrayed that, either by some thing narrated, they are understood what they are, or, by an imitation briefly thrown in, are detected in some conspicuous vice fit for mockery.

[140878] 244. But in a saying the ridiculous is that which is moved by a certain acuteness of a word or thought; but as in that former kind, whether of narration or of imitation, the likeness of mimes and mimics is to be avoided, so in this the scurrile railing of the orator must be greatly shunned. How, then, shall we distinguish your friend Granius, or my friend Vargula, from Crassus, from Catulus, from the rest? By Hercules, it does not come into my mind: for they are railing men; than Granius indeed no one is more railing. This, I suppose, first—that, as often as a saying can be said, we should not think it necessary to say it.

[141510] 245. A tiny witness came forward. 'May I question him?' said Philippus. Then the examiner, in haste, 'Only briefly.' Hereupon he, 'You will not complain: I shall question a very tiny one.' Ridiculous. But the judge Lucius Aurifex was sitting, himself shorter even than the witness: all the laughter was turned upon the judge; the whole thing seemed scurrile and ridiculous. Therefore those things which can fall upon men whom you would not wish, however pretty they be, are yet by their very kind scurrile;

[142018] 246. as that Appius, who wishes to be railing—and, by Hercules, is so—but sometimes sinks into this scurrile vice. 'I shall dine,' he said, 'at your house,' to this one-eyed friend of mine, Gaius Sextius; 'for I see there is room for one.' This is scurrile, both because he provoked without cause, and yet said that which would fit all one-eyed men; such things, because they are thought premeditated, are less laughed at: that of Sextius was excellent and extempore: 'Wash your hands,' he said, 'and dine.' A regard, then, for the time, and a moderation and temperance of the railing itself, and a rarity of sayings, will distinguish the orator from the buffoon; and that we speak with a cause, not that we may seem ridiculous, but that we may accomplish something, while they do it all day and without cause. For what did Vargula gain, when the candidate Aulus Sempronius had embraced him together with his brother Marcus, in saying, 'Boy, drive off the flies'? He sought a laugh, which in my opinion is the very slightest fruit of talent. We shall, then, moderate the time of speaking by prudence and weightiness; of which would that we had some art! But nature is mistress.

[143197] 247. said he, 'and dine.' A regard, then, for the time, and a moderation and temperance of the railing itself, and a rarity of sayings, will distinguish the orator from the buffoon; and the fact that we speak with a cause, not that we may seem ridiculous but that we may accomplish something, while they do it all day and without cause. For what did Vargula gain, when the candidate Aulus Sempronius had embraced him together with his brother Marcus, in saying, 'Boy, drive off the flies'? He sought a laugh, which in my opinion is the very slightest fruit of talent. We shall, then, moderate the time of speaking by prudence and weightiness; of which would that we had some art! But nature is mistress.

[143902] 248. Now let us set forth in summary the very kinds which most move laughter. Let this, then, be the first division: that what is wittily said has its wit sometimes in the thing, sometimes in the word; but that men are most delighted when the laughter is moved by thing and word conjoined. But remember this, that whatever topics I shall touch, whence the ridiculous is drawn, from those same topics weighty thoughts too can generally be drawn: so much only is the difference, that weightiness is placed in honourable and serious matters, jesting in slightly base and as it were deformed ones—as by the same words we can both praise a thrifty servant and, if he is worthless, jest. That old Neronian saying about a thievish servant is ridiculous: that he was the only one in whose house nothing was either sealed or shut up—which same thing is wont to be said of a good servant.

[144782] 249. But this is by the same words; all things are from the same topics. For as for what Spurius Carvilius's mother said—when he was lamed grievously from a wound received for the commonwealth, and on that account was ashamed to go out in public—'why do you not go out, my Spurius? As often as you take a step, so often let your virtues come into your mind,' that is noble and weighty: but what Glaucia said to the limping Calvinus, 'where is that old saying—"does he limp? Nay, this man halts!"'—that is ridiculous; and each is drawn from that which could be observed in lameness. 'What is more sluggish (ignavius) than this Navius?' said Scipio severely; but to a man of bad smell, 'I see I am being surrounded (circumventum) by you,' said Philippus rather ridiculously: but either kind is contained by the likeness of a word changed in a letter.

[145632] 250. Things said from ambiguity are thought even most pointed, but they are engaged not always in jesting, often even in weightiness. To that elder Africanus, adjusting a wreath to his head at a banquet, when it kept breaking, Publius Licinius Varus said: 'Do not wonder if it does not fit; for the head is big': both praiseworthy and honourable; but of the same kind is 'for Calvus it is enough that he says too little (parum).' Not to be long: there is no kind of jest from which serious and weighty things too may not be taken.

[146164] 251. And this also must be noticed, that not all ridiculous things are witty. For what can be so ridiculous as a buffoon (sannio)? But he is laughed at by his very mouth, countenance, voice, in short by his very body; I can call him salty, and so, not that I should wish an orator to be of that kind, but a mime. Wherefore the first kind, which most of all moves laughter, is not ours: the morose, the superstitious, the suspicious, the boastful, the foolish: these very natures are laughed at, which characters we are wont to make sport of, not to sustain.

[146723] 252. The second kind is in imitation, exceedingly ridiculous, but we are allowed to use it only stealthily, if ever, and in passing; otherwise it is by no means liberal; the third, the distortion of the mouth, is not worthy of us; the fourth, obscenity, is not only not worthy of the forum, but scarcely of the banquet of free men. So many things, then, being subtracted from this oratorical topic, the remaining wit is that which seems to be placed either in a thing, as I divided before, or in a word; for what, in whatever words you say it, is yet witty, is contained in the thing; what, the words being changed, loses its salt, has all its charm in the words.

[147388] 253. Ambiguities are among the first acute and placed in the word, not in the thing; but they do not often move great laughter; rather they are praised as prettily, as learnedly said; as in the case of that Titius, who, since he played at ball studiously and was at the same time thought to break the sacred statues by night, and his comrades, when he had not come to the field, sought him, was excused by Vespa Terentius, who said he had broken his arm; as that of Africanus, which is in Lucilius: 'What of Decius? Do you wish to make a little nut (nuculam) or to be pierced (confixum)?' said he:

[147987] 254. as your friend, Crassus, Granius, 'it is not worth a sixth-part.' And if you ask, he who is called railing will most excel in this kind; but other things move greater laughter. Ambiguity in itself is indeed approved, as I said before, even most of all; for it seems the mark of a man of talent to be able to lead the force of a word into another sense than the rest take it; but it moves admiration rather than laughter, except sometimes when it falls upon some other kind of the ridiculous too, which kinds I will myself run through.

[148528] 255. But you know that it is a very well-known kind of the ridiculous, when we expect one thing and another is said: here our own error moves laughter even in ourselves; and if an ambiguity too be mingled in, it becomes more salty; as in Novius that man seems to be merciful who sees a judgement-debtor led away: he asks thus: 'for how much is he assigned?' 'A thousand sesterces.' If he had only added 'you may lead him off,' that would be the kind of ridiculous beyond expectation; but because he added 'I add nothing, you may lead him off'—an ambiguity being added—it was, as it seems to me at least, most salty. This is graceful, when in an altercation a word is caught up from the adversary and from it something is hurled, as by Catulus against Philippus, at that very man who provoked.

[149322] 256. But since there are several kinds of ambiguity, about which there is a certain more subtle doctrine, we must attend to and hunt after words; in which, so that we may avoid those that are rather frigid—for one must beware lest the saying be thought far-fetched—we shall yet say very many things acutely. Another kind is that which has a small change of a word, which, placed in a letter, the Greeks call paronomasia, as 'Nobiliorem, mobiliorem' (the more noble, the more fickle) said Cato; or, as the same man, when he had said to someone 'let us go for a walk (deambulatum),' and the other said 'what need was there of "de-"?', 'Nay rather,' said he, 'what need was there of you (te)?' Or that answer of the same man,

[150046] 257. 'if you are both face to face (adversus) and turned away (aversus) unchaste.' The interpretation of a name too has acuteness, when you turn to the ridiculous why someone is so called; as I lately said that Nummius the bribe-distributor (divisor), as Neoptolemus at Troy, so he in the Campus Martius had found his name; and all these are contained in a word. Often, too, a verse is wittily inserted, either as it is or a little changed, or some part of a verse, as that of Statius by the chafing Scaurus; from which there are some who say that your law about citizenship, Crassus, was born: 'Hush, be silent, what is this clamour? Those who have neither mother nor father, such confidence? Away with that pride!' For in the case of Caelius that of yours, Antonius, was even useful to the cause: when that man as witness said the money had proceeded from himself, and had a rather effeminate son, as that man was now departing: 'Do you feel the old man has been touched (cheated) of thirty minae?'

[151048] 258. Into this kind are thrown also proverbs, as that of Scipio, when Asellus boasted that he had traversed all the provinces while doing military service: 'Drive on the little ass (agas asellum),' and the rest; wherefore these too, since they cannot, the words being changed, keep the same charm, are drawn as placed not in the thing but in the words.

[151402] 259. There is also a not saltless kind placed in the word, from this—when you seem to take the matter according to the word and not according to the meaning; of which one kind is that whole Tutor, an old mime, exceedingly ridiculous. But I leave the mimes; only I wish this kind of the ridiculous to be marked by some conspicuous and known instance; but of this kind is that which you, Crassus, lately said to him who had asked you whether you would be troublesome if he came to you well before light, 'you indeed,' you said, 'will not be troublesome.' 'You will bid yourself, then,' said he, 'be awakened?' And you, 'surely I had said you would not be troublesome.'

[152070] 260. Of this same kind is that old saying which they say that Maluginensis Scipio uttered, when he was reporting from his century that Acidinus was consul, and the crier had said 'speak of Lucius Manlius': 'A good man,' he said, 'and an excellent citizen, I think.' Ridiculous too is that of Lucius Nasica to the censor Cato; when that man said, 'to the best of your heart's knowledge, have you a wife?' 'By Hercules,' he said, 'not to the best of my heart's knowledge.' These are either frigid, or salty then, when something else was expected. For nature, as I said before, our own error delights; from which, when we are as it were deceived in our expectation, we laugh.

[152744] 261. In words too are those things which are drawn either from an altered expression, or from the metaphor of a single word, or from the inversion of words. From an alteration, as once Rusca, when he was bringing forward a law about ages, the dissuader Marcus Servilius said, 'tell me, Marcus Pinarius, if I speak against you, will you speak ill of me, as you have done to the rest?' 'As you have sown, so shall you reap,' he said.

[153177] 262. But from metaphor, as when that elder Scipio said to the Corinthians, who were promising him a statue in that place where there were those of other commanders, that the troopers (turmalis) displeased him. But words are inverted, as, when Crassus was pleading before Marcus Perperna as judge on behalf of Aculeo, and against Aculeo on Gratidianus's side there was present Lucius Aelius Lamia, deformed, as you know; who, when he interrupted offensively, 'Let us hear,' said Crassus, 'the pretty boy.' When there had been laughter, 'I could not,' said Lamia, 'fashion my own shape, but I could my talent'; then this man, 'Let us hear,' said he, 'the eloquent one': there was much more vehement laughter. These too are graceful, as in weighty thoughts, so in jests—for I said a while ago that the method of jesting is one, of severity another,

[154024] 263. but that of weighty and of jocular things there is one material—therefore words set in antithesis adorn a speech above all, which same kind is often also witty; as that Servius Galba, when he was bringing forward his own friends as judges to the tribune of the plebs Lucius Scribonius, and Libo said, 'when at last, Galba, will you come out of your dining-room?' 'When you,' said he, 'come out of another man's bedroom.' From which kind that too is not far distant which Glaucia said to Metellus, 'you have a villa at Tibur, a sheepfold on the Palatine.' And the kinds of words which are witty I think I have now stated;

[154651] 264. of things there are more, and these, as I said before, are more laughed at; among which is narration, a matter truly difficult; for those things must be expressed and set before the eyes which seem both probable—which is proper to narration—and which are, what is proper to the ridiculous, somewhat base; of which, as the briefest example, let that serve which I set down before, of Crassus about Memmius. And to this kind let us add also the narrations of fables.

[155122] 265. Something is drawn also from history, as, when Sextus Titius said that he was Cassandra, 'I can name,' said Antonius, 'many an Ajax son of Oileus among your lovers.' There is also that from likeness, which has either a comparison or, as it were, an image: a comparison, as that Gallus once, as witness against Piso, when he had said that countless money had been given to the prefect Magius, and Scaurus refuted it by Magius's poverty, 'you err,' he said, 'Scaurus; for I do not say that Magius saved it, but that, as a naked man might gather nuts, he carried it off in his belly'; as that of old Marcus Cicero, the father of this excellent man, our friend, 'our countrymen are like Syrian slaves: the better each

[155842] 266. knew Greek, so the more worthless he was.' Images too are greatly laughed at, which generally are drawn into deformity or some vice of the body with the likeness of something baser: as that of mine against Helvius Mancia, 'I will now show what kind of man you are,' when he said, 'show, I pray'; I pointed with my finger to a Gaul painted on the Cimbric Marian shield under the New Shops, distorted, his tongue thrust out, his cheeks flapping; laughter was roused; nothing seemed so like Mancia; as to Titus Pinarius, twisting his chin in speaking: 'then

[156403] 267. let him say, if he wishes anything, when he has cracked his nut.' Those things too, which for the sake of diminishing or magnifying are carried to an incredible exaggeration; as you, Crassus, in an assembly: 'Memmius thinks himself so great that, going down into the forum, he lowers his head at the Fabian arch'; of which kind is also that which Scipio at Numantia, when he was angry with Gaius Metellus, is said to have uttered: 'if his mother

[156855] 268. had borne a fifth, she would have borne an ass.' There is also a pointed implication, when by a small matter and often by a word an obscure and hidden thing is illustrated; as, when Publius Cornelius—a man, as he was thought, avaricious and thievish, but conspicuously brave and a good commander—was thanking Gaius Fabricius because he, an enemy, had made him consul, especially in a great and grave war: 'there is no reason,' he said, 'why you should thank me, if I preferred to be plundered rather than to be sold'; as Africanus to Asellus, when he objected that unlucky lustrum, 'do not wonder,' he said; 'for he who took you off the rolls of the tax-payers completed the lustrum and sacrificed the bull.' There is also an urbane dissembling, when other things are said than you think—not in that kind of which I spoke before, when you say contraries, as Crassus to Lamia, but when with a whole kind of speech you jest severely, while you think otherwise than you speak;

[157835] 269. as our Scaevola to that Septumuleius of Anagnia, to whom gold had been weighed out for the head of Gaius Gracchus, when he asked to be taken to Asia as prefect: 'what do you want, madman?' he said; 'so great is the multitude of bad citizens that I assure you of this, that if you stay at Rome, you will in a few years come to the greatest wealth.'

[158189] 270. In this kind Fannius in his annals says that this Africanus Aemilianus was excellent and calls him by the Greek word eiron (dissembler); but, as they relate who know these things better, Socrates, I think, far surpassed all in this irony and dissembling, in charm and humanity. The kind is very elegant and salty with weightiness, and suited both to oratorical speeches and to urbane conversations.

[158594] 271. And, by Hercules, all these things which are disputed by me about wit are no greater seasonings of forensic actions than of all conversations. For just as that which is in Cato—who reported many things, from which some are set down by me by way of example—seems to me very clever, that Gaius Publicius was wont to say that 'Publius Mummius was a man for any season,' so assuredly the matter stands that there is no time of life in which it does not become charm and humanity to be present.

[159090] 272. But I return to the rest. Akin to this dissembling is when a vicious thing is called by an honourable word; as when Africanus the censor was removing from his tribe that centurion who had not been present in Paulus's battle, when that man said he had stayed in the camp for the sake of guard, and asked why he was marked by him, 'I do not love,' he said,

[159451] 273. 'those who are too diligent.' Acute too is that, when from another's speech you catch up something other than he wishes; as Maximus to Salinator, when Tarentum being lost, Livius had nevertheless held the citadel and had made many splendid sallies from it, and when Maximus, some years after, had recovered that town, and Salinator asked him to remember that he had recovered Tarentum by his service, 'why should I not remember?' he said. 'For I should never

[159916] 274. have recovered it, unless you had lost it.' There are also those somewhat absurd things, but by that very name often ridiculous, not only most apt for mimes, but also in some way for us: 'A foolish man, after he began to have an estate, dropped dead.' And 'What is that woman to you?' 'A wife.' 'Like me, by the god of faith.' And 'as long as he was at the waters, he never dropped dead.' This kind is lighter and, as I said, mimic, but yet has sometimes a place even with us, so that even a not foolish man may say something as if foolishly, with salt: as to you, Antonius, Mancia, when he had heard that you, as censor, had been prosecuted by Marcus Duronius for bribery,

[160596] 275. 'now at length,' he said, 'you will be allowed to do your own business.' These things are greatly laughed at, and, by Hercules, all things which are said by prudent men, through simulation, somewhat absurdly and saltily. Of which kind is also not to seem to understand what you understand, as Pontidius, 'what do you think of a man caught in adultery?' 'Slow!' as I, who in a levy with Metellus, when he would not accept the excuse of my eyes from me

[161053] 276. and had said, 'do you, then, see nothing?' 'I do indeed,' said I, 'from the Esquiline gate I see your villa'; as that of Nasica, who, when he had come to the poet Ennius and, asking at the door for Ennius, the maid had told him he was not at home, Nasica perceived that she had said it by her master's order and that he was within; a few days afterward, when Ennius had come to Nasica and was asking for him at the door, Nasica cried out that he was not at home; then Ennius, 'what? do I not know your voice?' he said. Hereupon Nasica, 'you are an impudent man: when I sought you, I believed your maid that you were not at home; do you not believe me myself?' That too is pretty, by which he who said something is mocked in that very kind in which he said it;

[161819] 277. as, when the consular Quintus Opimius, who as a young man had had a bad name, said to a festive fellow, Egilius, who seemed rather effeminate but was not, 'what of you, my Egilia? When will you come to me with your distaff and wool?' 'By Pollux, I do not dare,' said he, 'for my mother forbade me to approach women of ill fame.'

[162154] 278. Salty too are those things which have a hidden suspicion of the ridiculous; of which kind is that of the Sicilian, to whom, when a certain friend complained that he said his wife had hanged herself from a fig-tree, 'I pray you,' he said, 'give me cuttings from that tree to plant.' Of the same kind is what Catulus said to a certain bad orator: who, when he thought in his epilogue that he had moved pity, after he had sat down, asked this man whether he seemed to have moved pity, 'and great pity indeed,' he said; 'for I think no one is so hard as not to have thought your speech worthy of pity.'

[162759] 279. But to me, by Hercules, those splenetic and as it were peevish ridiculous things greatly move me—not when they are said by a peevish man; for then it is not salt, but the nature, that is laughed at; in which, as it seems to me, that is very salty in Novius: 'why do you weep, father?' 'A wonder if I should not sing: I am condemned.' To this kind almost contrary is the kind of the ridiculous of the patient and slow man, as, when Cato had been struck by one who carried a chest, and that man said 'beware,' he asked 'whether he carried anything else

[163316] 280. besides the chest.' There is also a salty reproof of folly, as that of the Sicilian, to whom the praetor Scipio was giving as patron of his cause his own guest, a noble man but exceedingly foolish, 'I pray you, praetor,' he said, 'give that patron to my adversary, then give me no one.' Those things too move us which are explained by conjecture far otherwise than they are, but acutely and neatly; as, when Scaurus was accusing Rutilius of bribery, since he himself had been made consul, and that man had suffered repulse, and showed in his account-books the letters A. F. P. R., and said it was 'made on the faith of Publius Rutilius' (actum fide P. Rutili); but Rutilius said 'before done, after entered' (ante factum, post relatum); Gaius Canius, a Roman knight, when he was present with Rufus, cried out that neither was declared by those letters: 'what, then?' said Scaurus; 'Aemilius did it, Rutilius is punished' (Aemilius fecit, plectitur Rutilius). Discrepancies too are laughed at:

[164315] 281. 'what is wanting to this man except an estate and virtue?' Pretty too is a familiar reproof, as of one erring; as when Granius rebuked Albius because, when by his account-books something seemed to have been proved by Albucius, and he was greatly rejoicing that Scaevola was acquitted, he did not understand that it had been adjudged against his own account-books.

[164685] 282. Like this is also the friendly admonition in giving counsel; as when, to a bad advocate who had dulled his voice in speaking, Granius advised that he drink cold mead as soon as he had returned home, 'I shall ruin,' said he, 'my voice,

[164926] 283. if I do that': 'better that,' he said, 'than your client.' Pretty too is it, when what is suited to each man is told; as, when Scaurus had some envy from this, that he had taken possession of the goods of Phrygio Pompeius, a wealthy man, without a will, and was sitting as advocate for the defendant Bestia, when a certain funeral was being carried by, the accuser Gaius Memmius said, 'look, Scaurus, a dead man is being carried; if you can be his possessor.'

[165392] 284. But of all these nothing is more laughed at than what is beyond expectation, of which there are countless examples, as that of the elder Appius, who, in the senate, when it was being treated about the public lands and the Thorian law, and Lucullus was being attacked by those who said that the public lands were grazed bare by his cattle, 'that is not Lucullus's cattle; you err,' he said—he seemed to defend Lucullus—'I think it is free: it grazes wherever it pleases.'

[165869] 285. That too of Scipio pleases me, who struck down Tiberius Gracchus: when Marcus Flaccus, having thrown many reproaches at him, had brought Publius Mucius as judge, 'I object to him on oath,' he said, 'he is unfair'; when there had been a murmur, 'ah,' he said, 'Fathers, I do not object to him as unfair to me, but to all.' But than this Crassus nothing wittier: when the witness Silus had hurt Piso, by saying that he had heard something against him, 'it may be, Silus,' he said, 'that he from whom you say you heard it spoke in anger.' Silus nodded. 'It may also be that you did not rightly understand.' This too he nodded with his whole head, to give himself to Crassus. 'It may also be,' he said, 'that what you say you heard you never heard at all.' This fell out so beyond expectation that the laughter of all overwhelmed the witness. Of this kind Novius is full, whose familiar jest is

[166766] 286. 'a wise man, if you are cold, will tremble,' and very many others. Often, too, you may wittily concede to your adversary that very thing which he takes from you; as Gaius Laelius, when a certain man of bad birth said to him that he was unworthy of his ancestors, 'but, by Hercules,' said he, 'you are worthy of yours.' Often, too, ridiculous things are said sententiously, as Marcus Cincius, on the day on which he brought forward a law about gifts and presents, when Gaius Cento had come forward and rather insultingly asked, 'what do you bring forward, little Cincius?' 'That you may buy, Gaius,' he said, 'if you wish to use anything.'

[167411] 287. Often, too, things which cannot happen are saltily wished for; as Marcus Lepidus, when, the rest exercising themselves on the field, he himself had lain down on the grass, 'I wish,' said he, 'this were to labour.' Salty too is it to answer slowly, to those asking and as it were inquiring, what they do not wish; as the censor Lepidus, when he had taken away a horse from Marcus Antistius of Pyrgi, and his friends clamoured and asked what he should answer to his father, as to why he said his horse had been taken from him, when he was an excellent colonist, most thrifty, most modest, most frugal, 'that I believe

[168033] 288. none of those things,' he said. The Greeks collect certain others—execrations, expressions of wonder, threats; but I seem to myself to have divided these very things into too many kinds; for those which are contained in the method and force of a word are well-nigh fixed and definite; which for the most part, as I said before, are wont to be praised rather than laughed at;

[168414] 289. but these which are in the thing itself and the thought are in their parts countless, in their kinds few; for laughter is moved by deceiving expectation, by mocking the natures of others, by the likeness of something baser, by dissembling, by saying something somewhat absurd, by reproving folly. And so he who wishes to speak jocosely must be imbued, as it were, by a certain nature apt for these kinds and by character, so that the very countenance too may be accommodated to each kind of the ridiculous; which indeed the more severe and serious it is, as in you, Crassus, the saltier those things which are said are wont to seem.

[169053] 290. But now you, Antonius, who said that you would gladly rest in this lodging of my discourse, as though you had turned aside into the Pomptine country, a place neither pleasant nor healthful, I judge that you should think you have rested long enough, and proceed to finish the remaining journey.' 'For my part, and indeed cheerfully received by you,' said he, 'and both made more learned through you and even bolder now for jesting; for I do not fear that anyone will now think me lighter in that kind, since indeed you have brought forward to me as authorities the Fabricii and the Africani, the Maximi, the Catos, the Lepidi.

[169685] 291. But you have those things which you wished to hear from me, about which indeed I had to speak and to think more carefully; for the rest are easier, and from those which have been said all the rest are born. For I, when I have approached a cause and pursued everything by thinking, so far as I could, when I have seen and learned both the arguments of the cause and those topics by which the minds of the judges are won, and those by which they are moved, then I settle what good each cause has, what evil; for there is scarcely any matter that can be called into the dispute or controversy of speaking which has not both, but how much it has, that matters;

[170348] 292. but my method in speaking is wont to be this: that what good I have, that I embrace, adorn, exaggerate, there I dwell, there I lodge, there I cleave; but from the evil and the fault of the cause I so withdraw, not that it should appear that I flee it, but that the whole, by adorning and amplifying that good, may be overwhelmed, dissembled; and, if the cause is in arguments, I most of all guard the firmest, whether they are several or some one; but if the cause is in conciliation or in moving, I betake myself most of all to that part which can most move the minds of men.

[170931] 293. In short, the sum of this kind is this: that, if in refuting the adversary the speech can be firmer than in confirming our own matters, I direct all my weapons against him; if our things can be proved more easily than those refuted, I try to draw the minds away from the contrary defence and to lead them to ours.

[171251] 294. In short, those two things which seem easiest, since I cannot do those which are more difficult, I take to myself by my own right: one, that to a troublesome or difficult argument or topic I sometimes make no answer at all, which perhaps someone may justly have laughed at; for who is there that cannot do that? but yet I am now disputing about my own faculty, not that of others, and I confess that, if any matter presses me too vehemently, I am wont so to give way that I seem to flee not only with my shield not thrown away, but not even cast behind me, but to use a certain appearance and pomp in speaking, and a flight like a battle; but to halt in my own position so that I seem to have yielded not for the sake of fleeing the enemy, but of taking ground;

[172019] 295. the other is that which I think most of all to be guarded against and provided for by the orator, and which is wont most to trouble me: I am wont to labour not so much to be of help to causes as to do no harm; not but that one should strive in both, but yet it is much more disgraceful for an orator to seem to have hurt a cause than not to have profited it. But what is this, Catulus, that you whisper among yourselves? Do you despise these things, as they are to be despised?' 'By no means,' said he; 'but Caesar seemed to wish to say something about that very matter.' 'Let him say it, and gladly,' said Antonius, 'whether for refuting or for inquiring.'

[172683] 296. Then Julius said: 'By Hercules, Antonius, I have always been one who so spoke of you as an orator, that you seemed to me alone the most guarded in speaking, and that this was proper to your praise—that nothing was ever said by you which could harm him for whom you spoke; and this I remember, when a conversation had been begun by me with this Crassus, many listening, and Crassus in very many words praised your eloquence, that I said that among your other praises this was perhaps the greatest, that you not only said what was needful, but also did not say what was not needful;

[173270] 297. then I remember that he answered me, that the rest in you were supremely to be praised, but that to say what was foreign and what would harm him for whom each man spoke was the mark of a wicked and treacherous man; wherefore he seemed to himself not eloquent who should not do that, but wicked who should do it. Now, if it seems good to you, Antonius, I should like you to demonstrate why you think this so great, to do no evil in a cause, that nothing seems to you greater in an orator.'

[173765] 298. 'I will tell, indeed, Caesar,' said he, 'what I understand; but do you, and you all,' said he, 'remember this, that I am not speaking about the divinity, as it were, of a perfect orator, but about the moderate measure of my exercise and habit. Crassus's answer indeed is of a certain excellent and singular talent; to whom it seemed like a portent that anyone could be found, an orator, who should do some evil in speaking and harm him whom he defended;

[174225] 299. for he forms a conjecture about himself; whose force of talent is so great that he thinks no one says what is against himself except on purpose; but I am now disputing not about a certain pre-eminent and exceptional power, but about a well-nigh vulgar and common one. So among the Greeks it is reported that that Athenian Themistocles was of a certain incredible greatness of counsel and talent; to whom a certain learned man, and among the first cultivated, is said to have come, and to have promised that he would hand down to him the art of memory, which was then first brought forward; when he had asked what that art could effect, that teacher said—that he might remember everything; and Themistocles answered him, that he would do him a more grateful favour if he taught him to forget what he wished than if he taught him to remember.

[175072] 300. Do you see what force was in the man, of a most keen talent, how powerful and how great a mind was his? Who so answered that we could understand that nothing from his mind, once it had been poured in, could ever flow out; when indeed it was more desirable to him to be able to forget what he did not wish to remember than to remember what he had once heard or seen. But neither, on account of this answer of Themistocles, must labour not be given by us to memory, nor must that caution and timidity of mine in causes be neglected on account of the pre-eminent prudence of Crassus; for neither of these men brought me any faculty, but signified his own.

[175731] 301. For very many things must be looked round in causes, in every part of the speech, lest you stumble, lest you rush against anything: often some witness either does not hurt or hurts less, unless he be provoked; the defendant entreats, the advocates urge, that we inveigh, that we speak ill, in short that we cross-examine: I am not moved, I do not comply, I do not satisfy; and yet I gain no praise; for unskilled men can more easily blame what you have foolishly said than praise what you have wisely kept silent.

[176251] 302. Here how much evil is done, if you have hurt an angry, a not foolish, a not frivolous witness! For he has both the will to harm in his anger, and the force in his talent, and the weight in his life. Nor, if Crassus does not commit this, does it therefore follow that many do not, and often, commit it. And nothing is wont to seem to me more disgraceful than that, from some saying or answer or question of the orator, that talk follows: 'he has killed.' 'His adversary?' 'Nay rather,' they say, 'himself and the man he

[176776] 303. defends.' This Crassus thinks cannot happen except by treachery; but I very often see in causes men who are by no means bad do some evil. What of that which I said above, that I am wont to yield and—to say it more plainly—to flee those things which press my cause hard, when others do not so, but busy themselves in the enemy's camp and dismiss their own guards—do they harm causes moderately, when they either confirm the aids of the adversaries or ulcerate those things which they cannot heal?

[177278] 304. What, when they have no regard for the persons whom they defend, if those things in them which are odious they do not mitigate by extenuating, but by praising and extolling make more odious, how much evil is there, pray, in that? What, if against men dear and pleasing to the judges you inveigh, without any forefortifying of speech, more bitterly and insultingly, do you not alienate the judges from yourself?

[177695] 305. What, if those vices or disadvantages which are in some one judge or in several, you, in reproaching them in the adversaries, do not understand that you are inveighing against the judges—is the fault moderate? What, if, when you plead for another, you make the suit your own, or, hurt, are carried away by anger, you abandon the cause—do you do no harm? In which I—not because I willingly hear myself ill spoken of, but because I do not willingly abandon a cause—am thought too patient and slow; as when I rebuked you yourself, Sulpicius, because you were attacking the assistant, not the adversary; from which I gain even this, that, if anyone speaks ill of me, he seems petulant or plainly insane.

[178401] 306. But in the very arguments, if you set down something either openly false, or contrary to what you have said or are going to say, or by its very kind remote from the practice of the courts and the forum, do you do no harm? In short, all my care is wont always to be engaged in this—I will say it the oftener—that, if I can, I may effect something good by speaking; but if not that, at least that I do no evil.

[178816] 307. And so now I return thither, Catulus, in which you a little while ago were praising me—to the order and arrangement of matters and topics; of which the method is twofold: one which the nature of causes brings, the other which is provided by the judgement and prudence of orators: for that we should say something before the matter, then that we should set forth the matter, afterward that we should prove it by confirming our own defences and refuting the contrary, then that we should conclude and so make our peroration—this the very nature of speaking prescribes;

[179389] 308. but to settle in what manner we should compose those things which must be said for the sake of proving and teaching—this is even most especially proper to the prudence of the orator. For many arguments occur; many which seem likely to profit in speaking; but of these some are so slight that they must be despised; some, even if they have some help, are sometimes of such a kind that there is in them some fault, and that which seems to profit is not of so great worth that it should be joined with some evil;

[179905] 309. but those which are useful and firm, if they are yet, as often happens, very many, those of them which are either the slightest or very like to others weightier, I think ought to be separated and removed from the speech: for my part, when I collect the arguments of causes, I am wont not so much to number them as to weigh them.

[180240] 310. And since—what I have now often said—we lead men to our opinion by three things, either by teaching or by conciliating or by moving, one of these three things must be carried before us, that we may seem to wish nothing else but to teach; the remaining two, like blood in bodies, must be diffused through the whole continuous speech; for both the beginnings and the other parts of the speech, about which we will say a few things a little later, ought greatly to have this force, that they may be able to pertain to moving the minds of those before whom it is pleaded.

[180814] 311. But in those parts of the speech which, although they teach nothing by arguing, yet by persuading and moving effect very much, although the most proper place is both in beginning and in peroration, yet to digress from that which you have proposed and are pleading, for the sake of moving the minds, is often useful;

[181136] 312. and so either when the matter has been narrated and set forth, often there is given a place for digressing to move the minds, or when our arguments have been confirmed or the contrary refuted, or in both places, or in all, if the cause has that dignity and abundance, it can rightly be done; and those causes are weightiest and fullest for amplifying and adorning which give the most openings for a digression of this kind, so that one may use those topics by which the impulses of the minds of those who hear may be either impelled or turned back.

[181691] 313. And in this too I blame those who place those things which are least firm first; in which I think those also err who, if ever—a thing which never pleased me—they employ several advocates, wish each one to speak first in proportion as they think there is least in him: for the matter demands that the expectation of those who hear be relieved as quickly as possible; and if it be not satisfied at the beginning, much more labour must be spent in the rest of the cause; for that matter is in a bad way which does not seem at once, as soon as it has begun to be pleaded, to become better.

[182283] 314. Therefore, as in an orator each best one, so in a speech let each firmest thing be first; provided that in both this be held, that those things which excel be reserved even for the peroration; if any are moderate—for the faulty ought to have place nowhere—let them be thrown into the middle crowd and the herd.

[182600] 315. All these things being considered, then at last I am wont to think last of that which is first to be spoken—what exordium I should use. For if ever I have wished to find that first, nothing has occurred to me but what was meagre or trifling or vulgar or common. But the beginnings of speaking ought always to be careful and acute and furnished with thoughts, apt in words, and indeed proper to the causes; for the first acquaintance, as it were, and commendation of the speech is in the beginning, which forthwith ought to soothe and allure him who hears;

[183162] 316. in which I am wont to wonder, not indeed at those who have given no labour to this matter, but at a man among the first eloquent and learned, Philippus, who is wont so to rise to speak that he knows not what first word he is going to have; and the same says that, when he has warmed his arm, then he is wont to fight; nor does he attend that those very men, from whom he draws this likeness, hurl those first javelins so gently that they may both serve gracefulness most of all and provide for their remaining strength.

[183688] 317. And there is no doubt that the exordium of speaking ought not often to be vehement and pugnacious; but if even in that very gladiatorial contest of life, in which it is decided by the sword, yet before the encounter many things are done which seem to avail not for a wound but for show, how much more is this to be regarded in a speech, in which not force rather than delight is demanded! There is nothing, in short, in all the nature of things which pours itself forth entire and which unrolls itself wholly all at once; thus all things which are done and which are conducted most keenly, nature herself has fringed with gentler beginnings.

[184336] 318. But these things in speaking are not to be sought from somewhere outside, but to be taken from the very bowels of the cause; therefore, the whole cause being tried and surveyed, all the topics being found and arranged, one must consider what exordium should be used.

[184609] 319. Thus they will both be easily found—for they will be taken from those things which are most copious either in the arguments or in those parts to which I said one often ought to digress; and they will bring some weight, when they are drawn well-nigh from the inmost defence, and it will appear that they are not only not common nor can be transferred to other causes, but have wholly flowered forth from that cause which is being pleaded.

[185053] 320. But every beginning ought to have either a signification of the whole matter which is being pleaded, or an approach to the cause and a fortifying, or some ornament and dignity; but, as to houses and temples vestibules and approaches, so to causes beginnings ought to be set in proportion to the matters; and so in small and unfrequented causes it is often more fitting to begin from the very matter;

[185459] 321. but when a beginning must be used—which for the most part will be the case—thoughts may be drawn either from the defendant, or from the adversary, or from the matter, or from those before whom it is pleaded. From the defendant (I call defendants those whose matter is at stake), those things which signify a good man, which a liberal one, which a calamitous one, which one worthy of pity, which avail against a false accusation; from the adversary, from the same topics generally the contraries;

[185961] 322. from the matter, if it be cruel, if nefarious, if beyond expectation, if undeserved, if wretched, if ungrateful, if unworthy, if novel, if such as cannot be restored and healed; from those before whom it is pleaded, that we make them well-disposed and well-thinking—which is better effected by pleading than by asking. This indeed must be diffused through the whole speech, and not least into the last part; but yet many beginnings are born of that kind.

[186422] 323. For the Greeks also advise that in the beginning we make the judge attentive and teachable; which things are useful, but not more proper to the beginning than to the remaining parts; and easier even in the beginnings, both because then they are most attentive, when they expect everything, and because they can be more teachable at the outset; for those things are more brilliant which are said in the beginnings than those which are said in the middle of causes, either by proving or by refuting.

[186926] 324. But the greatest abundance of beginnings for either alluring or rousing the judge we shall draw from those topics which, for producing emotions of the minds, will be in the cause; which, however, it will not be fitting to unfold wholly in the beginning, but only that the judge be at first lightly impelled, so that, he being now inclined, the rest of the speech may bear down.

[187310] 325. But let the beginning be so connected with the following speech, that it may seem not, as it were, the prelude of a cithara-player, something attached, but a member cohering with the whole body. For some, when they have, after meditation, uttered that, so pass to the rest that they seem not to wish a hearing to be granted them. And such a prelude ought to be, not like that of the Samnites, who brandish their spears before the battle, which they use not at all in fighting, but such that with the very thoughts with which they have preluded they could even fight.

[187883] 326. But as for their bidding the matter be narrated briefly, if it is to be called brevity when no word is superfluous, the speech of Lucius Crassus is brief; but if there is then brevity, when there is only so much of words as is necessary, that is sometimes needful; but often it is harmful, most of all in narrating, not only because it brings obscurity, but also because it takes away that virtue which is the greatest of narration—that it be pleasant and accommodated to persuading. Look at those words 'for after he had gone out from the youths . . .'

[188443] 327. how long is the narration! The characters of the young man himself and the servile inquiry, the death of Chrysis, the countenance and form and lamentation of the sister, and the rest are narrated very variously and pleasantly. But if he had sought this brevity—'she is carried out, we go, we come to the tomb, she was placed on the fire'—he could have finished the whole in ten little verses; although this very 'she is carried out, we go' is so concise that it serves not brevity but rather grace.

[188948] 328. But if there had been nothing except 'she was placed on the fire,' yet the whole matter could easily have been understood. But a narration distinguished by persons and interpunctuated by conversations has both festivity, and is both more probable—because you say a thing was done, when you set forth in what manner it was done—and is much more open to understanding, if it is sometimes dwelt upon and not run through with that brevity.

[189390] 329. For a narration ought to be as open as the rest; but in this it must be the more elaborated, both because it is more difficult not to be obscure in narrating a matter than either in the beginning or in arguing or in perorating; and the obscurity of this part of the speech is even of greater danger than that of the rest, either because, if anything has been said somewhat obscurely in any other place, only that perishes which has been so said, while an obscure narration darkens the whole speech; or because other things you can, if you have once said something obscurely, say more plainly in another place, while of the narration there is one place in the cause. But the narration will be perspicuous, if it be narrated in usual words, if the order of times be observed, if it be narrated without interruption.

[190210] 330. But when a narration is to be used or not, that is a matter of judgement; for neither, if a matter is known nor it is doubtful what was done, ought one to narrate, nor if the adversary has narrated, unless we are going to refute; and if ever there must be narrating, we shall neither keenly pursue those things which produce suspicion and a charge and will be against us, and shall draw off whatever we can; lest that happen which Crassus thinks happens, if ever it does, by treachery, not by folly—that we harm a cause. For it pertains to the sum of the whole cause whether a matter has been cautiously or, on the contrary, demonstrated, since the narration is the source of all the remaining speech.

[190918] 331. It follows that the cause be set forth, in which it must be seen what comes into controversy; then the supports of the cause must be supplied, in combination both by weakening the contrary and by confirming your own. For there is one certain method in causes of that speech which avails for proving the argumentation; but it requires both confirmation and refutation; but since neither can those things which are said against us be refuted unless you confirm your own, nor these be confirmed unless you refute those, therefore these things are joined both by nature and by usefulness and by treatment.

[191526] 332. But all things must for the most part be concluded by amplifying matters, either by inflaming the judge or by mitigating him; and all things must be referred, both with the earlier topics of the speech and most of all at the end, to moving the minds of the judges as much as possible and calling them to our advantage.

[191851] 333. Nor indeed does there now seem to be cause why we should separate those precepts which must be handed down about persuasions or panegyrics, for most are common; but yet to persuade or dissuade something seems to me to be of the weightiest character; for it is the mark of a wise man to unfold his counsel about the greatest matters, and of an honourable and eloquent one, so that you can foresee by your mind, approve by your authority, persuade by your speech. And these things must be done in the senate with less display; for it is a wise council, and a place must be left for the speaking of many others, and even the suspicion of an ostentation of talent must be avoided:

[192534] 334. the public assembly receives all the force of speech and demands weight and variety. Therefore in persuading nothing is more to be desired than dignity; for he who seeks usefulness sees not what the persuader most wishes, but what he sometimes more follows. For there is no one, especially in so famous a state, who does not think that dignity is most to be sought; but usefulness for the most part prevails, when that fear underlies, that, if dignity be neglected, not even it can be retained.

[193035] 335. But the controversy among men's opinions is either in this, which is more useful; or even, when this is agreed, it is contended whether honour or usefulness should rather be consulted; which, because they often seem to fight with one another, he who will defend usefulness will enumerate the advantages of peace, of resources, of power, of revenues, of the garrison of soldiers, of the other things whose fruit we measure by usefulness, and likewise the disadvantages of the contraries; he who impels toward dignity will collect the examples of the ancestors, which were glorious even with danger, will magnify the immortal memory of posterity, will defend that usefulness arises from praise and that it is always joined with dignity.

[193776] 336. But what can or cannot be done, and what too is necessary or not, in either matter must especially be inquired; for all deliberation is cut short, if it is understood that a thing cannot be done or if necessity is brought to bear; and he who has taught this, others not seeing it, has seen the most.

[194082] 337. But for giving counsel about the commonwealth the chief thing is to know the commonwealth; for speaking convincingly, to know the characters of the state, which, because they are frequently changed, the kind of speech too must often be changed; and although the force of eloquence is well-nigh one, yet because the highest dignity is of the people, the weightiest cause is of the commonwealth, the greatest the movements of the multitude, a certain grander and more brilliant kind of speaking too seems to be employed; and the greatest part of the speech must be applied to the movements of the minds, sometimes either by exhortation or by some recalling, to rouse them to hope or to fear or to desire or to glory, often too to recall them from rashness, anger, hope, injury, envy, cruelty.

[194879] 338. But it happens that, because the assembly seems to be, as it were, the greatest stage of the orator, by nature itself we are roused to a more ornate kind of speaking; for a multitude has a certain such force that, as a flute-player cannot play without flutes, so an orator cannot be eloquent without a listening multitude.

[195208] 339. And since there are many and various popular pitfalls, the adverse acclamation of the people must be avoided, which is roused either by some fault of the speech—if anything seems to have been said harshly, arrogantly, basely, sordidly, with some fault of mind—or by an offence at the man or by envy, which is either just or arises from accusation and report, or if the matter displeases, or if the multitude is in some movement of its own desire or fear. To these four causes as many remedies are opposed: now rebuke, if there is authority; now admonition, which is, as it were, a gentler rebuke; now a promise, that if they will hear, they will approve; now entreaty, which is weak, but sometimes useful.

[195920] 340. But in no place do wit and quickness and some brief saying, not without dignity and with charm, profit more; for nothing is so easy as that a multitude be led aside from sadness and often from bitterness by a saying fitly and briefly and acutely and cheerfully made. I have set forth for you, as best I could, in both kinds of causes what I am wont to follow, what to flee, what to regard, and by what method altogether to be engaged in causes.

[196371] 341. Nor is that third kind, of panegyrics, difficult, which I at the outset, as it were, set apart from our precepts; but both because there are many kinds of speeches both weightier and of greater abundance, about which scarcely anyone would give precepts, and because we are not wont to use panegyrics very much, I separated this whole topic; for the Greeks themselves wrote panegyrics rather for reading and for delight or for adorning some man than for the sake of this forensic usefulness; whose are the books in which Themistocles, Aristides, Agesilaus, Epaminondas, Philip, Alexander, and others are praised; our panegyrics, which we use in the forum, have either the bare and unadorned brevity of testimony, or are written for a funeral assembly, which is least accommodated to the praise of a speech. But yet, since it must sometimes be used, and sometimes even written—as Gaius Laelius wrote for Quintus Tubero praising his uncle Africanus, or as we ourselves, for the sake of adorning, after the manner of the Greeks, may praise whomever we wish—let this topic too be handled by us.

[197467] 342. It is plain, then, that some things in a man are to be wished for, others to be praised: birth, beauty, strength, resources, riches, and the rest which fortune gives, either externally or to the body, have not in themselves true praise, which is thought due to virtue alone; but yet, because virtue itself is most discerned in the use and moderation of those things, these goods of nature and of fortune too must be handled in panegyrics; in which is the highest praise—not to have exalted oneself in power, not to have been insolent in money, not to have preferred oneself to others on account of the abundance of fortune, so that resources and stores may seem to have given the means and material not to pride and lust, but to goodness and moderation.

[198227] 343. But virtue, which is in itself praiseworthy and without which nothing can be praised, yet has several parts, of which one is more apt for praise than another; for there are some virtues which seem placed in the characters of men and in a certain affability and beneficence; others which are in some faculty of talent or in greatness and strength of mind; for clemency, justice, kindness, good faith, fortitude in common dangers are pleasant to hear in panegyrics;

[198697] 344. for all these virtues are thought fruitful not so much to those who have them as to the race of men. Wisdom and greatness of mind, by which all human things are thought slight and as nothing, and a certain force of talent in devising, and eloquence itself, have no less of admiration, less of pleasantness: for they seem rather to adorn and protect the very men whom we praise than those before whom we praise. But yet in praising these kinds of virtues too must be joined; for the ears of men bear that both those things which are pleasant and grateful, and those things which are wonderful in virtue, be praised.

[199318] 345. And since of the several virtues there are certain fixed duties and functions, and to each virtue its own proper praise is due, it must be unfolded, in the praise of justice, what he who is praised has done with good faith, what with equity, what with some duty of this kind; and likewise in the rest the deeds will be accommodated to the kind and force and name of each virtue.

[199703] 346. But the most grateful praise is held to be that of those deeds which seem to have been undertaken by brave men without profit and reward; but those which were even with labour and danger to themselves, these have the richest abundance for praising, because they can both be told most ornately and heard most easily; for that, in fine, seems to be the virtue of a pre-eminent man which is fruitful to others, to himself either laborious or dangerous or at least without recompense. Great too and admirable is it wont to seem to have borne adverse chances wisely, not to have been broken by fortune, to have retained dignity in harsh affairs;

[200350] 347. nor yet do those things not adorn—honours held, the decreed rewards of virtue, deeds approved by the judgements of men; among which it is even of praise to attribute happiness itself to the judgement of the immortal gods. But the matters to be taken up must be either pre-eminent in greatness, or first in novelty, or singular in their very kind; for neither small nor usual nor vulgar things are wont to seem worthy of admiration or of praise at all.

[200808] 348. There is also a comparison with other pre-eminent men, splendid in a panegyric. About which kind it has pleased me to say a little more than I had shown, not so much on account of forensic use—which has been handled by me throughout this whole discourse—as that you might see this: that, if panegyrics are in the office of the orator—which no one denies—a knowledge of all the virtues, without which a panegyric cannot be effected, is necessary to the orator.

[201274] 349. Now that the precepts of blaming are to be taken from the contrary vices is plain; at the same time this is before our eyes, that neither can a good man be properly and copiously praised without a knowledge of the virtues, nor a wicked one marked and blamed conspicuously and sharply enough without a knowledge of the vices. And these topics, both of praising and of blaming, we must often use in every kind of causes.

[201699] 350. You have what I think about finding things and arranging them; I will add also about memory, that I may relieve Crassus of labour and leave him nothing else to discourse about except those things by which these are adorned.' 'Go on, indeed,' said Crassus; 'for I gladly perceive you now known as a master and at length unrolled from those coverings of your dissembling and laid bare; and in that you leave me nothing or not much, you do very conveniently, and it is grateful to me.'

[202188] 351. 'Now as to how much I shall have left you,' said Antonius, 'that will be in your power; for if you wish to deal truly, I leave you everything; but if to dissemble, see how you may satisfy these gentlemen. But, to return to the matter, I am not, indeed,' said he, 'of so great a talent as Themistocles was, so as to prefer the art of forgetting to that of memory; and I am grateful to that Simonides of Ceos, who first, they say, brought forward the art of memory.

[202658] 352. For they say that, when Simonides was dining at Crannon in Thessaly at the house of Scopas, a fortunate and noble man, and had sung that poem which he had written about him, in which, for the sake of adorning, after the manner of the poets, much had been written about Castor and Pollux, that man too sordidly told Simonides that he would give him half of what he had agreed for that poem; the rest let him seek from his Tyndaridae, whom he had equally praised, if it seemed good to him.

[203152] 353. A little later, they relate, it was announced to Simonides that he should come out; that two young men were standing at the door, who greatly called him out; that he rose, went out, saw no one: in this interval that banquet-hall, where Scopas was feasting, fell in; and by that ruin Scopas himself, crushed with his kinsmen, perished; whom, when his people wished to bury and could in no way distinguish them, mangled as they were, Simonides is said, from his remembering in what place each of them had reclined, to have been the pointer-out of each for burial; and, admonished by this thing, he is reported to have discovered that it is order most of all which brings light to memory.

[203844] 354. And so for those who would exercise this part of their talent, places must be taken, and those things which they wished to hold by memory fashioned in the mind and placed in those places; thus it would come about that the order of the places would preserve the order of the matters, while the images of the matters would mark the matters themselves; and that we should use the places for wax and the images for letters.

[204270] 355. But what fruit of memory there is for the orator, how great the usefulness, how great the force, what need is there for me to say? to hold what you have learned in receiving a cause, what you yourself have thought out? to have all your thoughts fixed in the mind? all the apparatus of words laid out? so to hear either him from whom you learn, or him to whom you must answer, that they seem not to pour the speech into your ears, but to inscribe it in your mind? And so only those who are strong in memory know what and how far and in what manner they are going to speak, what they have answered, what remains; and the same remember many things done by themselves at various times in other causes, many things heard from others.

[205005] 356. Wherefore I confess indeed that the nature of this good is the chief, as of all those things of which I spoke before; but this whole art of speaking, or a certain image and likeness of an art, has this force, not that it should beget and create some whole, of which there is no part in our talents, but that it should bring forth and confirm those things which are already born and begotten in us;

[205409] 357. but yet there is scarcely anyone of so keen a memory that, without arranging and marking the matters, he can grasp the order of all the words or thoughts, nor again of so dull a one that he is not aided by this habit and exercise. For this Simonides, or whoever else discovered it, saw prudently—that those things are most fashioned in our minds which have been delivered and impressed by sense; but that the keenest of all our senses is the sense of sight; wherefore those things could most easily be held by the mind which were perceived by the ears or by thought, if they were delivered to the minds with the recommendation of the eyes also; so that a certain conformation and image and figure might mark things invisible and removed from the judgement of sight, in such a way that what we could scarcely embrace by thinking we should, as it were, hold by gazing.

[206282] 358. But these forms and bodies, like all things which come under sight, need a seat; for a body cannot be understood without a place. Wherefore, lest in a known and well-worn matter I be long and tedious, many places must be used, brilliant, distinct, at moderate intervals; and images that are active, keen, marked, which can occur and quickly strike the mind; which faculty both exercise will give—from which habit is begotten—and the noting of like words turned and changed by cases, or transferred from a part to a kind, and the figuring of a whole thought by the image of a single word, after the method and manner of some supreme painter distinguishing places by the variety of forms.

[206975] 359. But the memory of words, which is less necessary to us, is distinguished by a greater variety of images; for there are many words which, as joints, connect the members of speech, which can be fashioned by no likeness; of these images must be fashioned by us, which we may always use; the memory of things is the orator's own; this we can mark by single persons well placed, so that we may grasp thoughts by images, order by places.

[207413] 360. Nor is that true which is said by the slothful, that memory is overwhelmed by the weight of images and that even that is obscured which by itself nature could have held: for I myself have seen the greatest men and of well-nigh divine memory, at Athens Charmadas, in Asia Metrodorus of Scepsis, whom they say to be alive today, each of whom used to say that he wrote down, as it were letters in wax, by images in those places which he had, what he wished to remember. Wherefore by this exercise memory is not to be dug out, if it is none by nature; but certainly, if it lies hid, it is to be called forth.

[208024] 361. You have the discourse, long enough, of a man—would that not impudent! Certainly, at least, of one not too modest; who indeed, with you, Catulus, and also with Lucius Crassus listening, have said so many things about the method of speaking; for the age of those young men perhaps ought to have moved me less. But you will surely pardon me, if only you have learned what cause has now impelled me to this loquacity unusual to me.'

[208460] 362. 'For our part,' said Catulus, 'for I answer this both for myself and for my brother, we not only pardon you, but love you and feel great gratitude to you; and as we recognize your humanity and good-nature, so we admire that knowledge and abundance. For my part I think I have even gained this, that I have been relieved of a great error and freed from that wonder, which, with many others, I was always wont to feel—whence was that so great divinity of yours in causes; for I did not think that you had touched those things which I see you to have most diligently learned and gathered from every side, and, taught by practice, partly to have corrected, partly to have approved;

[209144] 363. and not the less do I admire your eloquence, and much more your virtue and diligence; and at the same time I rejoice that the judgement of my mind is approved, who always laid it down that no one can attain the praise of wisdom and of eloquence without the highest zeal and labour and learning. But yet what is that which you said would happen—that we should pardon you, if we knew what cause had impelled you to the discourse? For what other cause is there, except that you wished to humour both us and the zeal of these young men, who listened to you most attentively?'

[209722] 364. Then he said: 'I wished to take away from Crassus all refusal, whom I knew a little while ago to approach this kind of discourse either too modestly or too unwillingly—for I do not wish to say of so pleasant a man too fastidiously. For what will he be able to say? That he is a man of consular and censorian rank? Our case is the same. Or will he bring forward his age? He is four years younger. Or that he does not know these things? Which I learned late, which I caught in haste, which—as they say—at odd hours of leisure, he learned from boyhood, with the highest zeal, under the greatest teachers. I will say nothing of his talent, to which no one was equal: for when I am speaking, no one was ever so contemptuous of himself but that he hoped he could speak either better or in the same way; but when Crassus is speaking, no one was so arrogant as to be confident that he would ever speak in like manner. Wherefore, lest these excellent men have come in vain, let us at length, Crassus, hear you.'

[210731] 365. Then he said: 'Though I should grant that those things are so—which are very much otherwise—what, pray, have you left me today, Antonius, or anyone, that could be said? For I will say truly, most friendly men, what I feel: I have often heard learned men—why do I say often? nay sometimes; for how often could I, who came into the forum as a boy and was never away from it longer than as quaestor? But yet I heard, as I said yesterday, both at Athens, when I was there, most learned men, and in Asia that very Metrodorus of Scepsis, disputing about these very matters; nor indeed did anyone ever seem to me more copious or more subtle in this kind of speaking than this man has been today: but if it were otherwise, and I understood that something had been omitted by Antonius, I should not be so unurbane and well-nigh inhuman as to be reluctant in that which I felt you desired.'

[211618] 366. Then Sulpicius said: 'Have you, then, forgotten, Crassus, that Antonius so divided with you, that he himself should set forth the equipment of the orator, and leave to you its distinction and ornament?' Hereupon he said: 'First, who allowed Antonius both to make the parts and himself to take first whichever he wished? Then, if I rightly understood—since I was listening very gladly—he seemed to me to speak conjointly about both matters.' 'But he,' said Cotta, 'did not touch the ornaments of speech nor that praise from which eloquence found its name.' 'Words, then,' said Crassus, 'Antonius left to me, the matter he himself took.'

[212260] 367. Then Caesar said: 'If—which is the more difficult—he has left that to you, there is cause why we should desire to hear you; but if the easier, there is no cause why you should refuse.' And Catulus said: 'What of that which you said, Crassus—that, if we stayed today at your house, you would humour us—do you think it pertains nothing to your good faith?' Then Cotta, smiling, said: 'I could yield to you, Crassus: but see lest Catulus have brought in something of religion: this is a censor's task, and you see how it befits a man of censorian rank to commit that.' 'Come, then,' said he, 'as you wish. But now indeed, since it is that time of day, I judge that we must rise and rest; in the afternoon, if it is convenient for you, we will say something, unless perchance you prefer to put it off to tomorrow.' All said that they wished to hear, either at once or, if he himself preferred, in the afternoon, yet as soon as possible.