WORK: Brutus  (slug: cicero-marcus-tullius-brutus-be99b0)

CHAPTER: 01-brutus



[109550] 197. how much he said about the authority of his father, who had always maintained that this was the law? how much altogether about preserving the civil law? And when he said all these things both skilfully and knowingly, and likewise briefly and closely and ornately enough and very elegantly, who would there be among the people who would either expect or think that anything could be made better? But indeed, as on the other side Crassus began with a young dandy who, walking on the shore and having found an oar-pin, conceived a desire to build a ship on that account, that Scaevola likewise had from one oar-pin made a centumviral trial of an inheritance: by this beginning, with many thoughts of the same kind following, he delighted and led the minds of all who were present from severity to mirth — which is one of the three things which I said must be accomplished by an orator. Then that the man who had made the will had wished this, had meant this, that in whatever way there should be no son to come into his own guardianship, whether unborn or dead before, Curius should be heir; that most men so write, and that this is valid and always has been valid. Saying these things and many of the kind, he produced belief; which is the second of the three duties of an orator.

[110835] 198. Then he maintained the fair and good intentions and wishes of wills: how great the captiousness in words would be, both in other matters and especially in wills, if intentions were neglected; how great a power Scaevola would assume to himself, if no one should dare to make a will hereafter except according to his opinion. Unfolding these things both weightily and copiously with examples, and with variety, and even laughably and wittily, he stirred such admiration and assent that it seemed no one had spoken on the other side; — this was the third duty of the orator by division, the greatest in kind. Here that judge from the people, who separately had admired the one, would, when he had heard the other, despise his own judgement; but the understanding and learned hearer, listening to Scaevola, would feel that there was a certain richer and more ornate kind of speaking. But when the cause had been pleaded by each, if it were asked which was the better orator, never indeed would the judgement of the wise man differ from the judgement of the crowd.

[111901] 199. In what, then, does the understanding man surpass the unskilled? In a great and difficult thing; if indeed it is great to know by what means is accomplished or lost in speaking that, whatever it is, which either ought to be accomplished by speaking or ought not to be lost. The learned hearer surpasses the unlearned in this too, that often, when two or more orators are approved by the people's judgement, he understands which kind of speaking is best. For that which is not approved by the people cannot be approved even by the understanding hearer. For as from the sound of the strings in the lyre it is wont to be understood how skilfully they have been struck, so from the movement of minds it is discerned what the orator accomplishes in handling them.

[112666] 200. And so the understanding judge of speaking, not sitting by and listening attentively, but at a single glance and in passing, often judges of the orator. He sees the judge yawning, talking with another, sometimes even forming a knot of bystanders, sending to ask the hour, asking the president to dismiss the court: he understands that there is no orator present in that cause who can apply his oratory to the minds of the judges as the hand to the lyre. The same man, if in passing he has seen the judges intent and looking up, so that they seem either to be instructed about the matter and to approve it even by their expression, or, as a bird by some song, to be held, as it were, suspended by the oratory, or — what is most needed — to be more vehemently disturbed by pity, hatred, or some movement of the mind: if, in passing, as I said, he has seen these things, though he has heard nothing, he will surely understand that an orator is at work in that trial and that an oratorical work is being done or is already finished."

[113702] 201. When I had set forth these things, each assented; and I, as if beginning anew, said, "Since, then, all this discourse flowed from Cotta and Sulpicius, when I said that these were most approved by the judgement of those men and of that age, I shall return to them themselves; then I shall pursue the rest in order, as I have begun. Since, then, there are two kinds of good orators — for these are what we are seeking — one of those who speak thinly and closely, the other of those who speak loftily and amply; although that is better which is more splendid and magnificent, yet in good men all things that are of the highest are rightly praised.

[114353] 202. But that close orator must beware of poverty and meagreness, the ample one of an inflated and corrupt kind of oratory. Cotta, then, discovered acutely, spoke purely and fluently; and as, very knowingly, on account of the weakness of his sides, he had relaxed all straining, so to the feebleness of his strength he accommodated his kind of speaking. There was nothing in his oratory but what was genuine, nothing but what was dry and sound; and this was the greatest thing, that, although he could scarcely bend the minds of the judges by force of oratory and did not speak at all in that kind, yet by his handling he impelled them to do the same, moved by him, as those roused by Sulpicius did.

[115054] 203. For Sulpicius was, of all whom at least I have heard, perhaps the most grand and, so to speak, tragic orator. His voice was both great and sweet and splendid; his gesture and the movement of his body so graceful that he nevertheless seemed trained for the forum, not for the stage; his oratory impetuous and fluent, yet not redundant nor overflowing. He wished to imitate Crassus; Cotta preferred Antonius; but from the latter the force of Antonius was absent, from the former the charm of Crassus."

[115560] 204. "O great art!" said Brutus; "if indeed in those men, when they were supreme orators, each lacked one of the two greatest things which the other had." "And in these orators this is to be noted, that they can be supreme who are unlike each other. For nothing was so unlike as Cotta to Sulpicius, and each greatly excelled his equals. Wherefore it is the part of an understanding teacher to see whither each man's nature carries him, and, using that as a guide, so to train him — as it is recorded that Isocrates said, of the very keen talent of Theopompus and the very gentle one of Ephorus, that he applied spurs to the one, reins to the other.

[116210] 205. The speeches of Sulpicius which are in circulation, Publius Cannutius, my contemporary, a man in my judgement most eloquent outside our order, is thought to have written after his death. Of Sulpicius himself there is no speech, and I often heard from him that he was neither accustomed nor able to write. The speech of Cotta for himself under the Varian law, as it is entitled, Lucius Aelius wrote at Cotta's request. He was altogether an excellent man and a Roman knight most honourable among the first, and likewise most learned both in Greek and Latin letters, and lettered and skilled in our antiquity, both in things discovered and in things done and in the old writers. This knowledge our Varro, a man of outstanding talent and of every learning, received from him and increased by himself, and set forth in fuller and more illustrious writings.

[117068] 206. But the same Aelius wished to be a Stoic, and as an orator he never either studied or was one. Yet he wrote speeches for others to deliver; as for Quintus Metellus, for Quintus Caepio, for Quintus Pompeius Rufus — although the latter himself also wrote those which he used for himself, but not without Aelius.

[117384] 207. For at these writings I myself was present, when I was a young man with Aelius and used to hear him very eagerly. But I wonder that Cotta, himself a supreme orator and least inept, was willing for the slight little speeches of Aelius to be thought his own.

[117647] To these two of the same age no third was counted, but Pomponius pleased me most, or rather, displeased me least. There was altogether a place in the greatest causes for no one besides those of whom I spoke above, because Antonius, who was most sought after, was easy in accepting causes; Crassus more fastidious, but he too accepted them. He who had neither of these took refuge generally with Philippus or with Caesar; Cotta and Sulpicius were sought after. So by these six advocates the illustrious causes were pleaded; and there were not so many trials as in our age, nor what now happens, that single causes were defended by several — than which nothing is more faulty.

[118323] 208. We answer those whom we have not heard: in which, first, often one thing was said and another reported to us; then it is of great importance that I should see for myself how my adversary asserts about each matter, and especially how each matter is received. But nothing is more faulty than that, when there ought to be one body of the defence, the cause should arise anew, when it has been concluded by another.

[118741] 209. For of all causes there is one natural beginning, one peroration; the remaining parts, as members each placed in its own place, hold their own force and dignity. And since it is difficult in a long speech not sometimes to say something so that one is inconsistent with oneself, how much more difficult is it to beware of saying anything that is not consistent with the speech of him who spoke before you? But because both the labour is much greater to plead a whole cause than a part, and because more thanks are won if you speak at one time for several, therefore we have gladly adopted this custom.

[119348] 210. There were, however, some to whom Curio seemed the third of that age, because he perhaps used more splendid words and because he spoke Latin not at all badly, owing, I believe, to some domestic usage. For of letters he knew almost nothing; but it is of great importance whom one hears daily at home, with whom one converses from a boy, how fathers, tutors, and even mothers speak. We read the letters of Cornelia, the mother of the Gracchi: it appears that the sons were brought up not so much in the lap as in the speech of their mother. The speech of Laelia, daughter of Gaius, was often heard by us: therefore we saw her tinged with the elegance of her father, and his two daughters the Muciae, whose speech was known to me, and his granddaughters the Liciniae, both of whom we ourselves heard, and the wife of Scipio you too, Brutus, I believe, heard speaking at some time." "Yes indeed, and gladly," said Brutus; "and the more gladly because she was the daughter of Lucius Crassus."

[120342] 212. "What of that Crassus," I said, "the son of that Licinia, who was adopted by the will of Crassus?" "He is said indeed to have been of the highest talent," he said; "and indeed this Scipio, my colleague, seems to me really both to speak and to plead well." "You judge rightly, Brutus," I said. "For his stock is begotten from the very root of wisdom. For we have already spoken of his two grandfathers, Scipio and Crassus, and of his three great-grandfathers, Quintus Metellus, of those famous four sons, Publius Scipio, who from the domination of Tiberius Gracchus, as a private man, reclaimed the commonwealth into liberty, and Quintus Scaevola the augur, who was held most skilled in law and likewise very affable. And how illustrious is the name of his two great-great-grandfathers,

[121134] 213. Publius Scipio, who was twice consul, who was called Corculum, and the other the wisest of all, Gaius Laelius." "O noble stock," he said, "and, as into one tree several kinds are grafted, so into that house the engrafted wisdom of many!" "Similarly, then, I surmise — to compare small things with great — that the house of Curio, although he was left an orphan, was, by his father's example, accustomed to pure speech; and I judge this the more because I have known no one of those at least who were of any account so unlearned, so rude in every kind of honourable arts.

[121711] 214. He had known no poet, had read no orator, had collected no memory of antiquity; he had learned neither public nor private and civil law. Although this indeed was the case in others too, and great orators indeed, whom we saw too little furnished with these arts, such as Sulpicius, such as Antonius. But they nevertheless had that one work of speaking elaborated; and since it consists of five very well-known parts, no one could be utterly nothing in any part of them: for in whichever single one he plainly limped, he could not be an orator; but yet one excelled more in one, another in another.

[122314] 215. Antonius found what needed to be said and how it should be prepared and in what place placed, and embraced these in his memory, but excelled in delivery; and he had some of these on a par with Crassus, some even superior; but the oratory of Crassus shone more. Nor indeed can we say that to Sulpicius or to Cotta or to any good orator any one of those five parts was plainly and utterly lacking.

[122716] 216. And so in Curio this can most truly be judged, that an orator is commended by no one thing more than by the splendour and copiousness of his words. For he was both slow in thinking and disordered in arranging. The remaining two are delivery and memory: in each he stirred the guffaws of those who mocked. His movement was such as both Gaius Julius marked for ever — when, as he swayed his whole body to either side, he asked who was speaking from a boat — and Gnaeus Sicinius, an impure but very ridiculous man; nor was there anything else in him resembling an orator.

[123291] 217. When, as tribune of the commons, he had brought forward the consuls Curio and Octavius, and Curio had said much while his colleague Gnaeus Octavius sat by, who was bound with bandages and smeared with many medicaments on account of the pain in his limbs, Sicinius said: 'Never, Octavius, will you repay thanks to your colleague: who, had he not tossed himself about in his manner, the flies would have eaten you up there today.' His memory was so utterly none that sometimes, when he had proposed three things, he would either add a fourth or look for the third; who, in a private trial, even a very great one, when I had concluded for Titinia, the wife of Cotta, and he was speaking against me for Servius Naevius, suddenly forgot the whole cause, and said that this had been done by the poisons and enchantments of Titinia. Great signs these of a forgetful mind; but nothing is more shameful than that even in his writings he forgot what he had set down a little before — as in that book where he represents himself coming out of the senate and conversing with our Pansa and with the younger Curio, and all that conversation is drawn from the son's inquiry about what had been done in the senate. In which, when Curio inveighed at length against Caesar, and there was a discussion between them, as is the custom of dialogues, since the conversation was begun after the dismissal of the senate which Caesar as consul had held, he censured those things which the same Caesar administered in Gaul a year later and afterwards in the remaining years.

[124845] 219. Then Brutus, wondering, said, "Was there so great a forgetfulness, especially in writing, that not even in reading did he ever perceive how great a disgrace he had committed?" "And what," I said, "Brutus, more foolish than, if he wished to censure those things which he censured, not to set the conversation at a time when the times of those things had already passed? But he so wholly errs that in the same conversation he says that he does not enter the senate while Caesar is consul, and says this as he is going out of the senate while that very man is consul. Now, one who in this part of the mind, which is the guardian of the other parts of the talent, was so feeble that not even in writing did he remember what he had set down a little before — for him it is least to be wondered at that, speaking off-hand, his mind was wont to slip away.

[125700] 220. And so, although he did not lack official position and burned with zeal for speaking, very few causes were brought to him. As an orator, however, he was counted nearest the best of the living of his age, on account of the goodness of his words, as I said before, and a certain ready and flowing quickness. And so I judge that his speeches should nevertheless be looked at. They are indeed rather languid, but yet they can increase and, as it were, nourish that good which we grant was in him in middling measure: which has such force that alone, without the others, it produced in Curio the appearance of some sort of orator. But let us return to our plan.

[126363] 221. In the same number, then, of the same age was Gaius Carbo, the son of that most eloquent man. Not a sufficiently acute orator, but yet counted an orator. There was weight in his words, and he spoke easily, and his oratory had a certain natural authority. More acute was Quintus Varius in finding matter, and no less ready in words; a strong pleader and vehement, and neither poor nor mean in words, and one whom you would plainly dare to call an orator was Gnaeus Pomponius, fighting with his sides, rousing minds, keen, bitter, accusing.

[126908] 222. Much inferior to these was Lucius Fufius, who nevertheless from the accusation of Manius Aquilius had reaped the fruit of his diligence. For your great-uncle Marcus Drusus, a weighty orator only so far as when he spoke about public affairs; and Lucius Lucullus, even acute; and your father, Brutus, quite skilled too both in public and private law; Marcus Lucullus; Marcus Octavius, son of Gnaeus, who was so strong in authority and in speaking that he repealed the Sempronian corn-law by the votes of a crowded people; Gnaeus Octavius, son of Marcus; Marcus Cato the father; and Quintus Catulus the son too — let us lead out of the battle-line, that is, from the courts, and place in the garrisons of the commonwealth, which they can easily satisfy.

[127665] 223. To the same I would refer Quintus Caepio, had he not, too devoted to the equestrian order, dissented from the senate. Gnaeus Carbo, Marcus Marius, and several of the same kind, least worthy of the ears of an elegant assembly, I have known most fitted to turbulent gatherings. In which kind — to disturb here the order of ages — was lately Lucius Quinctius; more suited even to the ears of the unskilled was Palicanus.

[128089] 224. And since mention has been made of this kind, of all the seditious men after the Gracchi Lucius Appuleius Saturninus seemed the most eloquent; yet he caught men more by his appearance and movement and his very dress than by copiousness of speaking or by middling prudence. By far the most wicked since the birth of men was Gaius Servilius Glaucia, but very acute and shrewd and among the foremost ridiculous. He, from the lowest depths both of fortune and of life, in his praetorship would have been made consul, had it been judged lawful for his candidacy to be taken into account. For he both held the commons and had bound the equestrian order to himself by the benefit of a law. He as praetor, on the same day on which Saturninus the tribune of the commons, in the consulship of Marius and Flaccus, was publicly killed; a man most like the Athenian Hyperbolus, whose wickedness the old comedies of the Athenians marked.

[129019] 225. These Sextus Titius followed, a talkative man indeed and acute enough, but so loose and soft in gesture that a certain dance was born, to which dance the name 'Titius' was given. So one must beware of doing anything in pleading or speaking, the imitation of which may be laughed at. But we have gone back to a somewhat earlier age; now let us return to that of which we have spoken a good deal.

[129420] 226. Joined, then, to the age of Sulpicius was Publius Antistius, a quite commendable ranter, who, after he had been silent for many years and had been wont not only to be despised but even mocked, in his tribunate was first approved, pleading the true cause against that extraordinary candidacy of Gaius Julius for the consulship; and the more because, when his colleague that very Sulpicius pleaded the same cause, this man said more and more acute things. And so after his tribunate at first many causes were brought to him, then all the greatest, whatever they were.

[129992] 227. He saw the matter acutely, arranged it diligently, was strong in memory; he used words not indeed ornate but yet not mean; his oratory was ready and ran very easily; and he had a certain bearing, as it were, not inurbane; his delivery limped a little both with a fault of voice and with ineptitudes. He flourished in those times when, between the departure and return of Lucius Sulla, the commonwealth was without law and without any dignity; he was the more approved for this too, that there was a certain solitude of orators in the forum. Sulpicius had fallen, Cotta was away and Curio, of the remaining advocates of that age none was living except Carbo and Pomponius, both of whom he easily surpassed.

[130704] 228. Of a lower age the nearest was Lucius Sisenna, a learned man and devoted to the best studies, speaking good Latin, acquainted with public affairs, not without wit, but neither of much labour nor sufficiently versed in causes; and set between the two ages of Hortensius and Sulpicius, he could neither attain the greater nor had necessarily to yield to the lesser. His whole faculty can be perceived from his history, which, while it easily surpasses all earlier ones, yet shows how far it is from the highest and how this kind of writing is not yet sufficiently illuminated in Latin letters. For the talent of Quintus Hortensius, while a very young man, was at once, like a statue of Phidias, looked upon and approved. He first spoke in the forum in the consulship of Lucius Crassus and Quintus Scaevola, and before these very consuls indeed, and he came away approved by the judgement both of those who were present and of the consuls themselves, who surpassed all in understanding. He was nineteen years old at that time, but died in the consulship of Lucius Paullus and Gaius Marcellus: from which we see that he was in the number of advocates for forty-four years. About this orator we shall say more a little later; but in this place we wished to include his age within the unequal age of the orators. Although this indeed necessarily befell all to whom a somewhat longer life fell, that they were compared both with men much older than themselves and with some considerably younger. As Accius says that under the same aediles both he and Pacuvius produced a play, when the latter was eighty and he himself thirty years old: so

[132343] 230. Hortensius is joined not only with his own equals but with my age and with yours, Brutus, and with one considerably earlier, if indeed he was wont to speak while Crassus was living, and was now even more in vigour when Antonius and Philippus, now an old man, pleaded for the property of Gnaeus Pompeius in that cause, where, though he was a young man, he was the leading speaker; and he had easily come into the number of those whom I placed in the age of Sulpicius, and among his own equals — Marcus Piso, Marcus Crassus, Gnaeus Lentulus, Publius Lentulus Sura — he far excelled, and, having got me as a young man eight years younger than he was himself, he exercised me for many years in the pursuit of the same praise, and together with you, just as I pleaded for many, so he pleaded for Appius Claudius a little before his death.

[133183] 231. You see, then, how we have come to you, the orator, Brutus, with so many orators interposed between our beginning of speaking and yours; of whom, since in this discourse of ours I have resolved to name none of those who were living — lest you should too curiously draw out from me what I judged of each — I shall name those who are now dead." Then Brutus said, "That is not the reason which you give, why you are unwilling to say anything about those who are living." "What, then," I said, "is it?" "I think," he said, "that you fear lest this discourse of yours should leak out through us, and lest those whom you have passed over should be angry with you." "What?" I said; "will you not be able to keep silent?" "We indeed most easily," he said; "but yet I think you prefer to keep silent yourself rather than to try our silence."

[134022] 232. Then I said, "I will speak to you truly, Brutus. I did not think that in this discourse I should come down as far as this age; but the order of the ages so drew the discourse that I have now arrived even at the younger men." "Interpose, then," he said, "any you think fit; then let us return to you and to Hortensius." "Nay rather," I said, "to Hortensius; about myself others shall speak, if any wish." "By no means," he said. "For although you have easily held me by all your discourse, yet it seems to me longer because I am eager to hear about you; and not so much about the virtues of your speaking, which are most known both to all and certainly to me, as because I am eager to learn your steps and, as it were, your progress in speaking."

[134774] 233. "It shall be done as you wish," I said, "since you wish me to be the proclaimer not of my talent but of my labour. But I will interpose, as you please, others, and will begin with Marcus Crassus, who was the equal of Hortensius.

[135009] He, then, moderately furnished with learning, and even more narrowly by nature, by labour and industry and because he brought to bear, for obtaining causes, care too and influence, was for some years among the leading advocates. In his oratory the Latin was good, the words not mean, the matter arranged diligently, no flower however nor any light, great straining of the spirit, little of the voice, everything spoken almost in like fashion and in one manner. For his equal and enemy Gaius Fimbria could not display himself so long; who, saying everything in a loud voice with a certain hurried rush of really good words, yet so raved that you would wonder that the people were doing other things, so that there was a place for a madman among the eloquent. Gnaeus Lentulus, however, by his delivery made a much greater impression of speaking than was the faculty in him; who, although he was neither very acute, although both from his face and from his expression he seemed so, nor abounding in words, although he deceived in this very thing — so by his pauses, exclamations, sweet and melodious voice, and admirable handling, he laughed, he grew warm in pleading, that the things which were lacking were not missed. So, as Curio held the place of an orator by some copiousness of words, with no other good: so Lentulus concealed the middling quality of his other oratorical virtues by delivery, in which he was excellent. And not much otherwise Publius Lentulus, whose slowness both of thinking and of speaking was covered by the dignity of his form, the movement of his body full of both art and grace, and the sweetness and greatness of his voice. So in this man there was nothing besides delivery, the rest even less than in the former.

[136752] 236. Marcus Piso, whatever he had, he had from training, and most of all of those who lived before, he was educated in Greek learning. He had from nature a certain kind of keenness, which he had also polished by art, which was cunning and skilful in faulting words, but often peevish, sometimes frigid, at times even witty. He did not endure the labour of the forum, as a kind of race, very long, because he was both weak in body and did not bear the ineptitudes and follies of men, which must be swallowed by us, and spat them out rather angrily, whether peevishly, as was thought, or with an honest and free disdain. He, after he had flourished sufficiently as a young man, began afterwards to be held of less account. Then from the trial of the Vestals he gained great praise, and from that time, as if recalled into the race, he held his place as long as he could bear the labour; afterwards, as much as he took from his zeal, so much he lost of his glory.

[137714] 237. Publius Murena, of middling talent, but of great zeal for ancient things, both fond of letters and not unskilled, was of much industry and great labour. Gaius Censorinus, learned enough in Greek letters, unfolding readily what he had proposed, not ungraceful a pleader, but inactive and an enemy of the forum. Lucius Turius, of small talent but of much labour, spoke often, in whatever way he could; and so a few centuries were wanting to him for the consulship.

[138183] 238. Gaius Macer always lacked authority, but was a most diligent advocate, well-nigh. If his life, his morals, his very expression had not overturned all the recommendation of his talent, his name among advocates would have been greater. His oratory was not abundant, yet not poor; not very shining, not plainly rough; his voice, gesture, and all his delivery without charm; but in finding and arranging matters a wonderful accuracy, so that I have not easily known a more diligent or greater in anyone — but such that you would call it sooner crafty than oratorical. He, although he was approved even in public causes, yet held a more illustrious place in private ones.

[138856] 239. Then Gaius Piso, a 'stationary' orator and full of conversation, not at all slow in devising, but yet by his expression and dissimulation seemed much more acute than he was. For his equal Manius Glabrio, well trained by the diligence of his grandfather Scaevola, his own sluggish and negligent nature had retarded. Lucius Torquatus too was elegant in speaking, very prudent in judging, in his whole kind very urbane. My equal Gnaeus Pompeius, a man born for all the highest things, would have had a greater glory of speaking, had not the desire of greater glory drawn him away to the praises of war. He was ample enough in oratory, saw the matter prudently; his delivery had both in his voice a great splendour and in his movement the highest dignity.

[139614] 240. Likewise our equal Decimus Silanus, your stepfather, had not much zeal indeed, but enough of keenness and oratory. Quintus Pompeius, son of Aulus, who was called Bithynicus, perhaps older than us by two years, of the highest zeal for learning and much erudition, of incredible labour and industry — which I can know: for he was joined with me and with Marcus Piso both in friendship and in studies and exercises. His delivery did not sufficiently commend his oratory; for in the latter there was copiousness enough, but in the former too little charm.

[140172] 241. His equal was Publius Autronius, of a very keen and great voice but commendable in no other respect, and Lucius Octavius of Reate, who, when he was already pleading many causes, died a young man — yet he came to speaking more boldly than preparedly —; and Gaius Staienus, who had adopted himself and made an Aelius out of a Staienus, of a certain heated and petulant and furious kind of speaking; which, because it was pleasing to many and was approved, he would have ascended to honours, had he not, caught in a manifest crime, paid the penalties to the laws and the court.

[140753] 242. At the same time were the brothers Gaius and Lucius Caepasius, who by much effort, obscure and sudden men, were quickly made quaestors, with a certain provincial and unpolished kind of speaking. Let us add to these too, lest we seem to have passed over anyone vocal, Gaius Cosconius Calidianus, who with no keenness yet exhibited to the people that copiousness of words, if he had any, with much running about and great clamour. The same did Quintus Arrius, who was, as it were, Marcus Crassus's understudy. He ought to be an example to all of how much, in this city, it avails to comply with the convenience of many and to serve the honour or the peril of many.

[141422] 243. For by these things, born in the lowest station, having attained both honours and money and influence, he had come even into some number among advocates — without learning, without talent. But as unexercised boxers, even if, eager for the Olympic games, they can bear blows and strokes, yet often cannot bear the sun, so he, when he had now prosperously discharged every fortune and had taken up even great labours, did not bear, as it were a sun, the severity of that judicial year.

[141912] 244. Then Atticus said, "You are drawing now from the dregs, and have been for a while, but I held my peace; this, however, I did not think — that you would come down even to the Staieni and Autronii." "I do not suppose," I said, "that you think me carried away by partiality, since it is of the dead; but, following the order, I necessarily run into a known and contemporary memory. But I wish this to be perceived: that, all having been sought out who dared to speak among the multitude, very few indeed were worthy of memory, and that those who had any name at all were not so very many. But let us return to our appointed discourse.

[142550] 245. Titus Torquatus, son of Titus, both a learned man from the Rhodian school of Molon and by nature loose and ready enough for speaking — to whom, had life been granted, with bribery removed he would have been made consul — had more faculty for speaking than will. And so he did not satisfy his study, but in his duty he was wanting neither in the causes of his own connections nor in giving his senatorial opinion.

[142969] 246. Marcus Pontidius too, our townsman, regularly pleaded many private causes, rolling out his words quite quickly and not dull in causes, or rather I would say more than not dull, but boiling over in speaking often too vehemently with bile and anger; so that he often strove in altercation not only with his adversary but even, what was wonderful, with the judge himself, whose soother the orator ought to be. Marcus Messalla, younger than us, by no means poor, but not too ornate in his kind of words; prudent, acute, a least incautious advocate, diligent in learning and arranging causes, of great labour, of much effort and of many causes.

[143615] 247. The two Metelli too, Celer and Nepos, somewhat engaged in causes, neither without talent nor unlearned, had attained this popular kind of speaking. Gnaeus Lentulus Marcellinus, however, was never without speech and in his consulship seemed very eloquent, not slow in thoughts, not poor in words, of melodious voice, witty enough. Gaius Memmius, son of Lucius, perfect in letters, but Greek, quite fastidious of Latin ones, a pointed orator and sweet in words, but, fleeing the labour not only of speaking but even of thinking, took as much from his own faculty as he diminished of his industry.

[144216] 248. At this point Brutus said, "How I could wish that it pleased you to speak to me about those orators too who are alive today; and, if less about others, yet about the two whom I know you are wont to praise, Caesar and Marcellus, I would hear no less gladly than I have heard about those who have been." "Why, pray?" I said; "do you wait to hear what I judge about those who are equally known to you and to me?" "Marcellus, by Hercules," he said, "is well enough known to me,

[144696] 249. but Caesar too little; for the former I have often heard, while the latter, when I could now judge something, was away." "What, then, do you judge about him," I said, "whom you have often heard?" "What do you think," he said, "except that which you are about to have — one like yourself?" "Indeed," I said, "if it is so, I should wish him to please you as much as possible." "And so it is," he said, "and he pleases me vehemently; nor indeed without cause. For he both learned, and, the other studies laid aside, gave himself to this one thing alone, and exercised himself most keenly with daily rehearsals.

[145310] 250. And so he both uses choice words and frequent thoughts, and by the splendour of his voice and the dignity of his movement what he says is made specious and brilliant, and everything is so at hand that I think no virtue of an orator is lacking to him; and he is most to be praised, who at this very time, so far as is permitted in this our common and, as it were, fatal evil, consoles himself both with the consciousness of an excellent mind and also with the exercise and renewal of learning. For I saw lately at Mytilene a man, and, as I said, I saw plainly a man. And so, as I had before seen him like you in speaking, so now indeed, furnished by that most learned man Cratippus, and, as I understood, most friendly to you, with every copiousness, I saw him much more like."

[146093] 251. Here I said, "Although I gladly hear the praises of an excellent man and most friendly to us, yet I run into the memory of our common miseries, the forgetfulness of which I have sought by prolonging this very conversation. But about Caesar I am eager to hear what after all Atticus may judge." And he said, "You hold to yourself admirably, in being unwilling yourself to say anything about those who are now living; and by Hercules, if you had dealt with them as you have dealt with those who are already dead, so as to pass over no one, you would indeed have run into many Autronii and Staieni. Wherefore, whether you wished to escape this throng, or feared lest anyone might complain that he had either been passed over or not sufficiently praised, you could nevertheless have spoken about Caesar, especially since both your judgement of his talent is most well known, and his judgement of yours not obscure. But yet, Brutus," said Atticus, "about Caesar both I myself so judge, and I very often hear from this most keen assessor of this kind, that he speaks Latin most elegantly of well-nigh all the orators; and that not only by domestic usage, as a while ago we were hearing about the families of the Laelii and the Mucii — but although I believe that too was the case, yet, that the praise of speaking well might be perfected, he has attained it by much study of letters, and those recondite and choice, and by the highest zeal and diligence: who even amid the greatest occupations has written most carefully to you yourself," he said, looking at me, "on the method of speaking Latin, and in his first book has said that the choice of words is the source of eloquence, and has ascribed to this friend of ours" — who preferred that I should speak of him rather than that he should speak of himself — "a singular praise, my Brutus; for he wrote in these words, having addressed him by name: 'And if, that they might express their excellent thoughts, some have laboured with study and practice — of which copiousness you, as well-nigh the chief and the inventor, we ought to judge to have deserved well of the name and dignity of the Roman people — is to have known this easy and everyday speech to be reckoned as a thing left behind?'

[148338] 254. Then Brutus said, "Amicably indeed, by Hercules, and magnificently I think you praised — whom he called not only the chief and inventor of copiousness, which was great praise, but also one who deserved well of the name and dignity of the Roman people. For in that one thing in which we were surpassed by conquered Greece, that has either been wrested from them or at least shared by us with them. This glory and testimony of Caesar," he said, "I prefer not indeed to your supplication, but to the triumphs of many." "And rightly, Brutus," I said; "provided only that this is a testimony of Caesar's judgement, not of his goodwill. For surely he has brought more dignity to this people, whoever he is, if indeed there is anyone, who has not only illuminated but even begotten in this city the copiousness of speaking, than those who stormed the strongholds of the Ligurians: from which there are, as you know, many triumphs.

[149268] 256. But if we wish to hear the truth, setting aside those divine counsels by which the wisdom of generals has often established the safety of the state in war or in peace, a great orator far excels petty generals. 'But a general is of more use.' Who denies it? But yet — I do not fear that you will cry out against me; for this is a place for speaking freely what you feel — I would rather have one speech of Lucius Crassus for Manius Curius than two triumphs over strongholds. 'But it was of more importance to the commonwealth that a stronghold of the Ligurians should be taken than that the cause of Manius Curius should be well defended.'

[149913] 257. I believe it; but to the Athenians too it was of more importance to have firm roofs in their dwellings than the most beautiful statue of Minerva in ivory; yet I would rather be Phidias than even the best carpenter. Wherefore it is not how much each man is of use, but how much each man is worth, that must be weighed; especially since few can paint or model excellently, but workmen and porters cannot be lacking. But proceed, Pomponius, about Caesar, and render what remains."

[150397] 258. "You see," said he, "the very ground and, as it were, foundation of the orator, correct and Latin diction, the praise of which has been hitherto in the hands of those whose praise it was not of method or knowledge, but, as it were, of good habit. I pass over Gaius Laelius and Publius Scipio: that praise of that age was, as of innocence, so of speaking Latin — and yet not of all, for we see their contemporaries Caecilius and Pacuvius speaking badly — but almost all then who had neither lived outside this city nor had been infected by any domestic barbarism, spoke correctly. But this matter at least antiquity has made worse, both at Rome and in Greece. For there flowed together both to Athens and to this city many speaking corruptly from various places. The more must speech be purified, and method applied, as a touchstone, which cannot be changed, and the most perverse rule of habit not be used.

[151310] 259. Titus Flamininus, who was consul with Quintus Metellus, we saw as boys: he was thought to speak good Latin, but he knew no letters. Catulus indeed was by no means unlearned, as was said by you a little before, but yet the sweetness of his voice and the smooth pronunciation of the letters had made the fame of speaking well. Cotta, who by broadening the letters very much had drawn himself away from the likeness of Greek diction, and sounded the opposite of Catulus, something rather rural and plainly rather rustic, had by another, as it were uncultivated and woodland road arrived at the same praise. Sisenna, however, when he wished to be, as it were, a corrector of the customary speech, could not be deterred even by his accuser Gaius Rusius from using unusual words." "What, pray, is that?" said Brutus; "or who is that

[152143] 260. Gaius Rusius?" And he said, "He was an accuser of old, on whose accusation, when Sisenna was defending Gaius Hirtilius, Sisenna said that certain of his charges were 'spit-aroundable.' Then Gaius Rusius said: 'I am circumvented, judges, unless you help me. What Sisenna means I do not know; I fear a trap. Spit-aroundable — what is this? What spit is, I know; aroundable I do not know.' Great was the laughter; but he, my friend, nevertheless thought that to speak unusually was to speak correctly.

[152648] 261. Caesar, however, applying method, corrects faulty and corrupt habit by pure and incorrupt habit. And so when to this elegance of Latin words — which, even if you are not an orator and are a freeborn Roman citizen, is yet necessary — he joins those oratorical ornaments of speaking, then he seems, as it were, to set well-painted pictures in a good light. Since he has this special praise, in the common qualities I do not see to whom he ought to yield. He holds a certain splendid and least crafty method of speaking, magnificent and, in a certain way, noble in voice, movement, and even form."

[153249] 262. Then Brutus said, "His speeches indeed I greatly approve. And I have read several, and also the commentaries which he wrote of his own deeds." "Greatly indeed to be approved," I said; "for they are bare, straight, and graceful, all ornament of oratory stripped away as a garment. But while he wished others to have material ready, from which those who wished to write history might take, he has perhaps done a favour to the inept, who will wish to crimp those with curling-irons: but sane men he has deterred from writing; for nothing is sweeter in history than pure and brilliant brevity. But let us, if you please, return to those who have departed from life.

[153917] 263. Gaius Sicinius, then, the grandson by his daughter of that Quintus Pompeius who was censor, died of quaestorian rank; a commendable orator, nay even an approved one, from this school of Hermagoras, poor for adorning but ready for inventing. It gives sure methods and precepts of speaking, which, if they have less apparatus — for they are meagre — yet have order and certain roads that do not allow one to stray in speaking. Holding these, and coming prepared to causes, not poor in words, by that very equipment and discipline of speaking he had already come into the number of advocates.

[154513] 264. There was also a learned man among the foremost, Gaius Visellius Varro, my cousin, who was joined in age with Sicinius. He, when after the curule aedileship he was judge of an inquiry, died; in whom I confess that the judgement of the crowd dissented from my judgement. For he was not sufficiently saleable to the people: a certain headlong oratory, obscure for this very reason that it was very acute, and rapid and blinded by speed; but I could not quickly name another apter in words nor more frequent in thoughts. Besides, perfect in letters, he held the discipline of civil law already handed down by his father Aculeo. There remain, of those who are dead, Lucius Torquatus, whom you would not so quickly have called a rhetor — although oratory was not lacking — as, as the Greeks say, a politikon. There were in him very many letters, and those not common, but certain deeper and more recondite; a divine memory, the highest both weight and elegance of words; and all these the weight and integrity of his life adorned. Me indeed the oratory of Triarius too, in that age full of lettered old age, greatly delighted. What severity in his face! what weight in his words! how nothing came out of his mouth unconsidered!

[155742] 266. Then Brutus, moved by the mention of Torquatus and Triarius — for he had greatly loved each of them — said, "Indeed I, to omit the rest which are innumerable, when I think of those two, grieve that your perpetual authority on behalf of peace availed nothing! For the commonwealth would not have lost either those excellent men or many other outstanding citizens." "Let us be silent, Brutus," I said, "about those, lest we increase our grief. For both the recollection of things past is bitter, and the expectation of things to come more bitter. And so let us cease to mourn, and only proclaim how much each man could do by speaking, since that is what we seek.

[156409] 267. There are also among those who fell in the same war, Marcus Bibulus, who both wrote carefully, although he was especially no orator, and conducted many things steadfastly; Appius Claudius, your father-in-law, my colleague and friend: he was now both studious enough and a very learned and even practised orator, and well skilled both in augural law and in all public law and in our antiquity. Lucius Domitius spoke indeed with no art, but yet in Latin and with much freedom.

[156890] 268. There were besides two Lentuli of consular rank, of whom that Publius, the avenger of our wrongs, the author of our safety, whatever he had, however much it was, all that he had from training; the instruments of nature were lacking; but there was so great a splendour of mind and so great a greatness that he did not hesitate to claim for himself all the things that belong to illustrious men, and obtained them with every dignity. Lucius Lentulus, however, was a strong enough orator, if only an orator, but did not bear the labour of thinking; his voice melodious, his words not rough indeed, so that his oratory was full of spirit and terror; you would perhaps seek something better in the courts, but in public affairs you would judge that what there was, was enough.

[157668] 269. Nor indeed is Titus Postumius to be despised in speaking; in public affairs indeed he was no less vehement an orator than a warrior, unbridled and too keen, but he had well learned the laws and institutions of public law."

[157897] At this point Atticus said, "I should think you ambitious, if, as you said, those whom you have now for a long time been collecting were living. For you mention all who ever dared to speak standing up, so that you seem to me unwittingly to have passed over Marcus Servilius."

[158174] 270. "I am not ignorant of this, Pomponius," I said, "that there were many who had never uttered a word in public, although they could speak somewhat better than these orators whom I collect; but by mentioning these I attain this also, that you may understand, first, out of all the number, how not many dared to speak, and then, out of these very men, how few were worthy of praise.

[158559] 271. And so I shall not omit even these Roman knights, our friends, who lately died: Publius Cominius of Spoletium, on whose accusation I defended Gaius Cornelius, in whom there was both a composed and a keen and ready kind of speaking; Titus Accius of Pisaurum, to whose accusation I answered for Aulus Cluentius, who both spoke carefully and copiously enough, and was besides learned in the precepts of Hermagoras, by which, although not very rich ornaments of speaking, yet, as javelins fitted with thongs for the light-armed, so certain arguments fitted and ready are handed down for the several kinds of causes.

[159177] 272. And of greater zeal or industry I have known no one, although not even in talent could I easily say who surpassed Gaius Piso, my son-in-law. No time was ever free to him either from forensic pleading or from rehearsal at home or from writing or from thinking. And so he made such great progress that he seemed to fly rather than to run; and there was both an elegant choice of words and a fitting and, as it were, rounded construction; and while many and firm arguments were thought out by him for proving, there were besides neat and acute thoughts; and his gesture by nature so graceful that even art, which there was not, and a certain movement from training, seemed to come to it. I fear lest I may seem from love to say more than there was in him; which is not so; for other and greater things can be said about him. For neither in self-control nor in piety nor in any kind of virtue do I think anyone of the same age to be compared with him.

[160131] 273. Nor indeed do I think Marcus Caelius is to be passed over, whatever his fortune or his mind was at the end; who, as long as he obeyed my authority, was such a tribune of the commons that no one stood more steadfastly against the popular and turbulent madness of abandoned citizens, on behalf of the senate and the cause of the good. His somewhat old-fashioned style of pleading was nevertheless commended much both by splendid and grand oratory and likewise among the foremost witty and very urbane. Some of his harangues were weighty, his accusations keen — three, and all undertaken from a contest of public affairs; his defences, although those things which I mentioned were better in him, were yet not to be despised and quite tolerable. He, when with the highest goodwill of the good he had been made curule aedile, somehow at my departure departed from himself and fell, after he began to imitate those whom he himself had overthrown. But about

[161088] 274. Marcus Calidius let us say something, who was not one orator out of many, but rather among many was almost singular: so did a soft and translucent oratory clothe his recondite and choice thoughts. Nothing so tender as that grouping of his words, nothing so flexible, nothing that was more moulded at his own will, so that it was in the power of no orator equally: which first was so pure that nothing more limpid, so freely it flowed that nowhere did it stick; you would see no word except set in its place and, as it were, constructed in a mosaic inlay, as Lucilius says; nor indeed any word either harsh or unusual or low or drawn out too far; and not the words proper to things, but most of them transferred, yet so that you would say that they had not rushed into another's place but had migrated into their own; nor indeed were these loose or flowing apart, but bound up by rhythm, not openly nor always in the same way but variously and dissemblingly rounded off.

[162064] 275. There were too both of words and of thoughts those lights which the Greeks call schemata, by which, as by ornaments in adornment, his whole oratory was distinguished. And that 'point at issue,' which is included in many places in the formulae of the jurisconsults, he saw where it lay.

[162356] 276. There was added an order of matters full of art, a free delivery, and a whole kind of speaking placid and sound. And if it is best to speak agreeably, there is nothing that you should think better than this to be sought. But since it was said by us a little before that there seem to be three things which an orator ought to accomplish — to instruct, to delight, to move — two he held in the highest degree, both to illustrate the matter by argument and to bind the minds of those who heard with pleasure; that third praise was lacking, by which he should thoroughly move and rouse minds, which we said had the most power; nor was there any force or straining: whether from design, because he judged that those whose oratory was loftier and delivery more ardent were raving and revelling, or because he was not so made by nature, or because he was not accustomed, or because he did not know how. This one thing was absent in him — if it had no usefulness; if it was needed, it was lacking.

[163352] 277. Nay more, I remember that, when in his accusation he had charged Quintus Gallius with having prepared poison for him, and that this had been detected by him, and said that he was bringing forward handwritings, depositions, informations, examinations, the matter manifest, and had argued about that charge carefully and choicely, I, in answering, when I had argued as much as the matter bore, set this very thing also as an argument — that he, when he said that he had discovered the destruction of his own life, the proofs of his death, manifestly, and held them in his hand, had pleaded so loosely, so gently, so yawningly: 'Would you, Marcus Calidius,

[164012] 278. unless you were inventing this, plead in this way? — especially since with that eloquence of yours you are wont most keenly to defend the perils of other men, would you neglect your own? Where is the grief? where the ardour of mind, which is wont to draw out cries and complaints even from the talents of infants? No disturbance of mind, none of body, no striking of the brow, none of the thigh; not even, what is the least thing, a stamping of the foot. And so so far was it from your inflaming our minds, that at that point we could scarcely keep from sleep.' So we used the soundness or the fault of a supreme orator as an argument to dissolve the charge."

[164678] 279. Then Brutus said, "And do we doubt whether that was soundness or a fault? For who would not confess that, since of all the praises of the orator that is by far the greatest — to inflame the minds of the hearers and to bend them in whatever way the matter demands — he who lacked this virtue was lacking in that which was the greatest?" "Let it be so indeed," I said; "but let us return to him who now alone remains, Hortensius, and then we shall say a few words about ourselves, since that too, Brutus, you ask. Although mention is to be made, as at least it seems to me, of two young men, who, had they lived longer, would have attained a great praise of eloquence."

[165352] 280. "You mean," said Brutus, "Gaius Curio and Gaius Licinius Calvus." "You judge rightly," I said; "of whom the one rolled out so easily and fluently thoughts at times acute enough, frequent at least certainly, that nothing could be more ornate, nothing readier. And this man, too little trained by teachers, had an admirable nature for speaking; his industry I have not tried, his zeal certainly there was. Who, had he been willing to hear me, as he had begun, would have preferred to attain honours rather than power." "What, pray," he said, "is that? and how do you distinguish it?" "In this way," I said.

[165963] 281. "Since honour is the reward of virtue conferred upon someone by the judgement and zeal of the citizens, he who has attained it by their opinions, by their votes, seems to me both honourable and honoured. But he who by some chance has obtained command even against the will of his fellow citizens, as that man desired, has, I think, attained the name of honour, not honour. Which, had he been willing to hear, he would have come, with the greatest favour and glory, to the highest greatness, ascending by the steps of the magistracies, as his father had done, as the other more illustrious men. These very things I think I often discussed with Publius Crassus, son of Marcus, too, when at the outset of his age he had betaken himself to my friendship, when I vehemently exhorted him to consider that the straightest road of praise was that which his ancestors had left worn for him.

[166851] 282. For he was both most excellently trained and also perfectly and plainly learned, and there was in him both a talent keen enough and a not inelegant copiousness of oratory; and besides he seemed weighty without arrogance and modest without sloth. But this man too a certain tide of glory unusual for young men absorbed; who, because he had done good service as a soldier to a general, desired at once to be a general himself — an office to which the custom of our ancestors left a fixed age, an uncertain lot. So by his most grievous fall, while he wished to be like Cyrus and Alexander, who had run through their own course, he was found most unlike Lucius Crassus and many Crassi.

[167539] 283. But let us return to Calvus — for he was the one set before us; who was an orator both more learned in letters than Curio, and also brought a certain more careful and more choice kind of speaking; which, although he handled it knowingly and elegantly, yet, too much inquiring into himself and observing himself and fearing lest he should gather something faulty, he lost even the true blood. And so his oratory, attenuated by excessive scruple, was brilliant to the learned and to attentive hearers, but by the multitude and by the forum, for which eloquence was born, was swallowed up.

[168132] 284. Then Brutus said, "Our Calvus wished to be called an Attic orator: thence was that meagreness which he attained of set purpose." "He said so," I said; "but he both erred himself and forced others too to err. For if anyone thinks that those who speak neither ineptly nor odiously nor affectedly speak in the Attic manner, he rightly approves no one except an Attic. For he hates insipidity and extravagance, as a kind of madness of oratory, but approves soundness and integrity, as a kind of scruple and modesty of the orator. This ought to be the same opinion of all orators.

[168714] 285. But if he places meagreness and dryness and poverty, provided only it be polished, provided urbane, provided elegant, in the Attic kind, this is right only so far; but because among the Attics some are better than others, let him beware lest he be ignorant of the degrees and the differences and the force and the variety of the Attics. 'I wish to imitate the Attics,' he says. Which? for there is not one kind. For what is so unlike as Demosthenes and Lysias? as the same and Hyperides? as of all these Aeschines? Whom, then, do you imitate? If someone: did the rest, then, not speak in the Attic manner? if all: how can you, when they themselves are most unlike one another? In which I ask this too — whether that Demetrius of Phalerum spoke in the Attic manner. To me indeed Athens herself seems to breathe from his speeches. But he is more florid, so to speak, than Hyperides, than Lysias: a certain nature or a will of speaking thus there was.

[169669] 286. And indeed there were two at the same time unlike each other, but Attic nevertheless; of whom Charisius was of many speeches, which he wrote for others, when he seemed to desire to imitate Lysias; Demochares, however, who was the son of Demosthenes's sister, both wrote some speeches and wrote out the history of those things which were done at Athens in his own age, not so much in a historical as in an oratorical kind. And Hegesias wishes to be like Charisius, and so thinks himself Attic that he thinks those true Attics almost rustic in comparison with himself.

[170242] 287. But what is so broken, so minced, so puerile in that very neatness which nevertheless he attains? 'We wish to be like the Attics.' Excellent; are these, then, Attic orators? 'Who can deny it? These we imitate.' How — they who are both unlike one another and unlike others? 'We imitate Thucydides,' he says. Excellent, if you think of writing history, not if of pleading causes. For Thucydides was a genuine and even grand narrator of deeds; this forensic, contentious, judicial kind he did not handle. But the speeches which he interposed — for there are many — those I am wont to praise; to imitate I could not, if I wished, nor would I perhaps, if I could. As if someone delights in Falernian wine, but neither so new that he would wish it born in the last consulship, nor again so old that he would seek a consul Opimius or Anicius — 'and yet these vintages are the best,' I believe; but excessive age has not that sweetness which we seek, nor is it now really tolerable —

[171224] 288. would he, then, who feels this, if he wished to drink, think he must draw for himself from the vat? By no means; but let him follow a certain age. So I should advise those men that both this new oratory, as it were hot from the must and the vat, is to be fled, and that excellent one of Thucydides, too old, like the Anician vintage, is not to be pursued. For Thucydides himself, had he lived later, would have been much riper and milder. 'Let us, then, imitate Demosthenes.' O good gods; what else, I ask, do we do, or what else do we wish? But we do not attain it. For these our Attics, forsooth, attain what they wish.

[171852] 289. They do not even understand this — not only that it is so recorded, but that it was necessarily so, that, when Demosthenes was about to speak, gatherings for the sake of hearing took place from all Greece. But when these Attics speak, they are left not only by the bystanders — which is itself pitiable — but even by their own supporters. Wherefore if to speak narrowly and meagrely is the mark of the Attics, let them indeed be Attic; but let them come into the comitium, let them speak before a standing judge: the benches demand a grander and fuller voice.

[172418] 290. I wish this to fall to the orator's lot — that when it has been heard that he is about to speak, a place on the benches is taken, the tribunal is filled, the clerks are obliging in giving and yielding a place, the throng manifold, the judge erect; when he who is about to speak rises, silence is signified by the throng, then frequent assents, many expressions of admiration; laughter when he wishes, weeping when he wishes: so that he who sees these things from afar, even if he does not know what is being done, understands nevertheless that he is pleasing, and that a Roscius is on the stage. He to whose lot these things fall, know that he speaks in the Attic manner, as we hear of Pericles, as of Hyperides, as of Aeschines, and indeed of Demosthenes himself most of all.

[173201] 291. But if they approve an acute, prudent, and likewise genuine and solid and dried-up kind of oratory, and do not use that weightier oratorical ornament, and wish this to be the property of the Attics, they praise rightly. For in an art so great and so varied there is a place even for this minute subtlety. So it will come about that not all who speak in the Attic manner speak likewise well, but that all who speak well speak likewise in the Attic manner too. But let us return again to Hortensius."

[173706] 292. "Certainly indeed," said Brutus; "although that digression of yours from the proposed discourse was most pleasant to me." Then Atticus said, "Several times I have attempted to, but I was unwilling to interrupt. Now, since your discourse seems already to look toward concluding, I shall say, I think, what I feel." "Do indeed, Titus," I said. Then he said, "I think that irony which they say was in Socrates, which he uses in the books of Plato and Xenophon and Aeschines, witty and elegant. For it is the mark both of a least inept man and likewise of a witty one, when there is a dispute about wisdom, to take this away from himself, to ascribe it, mocking, to those who arrogate it to themselves — as in Plato Socrates extols to heaven with praises Protagoras, Hippias, Prodicus, Gorgias, and the rest, but feigns himself ignorant and rude in all things. This somehow becomes him, nor do I agree with Epicurus, who censures it. But in history, which you have used in your whole discourse, when you set forth what kind of orator each man was, see, pray," he said, "lest irony be as much to be censured as in giving testimony." "To what end is that?" I said; "for I do not understand.

[174897] 293. Because, first," he said, "you praised certain orators in such a way that you could lead the inexperienced into error. For my part, in some cases I could scarcely keep from laughing, when you compared to the Attic Lysias our Cato — a great man, by Hercules, or rather a supreme and singular man — no one will say otherwise — but an orator? but even like Lysias? than whom nothing can be more polished. A pretty irony, if we were jesting; but if we are asserting, see lest scruple be as much to be applied by us as if we were giving testimony.

[175446] 294. For I approve your Cato as a citizen, as a senator, as a general, as a man, in short, excellent both in prudence and diligence and in every virtue; his speeches I greatly praise for those times — for they signify a certain form of talent, but very unpolished and plainly rude — but when you said that his Origins were crammed with all the praises of an orator, and compared Cato with Philistus and Thucydides, did you think you would approve that to Brutus or to me? For to those whom not even any of the Greeks can imitate, you compare a man of Tusculum not yet even suspecting what it was to speak copiously and ornately.

[176076] 295. You praise Galba. If as the leading man of that age, I assent — for so we have been told —; but if as an orator, produce, pray, his speeches — for there are some — and say that this Brutus, whom you love more than yourself, you wish to speak in that manner. You approve the speeches of Lepidus — here, Paulus, I assent to you, provided you praise them as ancient; which likewise I say of Africanus, of Laelius, than whose oratory you say nothing can be made sweeter, and you add too something or other more solemn. You catch us with the name of a supreme man and with most true praises of a most elegant life. Remove these: lest that sweet oratory be so mean that no one would wish to look at it.

[176779] 296. I know that Carbo was held among the supreme orators; but, as in other things so in speaking, what is now the best, that, of whatever kind it is, is wont to be praised. I say the same of the Gracchi, although about them those things have been said by you to which I assent. I pass over the rest; I come to those in whom you think eloquence now perfected, whom I have heard, without dispute great orators, Crassus and Antonius. To their praises I wholly assent to you, but yet not in that manner: as Lysippus said that the Doryphorus of Polyclitus was his master, so you say that the advocacy of the Servilian law was your mistress; this is genuine irony. Why I think so I shall not say, lest you think I am flattering you.

[177508] 297. I pass over, then, what you said about these very men, what about Cotta, what about Sulpicius, what just now about Caelius. For these were certainly orators; but how great and of what kind, you may see for yourself. For that I care less about — that you have heaped together all the workmen; so that some seem to me to have wished to die, in order to be entered by you in the number of orators." When he had said this: "You have set in motion the beginning of a long discourse, Atticus," I said, "and have stirred a matter worthy of a new disputation, which let us put off to another time.

[178104] 298. For the books both of others and especially of Cato are to be turned over. You will understand that nothing was lacking to his outlines except the bloom and colour of those pigments which had not yet been discovered. For about the oratory of Crassus I judge thus, that he himself perhaps could have written better, but no one else, as I think. For in this you would not take me to be an ironist, because I have said that that speech was my mistress. For although you yourself seem to judge better of that faculty, if any, which we now have, yet as young men we had nothing in the Latins rather to imitate.

[178716] 299. But that more were named by me, this pertained to it, as I said a little before, that I wished it to be understood, in that which all were most eager for, how few came out worthy of the name. Wherefore I would not have myself thought an ironist, not even if Africanus was one, as Gaius Fannius says in his history." "As you will," said Atticus. "For I did not think it foreign to you, what had been both in Africanus and in Socrates."

[179157] 300. Then Brutus said, "About that later; but you," he said, looking at me, "will you set forth for us the old speeches?" "Indeed, Brutus," I said; "but at my place at Cumae or at Tusculum at some time, if only it shall be permitted, since in each place we are neighbours. But now let us return to that from which we digressed.

[179486] 301. Hortensius, then, when as a quite young man he had begun to speak in the forum, was quickly taken up for greater causes: and although he had fallen upon the age of Cotta and Sulpicius, who were ten years older, with Crassus and Antonius then excelling, then Philippus, afterwards Julius, with these very men his glory of speaking was compared. First, a memory so great as I think I have known in no one, that what he had rehearsed with himself, that he rendered without writing in the same words in which he had thought it. This aid he used, so great, in such a way that he remembered both his own things rehearsed and written, and, with no one prompting, all that all his adversaries had said.

[180187] 302. And he burned with eagerness so that in no one have I ever seen a more flaming zeal. For he allowed no day to pass without either speaking in the forum or rehearsing outside the forum. Very often, however, he did both on the same day. And he had brought a by no means common kind of speaking; two things indeed which no one else: divisions of the matters about which he was to speak, and recapitulations, mindful both of what had been said against him and of what he himself had said.

[180678] 303. He was elegant in the splendour of his words, apt in arrangement, copious in faculty; and these he had attained both by the highest talent and by the greatest exercises. He embraced the matter from memory, divided it acutely, and passed over almost nothing that was in the cause either for confirming or for refuting. His voice melodious and sweet, his movement and gesture had even more art than was enough for an orator. While he, then, was flourishing, Crassus died, Cotta was driven out, the courts were interrupted by the war, and we came into the forum.

[181244] 304. Hortensius in the war was in the first year a soldier, in the second a military tribune; Sulpicius a lieutenant; Marcus Antonius too was away; the courts were exercised by the one Varian law, the rest interrupted on account of the war; at which I was frequently present, although the orators pleaded for themselves not indeed leading ones, Lucius Memmius and Quintus Pompeius, but orators nevertheless, with the eloquent witness, at any rate, Philippus, in whose testimony the straining had both the force and the copiousness of an accuser.

[181791] 305. The rest who were then counted leading men were in magistracies and were heard by us almost daily in the assemblies. For the tribune of the commons then was Gaius Curio, although he indeed was silent, as he had once been left by an entire assembly; Quintus Metellus Celer, not indeed an orator, but yet not without speech; but eloquent were Quintus Varius, Gaius Carbo, Gnaeus Pomponius, and these indeed dwelt on the Rostra; Gaius Julius too, the curule aedile, held almost daily carefully prepared assemblies. But me, most eager to hear, the first grief struck, when Cotta was expelled. Frequently hearing the rest, I was held by a most keen zeal, and daily both writing and reading and rehearsing I was not content with oratorical exercises alone. Now in the following year Quintus Varius, condemned by his own law, had departed;

[182630] 306. but I gave much labour to the study of civil law with Quintus Scaevola, son of Quintus, who, although he gave himself to no one for teaching, yet, by answering those who consulted him, taught those eager to hear. And the year next to this was that of the consuls Sulla and Pompeius. Then we came thoroughly to know the whole kind of speaking of Publius Sulpicius, haranguing daily in his tribunate; and at the same time, when Philo, the head of the Academy, with the optimates of the Athenians, had fled from home in the Mithridatic war and had come to Rome, I gave myself wholly to him, roused by a certain admirable zeal for philosophy, in which I dwelt the more attentively — although the variety and great magnitude of the matters themselves held me with the highest delight — because the method of the courts seemed now to have been taken away for ever.

[183495] 307. Sulpicius had fallen that year, and in the next three orators of three ages had been most cruelly killed, Quintus Catulus, Marcus Antonius, Gaius Julius. In the same year too at Rome we gave our attention to Molon of Rhodes, both a supreme pleader of causes and a teacher. These things, although they seem to be foreign to the proposed discourse, are nevertheless brought forward by me for this reason — that you may be able to discern our course, since you wished it, Brutus — for to Atticus these things are known — and to see how, in the race, we followed Quintus Hortensius in his very footsteps. For nearly three years the city was without arms, but by the death or departure or flight of the orators — for the young men Marcus Crassus and the two Lentuli were also away — Hortensius pleaded the first parts in causes; Antistius was more and more approved daily, Piso spoke often, Pomponius less often, Carbo rarely, Philippus once or twice. But I at all this time, nights and days, was engaged in the meditation of all the disciplines.

[184543] 309. I was with the Stoic Diodotus, who, when he had dwelt with me and lived with me, lately died in my house. By him I was exercised, both in other things and most eagerly in dialectic, which is to be thought, as it were, a contracted and compressed eloquence; without which even you, Brutus, have judged that you could not attain that genuine eloquence, which they think to be dialectic dilated. To this teacher and to his various and many arts I was nevertheless so devoted that no day was free from oratorical exercises.

[185069] 310. I rehearsed, declaiming — for so they now speak — often with Marcus Piso and with Quintus Pompeius or with someone daily, and I did this much in Latin too, but more often in Greek, either because Greek oratory, supplying more ornaments, brought a habit of speaking similarly in Latin, or because by the supreme Greek teachers, unless I spoke Greek, I could neither be corrected nor taught.

[185465] 311. Meanwhile there was tumult in the recovery of the commonwealth and the cruel death of the three orators Scaevola, Carbo, Antistius, the return of Cotta, Curio, Crassus, the Lentuli, Pompeius, the laws and courts established, the commonwealth recovered; but from the number of orators Pomponius, Censorinus, Murena were taken away. Then first we began to come to causes both private and public, not in order to learn in the forum, which most did, but in order that, as much as we could accomplish, we might come into the forum already learned.

[186014] 312. At the same time we gave our attention to Molon; for, in the dictatorship of Sulla, he had come as a lieutenant to the senate about the rewards of the Rhodians. And so our first public cause, pleaded for Sextus Roscius, had so much of commendation that there was none which did not seem worthy of our advocacy. Then thereafter many, which we brought diligently elaborated and, as it were, worked out by lamplight.

[186434] 313. Now, since you seem to wish to know me not by some mole or rattle but by the whole body, I shall embrace some things too which may perhaps seem less necessary. There was at that time in me the highest slenderness and weakness of body, a long and thin neck: which habit and which figure are thought not to be far from peril of life, if labour and a great straining of the sides is added. And this moved the more those to whom I was dear, because I said everything without remission, without variety, with the highest force of voice and straining of the whole body.

[187004] 314. And so, when both friends and physicians urged me to cease pleading causes, I thought that any peril whatever was rather to be undergone than that I should depart from the hoped-for glory of speaking. But since I judged that by remission and moderation of the voice and by changing the kind of speaking I could both avoid the peril and speak more temperately, that I might change my habit of speaking was the cause of my setting out into Asia. And so, when I had been engaged in causes for two years and my name was now celebrated in the forum, I set out from Rome.

[187576] 315. When I had come to Athens, I was six months with Antiochus, the most noble and most prudent philosopher of the Old Academy, and the study of philosophy, never interrupted and cultivated from earliest youth and always increased, I renewed again with this supreme author and teacher. At the same time, however, at Athens with Demetrius the Syrian, an old and not ignoble teacher of speaking, I was wont to be exercised eagerly. Afterwards all Asia was traversed by me, with the supreme orators indeed, with whom I was exercised, they themselves being willing; of whom the chief was Menippus of Stratonicea, in my judgement in all Asia in those times the most eloquent; and, if to have nothing of the troubles and ineptitudes of the Attics is to be Attic, this orator can rightly be numbered among them.

[188383] 316. But most constantly with me was Dionysius of Magnesia; there was also Aeschylus of Cnidos, and Xenocles of Adramyttium. These were then counted the chief of the rhetors in Asia. Not content with whom, I came to Rhodes and applied myself to the same Molon whom I had heard at Rome, both an outstanding pleader in real causes and a writer, and most prudent in marking and noting faults and in training and teaching. He gave his attention, if only he could attain it, to repressing us, too redundant and overflowing with a certain juvenile licence and unrestraint of speaking, and to confining us, as it were flowing beyond our banks. So I returned, two years later, not only more practised but almost changed. For both the excessive straining of the voice had subsided and the oratory had, as it were, boiled down, and strength had come to the sides and a moderate habit to the body.

[189271] 317. Two orators then excelled who might rouse me with a desire of imitating them, Cotta and Hortensius; of whom the one was relaxed and gentle and embracing the thought loosely and easily in proper words, the other ornate, keen, and not such as you, Brutus, knew him, already fading, but more excitable in his kind of words and delivery. And so I judged that my business was rather with Hortensius, both because in ardour of speaking I was nearer and in age more closely joined. For indeed I had seen, in the same causes — as for Marcus Canuleius, for the consular Gnaeus Dolabella — that, although Cotta had been employed as the leading man, yet Hortensius pleaded the first parts. For a keen orator, kindled and active and melodious, the concourse of men and the noise of the forum demands.

[190066] 318. For one year, then, when we had returned from Asia, we pleaded noble causes, while I was seeking the quaestorship, Cotta the consulship, Hortensius the aedileship. Meanwhile the Sicilian year received me as quaestor, Cotta set out from his consulship into Gaul, Hortensius both was and was held the leading man. But when, a year later, I had returned from Sicily, that thing in me, whatever it was, now seemed to be perfected and to have a certain maturity of its own. I seem to say too much about myself, especially as I am myself the one; but the purpose of all this discourse is not that you should perceive my talent and eloquence, from which I am far, but my labour and industry.

[190757] 319. When, then, I had been engaged for nearly five years in very many causes and among the leading advocates, then in my Sicilian advocacy I came into the greatest contest, as aedile-elect with the consul-elect Hortensius. But since all this discourse of ours requires not only an enumeration of orators but also certain precepts, what is, as it were, to be marked and noted in Hortensius may be briefly said.

[191169] 320. For he, after his consulship — I believe because he saw that none of the consulars was to be compared with him, and neglected those who had not been consuls — relaxed that highest zeal of his with which from a boy he had been kindled, and in the abundance of all things wished to live more happily, as he himself thought, certainly more relaxedly. The first and second and third year had taken away just so much, as it were, from the colour of an old picture, as not any one of the people, but a learned and understanding assessor could perceive. Proceeding further, however, as in the other parts of eloquence, so most of all sticking in the swiftness and continuation of words, he seemed to become daily more unlike himself.

[191902] 321. But we did not cease, both with every kind of exercise and most of all with the pen, to increase that thing of ours, whatever it was, however much it was. And, to omit many things in this interval and in these years after the aedileship, I was made both praetor first and, with incredible goodwill of the people, consul. For both on account of my assiduity in causes and my industry, and on account of a more choice and least common kind of oratory, I had turned the minds of men to me by the novelty of my speaking.

[192425] 322. I shall say nothing about myself: I shall speak of the rest, of whom there was no one who seemed to have studied letters, in which the source of perfect eloquence is contained, more choicely than the common run of men; no one who had embraced philosophy, the mother of all well-done deeds and well-said words; no one who had learned the civil law, a thing most necessary for private causes and for the prudence of the orator; no one who held the memory of Roman affairs, from which, if ever there were need, he might raise from the dead the most wealthy witnesses; no one who, briefly and pointedly, his adversary mocked, could relax the minds of the judges and lead them for a while from severity to mirth and laughter; no one who could dilate, and lead the oratory from a proper and definite discussion of a person and a time to a common question of the whole kind; no one who, for the sake of delighting, could digress for a little from the cause; no one who could lead the judge greatly to anger, no one who could lead him to weeping; no one who could impel his mind — which alone is most especially the property of the orator — in whatever direction the matter demanded.

[193607] 323. And so, when Hortensius had now almost faded away, and I had been made consul in my own year, but in the sixth after he was consul, he began to recall himself to industry, lest, when we were equal in honour, I should seem to be superior in some respect. So for twelve years after my consulship we were engaged most closely together in the greatest causes, while I preferred him to myself, and he me to himself; and my consulship, which at first had lightly grazed him, the same had joined us by the praise of my deeds, which he admired.

[194150] 324. But the practice of each of us was most especially perceived a little before this pursuit of ours, terrified by arms, Brutus, suddenly fell silent and grew dumb: when, under the Pompeian law with three hours given for speaking, we came new every day to causes most like one another, or rather the very same. At which causes you too, Brutus, were present, and pleaded several both with us and alone, so that Hortensius, though he did not live long enough, yet completed this course: he began to plead causes sixteen years before you were born; the same man, in his sixty-fourth year, very few days before his death, together with you defended your father-in-law Appius. But what the kind of speaking was in each, the speeches of each will show even to our posterity.

[194922] 325. But if we ask why Hortensius flourished more in speaking as a young man than as an older one, we shall find two most true causes. The first, that his kind of oratory was Asiatic, more granted to youth than to old age. Now there are two kinds of Asiatic diction: one sententious and pointed, with thoughts not so much weighty and severe as neat and graceful, such as Timaeus in history, but in speaking, when we were boys, Hierocles of Alabanda, and even more his brother Menecles, of both of whom the speeches are among the foremost praiseworthy in the Asiatic kind. The other kind is not so much crowded with thoughts as winged and impetuous in words, such as is now all Asia, and not only in the flow of oratory, but also in an embellished and witty kind of words, in which were Aeschylus of Cnidos and my contemporary Aeschines of Miletus. In these there was an admirable run of oratory, but the ornate neatness of thoughts there was not.

[195870] 326. But these kinds of speaking, as I said, are fitter for young men; in old men they have no weight. And so Hortensius, flourishing in each kind, raised loud applause as a young man. For he had both that Meneclean zeal for frequent and graceful thoughts — in which, as in that Greek, so in him there were certain thoughts more graceful and sweet than either necessary or sometimes useful — and his oratory was both impetuous and vibrant and also careful and polished. These things were not approved by old men — I often saw Philippus both mocking and even growing angry and peevish — but young men admired, the multitude was moved. He was excellent in the judgement of the crowd and easily held the first place as a young man. For although that kind of speaking had too little of authority, yet it seemed suited to his age. And certainly, because both a certain form of talent shone out and a perfect exercise of words bound up in a compact grouping, he excited the highest admiration of men. But when now honours and that older authority required something weightier, he remained the same, and the same did not become him; and because he had let go his exercise and zeal, which in him had been most keen, that former neatness and frequency of thoughts remained, but it was not adorned with that dress of oratory with which he had been wont. This, perhaps, Brutus, pleased you less than it would have pleased, if you had been able to hear him flaming with zeal and flourishing in faculty."

[197363] Then Brutus said, "For my part I both see of what kind those things are which you say, and I always thought Hortensius a great orator, and most especially approved him speaking for Messalla, when you were away." "So they report," I said, "and his speech, written, as they say, in just as many words as he spoke, declares it. Therefore he flourished from the consulship of Crassus and Scaevola down to the consuls Paullus and Marcellus; we were in the same course from the dictatorship of Sulla to nearly the same consuls. So the voice of Quintus Hortensius was extinguished by his own fate, ours by the public fate.

[197980] 329. "Make a better omen, pray," said Brutus. "Let it be indeed as you wish," I said, "and that not so much for my sake as for yours; but fortunate was his end, who did not see, when they happened, those things which he foresaw would come. For often between ourselves we bewailed the impending disasters, when we saw the causes of civil war shut up in the desires of private men, and the hope of peace shut out from the public counsel. But his own good fortune, which he always enjoyed, seems to have rescued him by death from those miseries which followed.

[198539] 330. But we, Brutus, since after the death of Hortensius, that most illustrious orator, we have been left as the, as it were, guardians of orphaned eloquence, let us keep her at home, hedged about with a free protection, and let us repudiate these unknown and shameless suitors, and guard her as a grown maiden, chastely, and as far as we can keep her from the assault of lovers. For my part, although I grieve that I entered upon life a little too late, as it were upon a road, and, before the journey was completed, fell into this night of the commonwealth, yet I am sustained by that consolation which you, Brutus, applied to me in your most pleasant letter, in which you judged that I ought to be of brave spirit, because I had done those things which would speak of me even with me silent, and would live when I was dead; which, if all went rightly, by the safety of the commonwealth, but if otherwise, by its very destruction, would give testimony of my counsels concerning the commonwealth.

[199538] 331. But looking on you, Brutus, I grieve — you, whose youth, as it rode, as it were, in a four-horse chariot through the midst of praises, the cross-blow of the commonwealth's wretched fortune has run athwart. This grief touches me, this care troubles me, and this man with me, the partner of the same love and judgement. We favour you, we desire that you may enjoy your virtue, we wish for you that commonwealth in which you may be able to renew and increase the memory of two most distinguished families. For yours was that forum, yours that course; you had come there, you alone, who had not only sharpened your tongue by the practice of speaking, but had also enriched eloquence itself with the equipment of weightier arts, and by those same arts had joined every glory of virtue with the highest praise of eloquence.

[200362] 332. From you a twofold anxiety afflicts us — that you yourself are deprived of the commonwealth and it of you. Yet you, Brutus, although this untimely calamity of the state checks the course of your talent, hold yourself to your perennial studies, and accomplish that which you had now well-nigh, or rather plainly, accomplished — that you may rescue yourself from that throng of advocates which I have gathered into this discourse. For it does not befit you, adorned with the richest arts, which, since you could not draw them from home, you summoned from that city which has always been held the home of learning, to be numbered among the common crowd of advocates. For why did Pammenes, by far the most eloquent man of Greece, train you? why that old Academy and its heir Aristus, my host and friend, if indeed we are going to be like the greater part of orators?

[201231] 333. Do we not see that scarcely in single ages have two praiseworthy orators stood forth? Galba was, among so many of his contemporaries, the one outstanding man, to whom, as we have been told, both the elder Cato yielded and those who were younger in those times — Lepidus afterwards, then Carbo; for the Gracchi in their harangues with a far easier and freer kind of speaking, although even to their age the praise of eloquence had not yet been perfected; Antonius, Crassus, after them Cotta, Sulpicius, Hortensius. I say no more, I only say this: if it had befallen me to be numbered among the many . . . if the running-about of the more opportune is laborious . . .