WORK: On the Nature of the Gods  (slug: cicero-marcus-tullius-on-the-nature-of-the-gods-3ef991)

CHAPTER: 02-book-2



[110139] 144. The hearing, moreover, is always open, for we need its sense even when asleep, and when a sound has been received by it we are roused even from sleep. It has a winding passage, lest anything should be able to enter if it lay open simple and straight; and provision was made too that, if any tiny creature should try to break in, it should stick fast in the dirt of the ears as in birdlime. But on the outside project what are called the ears, both made for covering and protecting the sense, and lest the voices that strike should slip away and wander before the sense had been struck by them. But they have entrances hard and as it were horny and with many windings, because by these natures the sound carried back is amplified; wherefore in the lyre too there is resonance from the shell or from horn, and from winding and enclosed places things are echoed back more fully.

[111021] 145. Likewise the nostrils, which, on account of necessary uses, are always open, have narrower entrances, lest anything that might harm should be able to pass into them; and they always have a moisture not useless for driving off dust and many other things. The taste is excellently fenced; for it is contained in the mouth, both aptly for use and for the keeping of safety. And all the senses of men far surpass the senses of the beasts. For first, in those arts of which the judgement belongs to the eyes — in painted, modelled, and engraved forms, and also in the motion and gesture of bodies — the eyes discern many things more subtly; and the eyes judge also the charm and order, and, so to say, the seemliness of colours and shapes; and even greater things: for they know both virtues and vices; they know the angry and the propitious, the rejoicing and the grieving, the brave and the cowardly, the bold and the timid.

[111949] 146. And of the ears likewise there is a kind of wonderful and skilful judgement, by which is judged, in the songs of voice and pipe and string, the variety of sounds, the intervals, the distinctness, and the very many kinds of voice — tuneful and dull, smooth and rough, deep and shrill, flexible and hard — which are judged by the ears of men alone. And of the nostrils likewise, and of taste, and in part of touch, there are great judgements. And for the taking and full enjoyment of these senses, more arts even than I could wish have been discovered; for it is plain to what lengths the compoundings of perfumes, the seasonings of foods, the allurements of bodies have advanced.

[112634] 147. Now the very mind and intellect of man, his reason, counsel, prudence — whoever does not perceive that these have been perfected by divine care, he seems to me to lack these very things. While I discuss this, I could wish that your eloquence, Cotta, were given me. For in what fashion would you set forth how great, first, is the intelligence in us, then the joining and grasping of consequences along with their first principles; from which, of course, we judge what is brought about from what causes, and conclude this by reason, and define single things and grasp them within a circumscribing bound; from which is understood what force knowledge has and of what kind it is, than which not even in god is there anything more excellent. But how great are those things which you Academics weaken and do away with — that both by the senses and by the mind we perceive and grasp the things that are outside us;

[113549] 148. from which, compared and matched among themselves, we also form arts, some necessary for the use of life, some for delight. And again, that mistress of things, as you are wont to say, the power of speaking, how splendid it is and how divine! Which first brings it about that we can both learn the things we do not know and teach others the things we know; then by this we exhort, by this we persuade, by this we console the afflicted, by this we lead the terrified away from fear, by this we restrain the exultant, by this we quench desires and angers; this has bound us together by the fellowship of law, of statutes, of cities; this has separated us from a savage and brutish life.

[114239] 149. And for the use of speech it is incredible, unless you attend diligently, how great works Nature has contrived. For first the windpipe reaches from the lungs to the inmost mouth, through which the voice, taking its beginning from the mind, is received and poured forth. Then in the mouth is set the tongue, bounded by the teeth; it shapes and limits the voice poured forth without measure, and makes the sounds of the voice distinct and pressed, when it strikes both the teeth and other parts of the mouth; and so our people are wont to call the tongue like a plectrum, the teeth like strings, the nostrils like the horns which resound to the strings in songs.

[114906] 150. And how apt, and how serviceable for many arts, are the hands which Nature gave to man! For the bending of the fingers is easy, and easy their stretching, on account of the soft joints and articulations, and they labour in no motion. And so for painting, modelling, carving, for drawing forth the sounds of strings and pipes, the hand is apt by the application of the fingers. And these are matters of delight, those of necessity — I mean the tillage of fields, the building of houses, the coverings of bodies whether woven or sewn, and all the working of bronze and iron; from which it is understood that, by things discovered by the mind, perceived by the senses, with the hands of craftsmen brought to bear, we have attained all things, so that we could be housed, clothed, safe, and have cities, walls, dwellings, and shrines.

[115743] 151. Now by the works of men, that is, by their hands, variety also and abundance of food is found. For the fields bring forth many things sought by the hand, which are either consumed at once or, stored up, are entrusted to keeping; and besides, we feed on beasts both of land and of water and of the air, partly by catching, partly by rearing. We also bring about, by our taming, the carriages of four-footed beasts, whose swiftness and strength lend strength and swiftness to ourselves. We lay burdens on some beasts, we put yokes upon them; we turn to our advantage the most acute senses of elephants and the keenness of dogs; we draw forth iron from the caverns of the earth, a thing necessary for tilling the fields; we find the deeply hidden veins of bronze, silver, and gold, both apt for use and comely for adornment. And by the felling of trees and by all timber, whether cultivated or of the woods, we use it partly for warming the body by applying fire and for softening food, partly for building, that, fenced by roofs, we may drive off cold and heat;

[116809] 152. and it brings great use, too, for the making of ships, by whose voyages all supplies for life are furnished from every side; and the things which Nature has begotten most violent — the sea and the winds — we alone have the governing of, through our knowledge of nautical matters, and we enjoy and use very many things of the sea. And likewise of earthly advantages there is in man the whole mastery: we enjoy plains, we enjoy mountains; ours are the rivers, ours the lakes; we sow crops, we plant trees; we give fertility to the lands by leading in waters; we dam, direct, and turn aside rivers; in short, with our own hands we strive to make, in the nature of things, as it were a second nature.

[117512] 153. And what of the reason of men — has it not penetrated even to the sky? For we alone of living creatures have come to know the risings, settings, and courses of the stars; by the race of men the day, the month, the year have been bounded; the eclipses of the sun and moon have been known and foretold for all time to come — how great they will be, and when. Contemplating which, the mind comes to the knowledge of the gods, from which arises piety, to which justice is joined and the rest of the virtues, from which springs a blessed life, equal and like to that of the gods, yielding to the heavenly ones in nothing save immortality, which has nothing to do with living well. By the setting forth of which things I seem to have sufficiently shown how far the nature of man surpasses all living creatures. From which it ought to be understood that neither the figure and position of the limbs nor the force of the genius and mind could have been brought about by fortune.

[118489] 154. It remains for me to show, and at length to conclude, that all things which are in this world, of which men make use, were made and prepared for the sake of men. In the first place, the world itself was made for the sake of gods and men, and the things which are in it were prepared and devised for the use of men. For the world is, as it were, the common house of gods and men, or a city of both; for they alone, using reason, live by right and by law. As, then, we must hold that Athens and Lacedaemon were founded for the sake of the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, and all the things that are in those cities are rightly said to belong to those peoples, so whatever things are in the whole world must be held to belong to the gods and to men.

[119240] 155. Now the circuits of the sun and moon and the rest of the heavenly bodies, although they pertain also to the coherence of the world, yet furnish a spectacle to men too; for there is no sight more insatiable, none more beautiful, and none more excellent for reason and skill; for, measuring their courses, we have come to know the ripenings and the varieties and changes of the seasons. And if these are known to men alone, we must judge that they were made for the sake of men.

[119723] 156. And the earth, teeming with crops and with the various kinds of pulse, which it pours forth with the greatest bounty — does it seem to bring these forth for the sake of beasts or of men? What shall I say of the vines and the olive-groves, whose most plentiful and most joyous fruits in no way pertain to the beasts? For of sowing, of tilling, of reaping the fruits in season and gathering them in, of storing and laying them by, there is no knowledge in the cattle, and the use and care of all these things is man's.

[120246] 157. As the lyre, then, and the pipes must be said to have been made for the sake of those who could use them, so the things I have spoken of must be confessed to have been prepared for those alone who use them; nor, if some beasts steal or snatch something of them, shall we say that they too were born for the sake of the beasts. For men do not store grain for the sake of mice and ants, but for the sake of their wives, children, and households; so the beasts, as I said, enjoy it by stealth, the masters openly and freely;

[120774] 158. it must be confessed, then, that these stores of things were procured for the sake of men. Unless perhaps the great abundance and variety of fruits, and their pleasantness not only of taste but also of smell and sight, brings any doubt that Nature has given them to men alone. And so far is it from being true that these things were prepared even for the sake of the beasts, that we see the very beasts begotten for the sake of men. For what else do the sheep furnish but that, their fleeces being dressed and woven, men may be clothed? — sheep which indeed could neither be fed nor sustained nor yield any fruit from themselves without the tillage and care of men. And the so faithful guarding of dogs, their so loving fawning upon their masters, their so great hatred of strangers, and their so incredible keenness of nose for tracking, their so great eagerness in hunting — what else does it mean but that they were begotten for the conveniences of men?

[121737] 159. Why should I speak of oxen? Whose very backs declare that they were not shaped for receiving a burden, but their necks born for the yoke, and the strength and breadth of their shoulders for drawing ploughs. By which, when the lands were broken up by the cleaving of clods, by that golden race, as the poets say, no violence was ever done them; but then the iron race suddenly arose, and dared first to forge the deadly sword and to taste the bullock joined to the yoke and tamed by its own hand: so great a usefulness was thought to be got from oxen that to feed upon their flesh was held a crime. It would be long to follow out the uses of mules and asses, which surely were prepared for the use of men.

[122448] 160. But the pig — what has it besides food? To which indeed Chrysippus says that its very soul was given for salt, lest it should rot; in which beast, because it was fitted for the feeding of men, Nature has begotten nothing more fruitful. What shall I say of the multitude and the sweetness of fishes, what of birds? From which so great a pleasure is got that at times our Stoic Providence seems to have been Epicurean; and these could not even be caught save by the reason and skill of men — although certain birds, both flyers and singers (as our augurs call them), we think to have been born for the sake of taking auguries.

[123079] 161. Now the huge and wild beasts we get by hunting, both that we may feed on them and that we may exercise ourselves in hunting after the likeness of military training, and that we may use them tamed and well-broken, as the elephants, and that we may choose out of their bodies many remedies for diseases and wounds, just as from certain plants and herbs, whose usefulness we have perceived by the experience and trial of long time. One may survey with the mind, as with the eyes, the whole earth and all the seas: you will discern now the fruitful and measureless spaces of the plains, and the thickest clothing of the mountains, the pastures of cattle, then the sea-courses of incredible swiftness.

[123782] 162. Nor indeed above the earth alone, but even in its inmost darkness, lies hidden the usefulness of very many things, which, arising for the use of men, is found by men alone. But that point, which either of you will perhaps seize on to censure — Cotta, because Carneades gladly inveighed against the Stoics; Velleius, because Epicurus mocks nothing so much as the prediction of things to come — seems to me to confirm most of all that human affairs are cared for by the prudence of the gods. For there is assuredly divination, which appears in many places, things, and times, both in private and most of all in public affairs:

[124413] 163. the soothsayers discern many things, the augurs foresee many things; many things are declared by oracles, many by prophecies, many by dreams, many by portents; by the knowledge of which many things have often been gained according to the wish and advantage of men, and many dangers also driven off. This, then, whether it be a power, or an art, or a nature, has assuredly been given to man for the knowledge of things to come, and to no other by the immortal gods. And if these things, taken singly, perhaps do not move you, yet at least, all connected and joined together among themselves, they ought to have moved you.

[125040] 164. Nor indeed is it for the whole race of men alone, but for individuals also, that the immortal gods are wont to take thought and provide. For we may contract the universality of the human race and bring it down step by step to fewer, and at last to single men. For if we judge that the gods take thought for all men who are anywhere, on whatever coast and part of the lands, distant from the continuity of this land which we inhabit, for the causes which we mentioned before, they take thought also for these men who, with us, dwell in these lands from east to west.

[125612] 165. But if they take thought for those who dwell, as it were, in a kind of great island which we call the orb of the earth, they take thought also for those who hold the parts of that island, Europe, Asia, Africa. Therefore they cherish both the parts of these, as Rome, Athens, Sparta, Rhodes, and, of those cities, apart from the whole, single men, as in the war with Pyrrhus, Curius, Fabricius, Coruncanius; in the first Punic War, Calatinus, Duellius, Metellus, Lutatius; in the second, Maximus, Marcellus, Africanus; after these, Paulus, Gracchus, Cato; and in our fathers' memory, Scipio, Laelius; and many other singular men besides, both our state and Greece has borne, of whom we must believe that none was such save by the help of god.

[126360] 166. This reasoning impelled the poets, and most of all Homer, to attach to the chief of the heroes — Ulysses, Diomedes, Agamemnon, Achilles — certain gods as companions of their crises and dangers. Besides, the frequent presences of the gods themselves, such as I recounted above, declare that the gods take thought both for states and for single men. Which indeed is understood also by the foretokens of things to come, which are portended now to the sleeping, now to the waking; besides, we are admonished by many omens, by many things in the entrails, and by many other things, which long use has so marked that it has made the art of divination.

[127012] 167. No man, therefore, was ever great without some divine inspiration. Nor indeed must it be so refuted that, if a storm has harmed the crops or vineyards of anyone, or if chance has taken away anything from the conveniences of life, we should judge the man to whom any of these things has happened either hated by god or neglected by god. The gods care for great things, the small they neglect. But to great men all things are always prosperous, if indeed enough has been said by our school and by the chief of philosophy, Socrates, concerning the rich plenty and abundance of virtue.

[127600] 168. These things, in the main, came into my mind which I thought ought to be said concerning the nature of the gods. But you, Cotta, if you would listen to me, would plead the same cause, and would bethink yourself that you are both a leading citizen and a pontiff, and, since it is allowed you to argue on either side, would take this side rather, and would bring to this rather that faculty of arguing which, received from your rhetorical exercises, the Academy has enlarged. For an evil and impious custom it is to argue against the gods, whether it be done in earnest or in pretence."