WORK: On Oratory  (slug: cicero-marcus-tullius-on-oratory-6f2b26)

CHAPTER: 02-book-2



[0] 1. When we were boys, brother Quintus—if you remember—there was a strong belief that Lucius Crassus had attained no more learning than that first boyish instruction could give him, and that Marcus Antonius was altogether without and ignorant of all culture; and there were many who, although they did not think the matter stood thus, yet, that they might the more easily deter us, fired as we were with the zeal of learning, from study, gladly proclaimed what I have said about those orators—so that, if men without education had attained the highest prudence and an incredible eloquence, all our labour might seem vain, and the zeal of our father, an excellent and most prudent man, in educating us, might seem foolish.

[722] 2. These men we then, as boys, used to refute by domestic witnesses—our father, and our kinsman Gaius Aculeo, and our uncle Lucius Cicero; for about Crassus our father, and Aculeo (with whom our maternal aunt was married, and whom Crassus loved most of all men), and our uncle, who had gone out with Antonius into Cilicia and had returned together with him, often told us many things about his zeal and learning; and since we were learning, together with our cousins, the sons of Aculeo, both those things which were approved by Crassus, and were being instructed by those teachers whom he employed, we also often perceived, when we were at his house—a thing which even as boys we could feel—that he both spoke Greek so well that he seemed to know no other language, and set before our teachers, in his questioning, and himself handled in all his conversation, such matters that nothing seemed new to him, nothing unheard of.

[1649] 3. But about Antonius, although we had often heard from our most cultivated uncle in what manner he had given himself, whether at Athens or at Rhodes, to the conversations of the most learned men, yet I myself, as a youth, so far as the modesty of my entering years allowed, often inquired many things of him. What I write will assuredly not be new to you; for even then you used to hear from me that he had seemed to me, from many and various conversations, to be in no matter—at least in those arts of which I could form some judgement—unskilled or ignorant.

[2211] 4. But this was the case with each of them: that Crassus did not so much wish to be thought not to have learned, as to despise those things, and to set the prudence of our own countrymen, in every kind, above the Greeks; while Antonius thought his speech would be more acceptable to this people if he were thought never to have learned at all; and so each thought he would be the weightier, if the one seemed to despise the Greeks, the other not even to know them.

[2677] 5. What their purpose was is nothing at all to the present time; but this belongs to the design of the present writing and occasion—that no one has ever been able to flourish and excel in eloquence, not only without the doctrine of speaking, but not even without all wisdom. For the other arts, generally, each maintains itself by itself; but to speak well, which is to speak knowingly and skilfully and elegantly, has no defined region within whose boundaries it is confined: all things whatsoever that can fall into the discussion of men must be spoken of well by him who professes that he can do this, or the name of eloquence must be abandoned.

[3327] 6. Wherefore for my part I confess that, both in our own state and in Greece itself, which always reckoned these things highest, there have been many of excellent talents and of great glory in speaking without the highest knowledge of all things; but that such an eloquence should arise as was in Crassus and Antonius, without a knowledge of all the things that pertained to so great a prudence, and to so great an abundance of speaking as was in them—this, I affirm, could not have been.

[3817] 7. For this reason I did the more gladly commit to writing that conversation which they once held among themselves about these matters; both that that opinion which had always existed might be removed—that the one was not very learned, the other plainly unlearned; and that I might preserve in writing those things which I judged to have been said divinely by the greatest orators about eloquence, if in any way I could attain and embrace them; and, by Hercules, also that I might rescue their praise, now nearly fading, so far as I could, from the oblivion and the silence of men.

[4400] 8. For if they could have been known from their own writings, perhaps I should have thought this less to be laboured at by me; but since the one had left not much that survived, and that itself written as a young man, and the other almost nothing written, I thought this was owed by me to the great talents of these men—that, while we still hold a living memory of them, I should, if I could, render it immortal.

[4814] 9. And I approach this with the greater hope of carrying it through, because I am not writing something about the eloquence of Servius Galba or Gaius Carbo, in which I might invent, if I wished anything, with no one's memory now refuting me; but I publish these things to be known by those who often heard the very men of whom I speak; so that we may commend two supreme men to those who have seen neither of them, with the memory of living and present men—men to whom both those orators were known—as witness.

[5326] 10. Nor indeed, dearest and best of brothers, do I now pursue you with certain rhetorical books, which you think rustic, in order to instruct you; for what can be either more subtle or more ornate than your own speech? But whether by judgement, as you are wont to say, or whether—as that father of eloquence Isocrates himself wrote of himself—from a certain modesty and a kind of inborn timidity you have shrunk from speaking; or whether, as I myself am wont to jest, you thought one rhetorician enough, not only in one family, but well-nigh in the whole state, yet I do not think that these books will be to you of that kind which could deservedly be mocked because of the meagreness, in the good arts, of those who have disputed about the method of speaking; for nothing, at least to my mind, seems to have been omitted in the conversation of Crassus and Antonius that anyone of the highest talents, the keenest studies, the best learning, the greatest practice might think could have been known and grasped—a thing which you will most easily be able to judge, who wished to gain the prudence and method of speaking through yourself, but the practice through us.

[6492] 11. But that we may the more quickly complete this no slight task which we have undertaken, let us, leaving aside our own exhortation, come to the conversation and disputation of those whom we have set before us.

[6706] 12. On the next day, then, after those things had been done, at about the second hour, when Crassus was even then in bed, and Sulpicius was sitting by him, and Antonius was walking up and down with Cotta in the portico, suddenly thither came the old Quintus Catulus with his brother Gaius Julius. When Crassus heard this, he rose in some agitation, and all, wondering, suspected that there was some greater cause of their coming.

[7137] 13. When they had greeted one another in the friendliest way, as their intimacy bore, "What of you, pray?" said Crassus; "is there any news?" "Nothing at all," said Catulus; "for you see that it is the games; but—you may think us either silly," he said, "or troublesome—when Caesar came to me yesterday evening at my Tusculan villa from his own Tusculum, he told me that he had met Scaevola going from here, from whom he said he had heard certain wonderful things: that you, whom I have so often, by every means, in attempting to draw out to disputation, could not, had discoursed very much about eloquence with Antonius, and had disputed almost in the manner of the Greeks, as in a school:

[7829] 14. so my brother prevailed upon me—not myself too much averse from the desire of hearing, but, by Hercules, fearing lest we should intrude troublesomely upon you—to come hither with him; for he said Scaevola told him that a good part of the conversation had been put off to this day. If you think this too eager, you will attribute it to Caesar; if too familiar, to us both; we, at any rate, unless perchance we intrude troublesomely, are delighted to have come."

[8295] 15. Then Crassus said: "For my part, whatever cause had brought you hither, I should rejoice, since I see at my house men most dear and most friendly to me; but yet, to speak truly, I would rather any other had been the cause than that which you mention. For I, to speak as I feel, never pleased myself less than yesterday; and this happened to me more from good-nature than from any other fault of mine, who, while I humour these young men, forgot that I was an old man, and did what I had not done even as a young man—disputed about matters which are contained in some learning. But yet this fell out very opportunely for me, that, my part being now done, you have come to hear Antonius."

[8987] 16. Then Caesar said: "For my part, Crassus, I am so desirous of hearing you in that longer and continuous disputation, that, if that be less granted me, I should be content even with this daily conversation of yours; and so I shall try this—that my friend Sulpicius and Cotta may not seem to prevail more with you than I—and I shall assuredly entreat you to impart some of your sweetness to me too, and to Catulus; but if that be less pleasing to you, I shall not press you, nor allow it to happen that, while you fear lest you be silly, you should judge me to be so."

[9558] 17. Then he said: "By Hercules, Caesar, of all Latin words I have always thought the force of this word the greatest; for he whom we call inept (ineptum) seems to me to have his name derived from this—that he is not fitted (aptus); and this, in the usage of our speech, has a very wide application; for he who either does not see what the occasion demands, or talks too much, or shows himself off, or has no regard for the dignity or convenience of those with whom he is, or, in short, is in any kind either uncouth or excessive, he is said to be inept.

[10113] 18. With this fault that most learned nation of the Greeks is overflowing; and so, because the Greeks do not see the force of this evil, they have not even imposed a name upon the fault; for though you search through everything, you will not find how the Greeks call a man inept. But of all the kinds of ineptitude, which are countless, I scarcely know whether any is greater than this—as those men are wont, in whatever place, among whatever men it has seemed good, to dispute most subtly about matters either most difficult or not necessary. This we, against our will and protesting, were yesterday compelled by these young men to do."

[10752] 19. Then Catulus said: "Not even the Greeks, Crassus, who in their own states were famous and great, just as you are, and as we all wish to be in our commonwealth, were like these Greeks who thrust themselves upon our ears; nor in their leisure did they shun conversations and disputations of this kind.

[11057] 20. And if those seem to you inept who have no regard for time, place, and men—as they ought to seem—does, pray, either this place seem unsuitable, in which this very portico, where we now walk, and the wrestling-ground, and the seats in so many places of the gymnasia, in some way recall the memory of the Greeks' gymnasia and disputations? Or is the time importunate, in such great leisure, which is both rarely given and now given to us at the very moment of our wish? Or are the men averse from this kind of disputation, who are all such that we count life nothing without these studies?"

[11651] 21. "All those things," said Crassus, "I interpret in another way: for first I think that the Greeks themselves, Catulus, invented the wrestling-ground and the seats and the porticoes for the sake of exercise and delight, not of disputation; for the gymnasia were invented many ages before the philosophers began to chatter in them; and at this very time, when the philosophers hold all the gymnasia, yet their hearers would rather hear the discus than the philosopher; and as soon as it sounds, they all leave the philosopher, in the midst of his discourse, disputing about the greatest and weightiest matters, for the sake of the rubbing-down: thus they set the lightest delight before the weightiest usefulness, as they themselves declare.

[12395] 22. As for the leisure which you mention, I agree; but the fruit of leisure is not the straining of the mind, but its relaxation. Often I heard from my father-in-law, when he said that his father-in-law Laelius was almost always wont to take his country holidays with Scipio, and that they were wont to grow boys again incredibly, when they had flown out from the city into the country as from chains. I do not dare to say it of such men, but yet Scaevola is wont to relate that they used to gather shells and pebbles at Caieta and at Laurentum, and to descend to every relaxation and play of the mind.

[12999] 23. For the matter so stands that, just as we see birds fashion and build nests for the sake of their procreation and their advantage, but, when they have accomplished something, fly about freely, loosed from their work, here and there to ease their labour, so our minds, wearied with forensic business and city work, are eager and long to fly about free from care and toil.

[13375] 24. And so what I said in the cause of Curius, against Scaevola, I said not otherwise than I felt: for, 'If,' I said, 'Scaevola, no will shall be rightly made except such as you have written, we citizens shall all come to you with our tablets, you alone shall write all our wills. What then?' I said; 'when will you do public business? When the business of friends? When your own? When, in short, will you do nothing?' Then I added this: 'For to me he does not seem to be free, who does not sometimes do nothing.' In which opinion, Catulus, I remain; and it delights me, when I have come hither, to do this very thing—nothing—and plainly to be idle.

[14026] 25. For as to your third addition—that you are those who would think life unpleasant without these studies—that not only does not exhort me to disputation, but even deters me. For as Gaius Lucilius, a learned and most urbane man, used to say of what he wrote, that he wished it to be read neither by the most unlearned nor by the most learned, because the one understood nothing, the other perhaps more than himself—about which he also wrote, 'I do not care to be read by Persius' (for this man was, as we knew, almost the most learned of all our countrymen) 'but I want Laelius Decumus'—whom we knew to be a good man and not unlettered, but nothing compared to Persius—so I, if now I must dispute about these our studies, should not indeed wish to do so before rustics, but much less before you; for I prefer that my speech be not understood than be censured."

[14889] 26. Then Caesar said: "For my part, Catulus, I now seem to myself to have spent my labour well in coming hither; for this very refusal of disputation was itself a kind of disputation, to me at least most pleasant. But why do we hinder Antonius, whose part it is, I hear, to discourse about the whole of eloquence, and whom Cotta and Sulpicius have long been awaiting?"

[15259] 27. "For my part," said Crassus, "I will neither allow Antonius to say a word, and I myself will be silent, unless I first obtain something from you"—"What, pray?" said Catulus. "That you stay here today." Then, when he hesitated, because he had promised his brother, "I," said Julius, "answer for both: so we will do; and indeed on that condition, even if you were to say not a word, you would keep me here."

[15670] 28. Hereupon Catulus smiled, and at the same time said: "My hesitation is cut off, since I had given no orders at home, and he, at whose house I was to be, has so easily promised without my opinion." Then all turned their eyes upon Antonius, and he said: "Listen, then, listen; for you will hear a man instructed from the school and from a master and in Greek letters; and indeed I shall speak the more confidently, because Catulus has come as a hearer, to whom not only we of the Latin tongue, but even the Greeks themselves, are wont to concede the subtlety and elegance of their own language.

[16267] 29. But because, nevertheless, this whole thing, whatever it is, whether art or zeal of speaking, can be nothing unless impudence be added, I will teach you, my pupils, what I myself never learned—what I think about every kind."

[16497] 30. When they had smiled at this, "The matter," he said, "seems to me to be excellent in respect of faculty, moderate in respect of art; for art belongs to those things which are known; but all the orator's action is contained in opinions, not in knowledge; for we both speak before those who do not know, and we say those things which we ourselves do not know; and so they at different times both feel and judge differently about the same matters, and we often plead contrary causes, not only so that Crassus speaks against me sometimes, or I against Crassus, when it is necessary that one of the two say what is false, but even so that each of us defends at different times different things about the same matter, when there cannot be more than one truth. As, then, in a matter of this kind, which rests on falsehood, which does not often arrive at knowledge, which hunts after the opinions and often the errors of men, so I will speak, if you think there is a cause why you should listen."

[17491] 31. "We do indeed, and very greatly," said Catulus, "think so, and the more because you seem about to use no ostentation; for you have begun not gloriously, as you think, but rather from truth than from some kind of dignity."

[17718] 32. "As, then, I have confessed about the kind itself," said Antonius, "that it is no great art, so this I affirm—that certain very acute precepts can be given for handling the minds of men and for catching their goodwill. If anyone wishes to call the knowledge of this matter a certain great art, I will not contend; for since most men plead causes in the forum rashly and with no method, while some, by reason of practice or some habit, do it more skilfully, there is no doubt that, if anyone observes what it is whereby some speak better than others, he can note it: therefore he who shall have done this in the whole field will have found, if not plainly an art, yet a kind of quasi-art.

[18411] 33. And would that, as I seem to myself to see those things in the forum and in causes, so now I could search them out for you—in what manner they may be discovered! But of myself I shall see; now I set forth this, of which I have persuaded myself: that, although it be not an art, yet nothing is more glorious than a perfect orator; for, to pass over the use of speaking, which holds sway in every peaceful and free state, there is so great a delight in the very faculty of speaking, that nothing more pleasant can be perceived either by the ears or the minds of men.

[18981] 34. For what song can be found sweeter than a well-measured speech? What poem more fitting than the artistic rounding of words? What actor more pleasing in imitating the truth than the orator in upholding it? What is more subtle than frequent and acute thoughts? What more wonderful than a matter illustrated by the splendour of words? What more full than a speech heaped up with every kind of matter? Nor is there any matter which is not proper to the orator, provided it ought to be spoken of with elegance and weight.

[19503] 35. His it is, in giving counsel about the greatest matters, to set forth his opinion with dignity; his too is the rousing of a languishing people and the moderating of an unbridled one; by the same faculty both the fraud of men is summoned to destruction and integrity to safety. Who can exhort to virtue more ardently, who recall from vices more keenly, who censure the wicked more harshly, who praise the good more ornately, who break a passion more vehemently by accusing it? Who lighten grief more gently by consoling?

[20028] 36. And history, indeed—the witness of times, the light of truth, the life of memory, the mistress of life, the messenger of antiquity—by what other voice than the orator's is it commended to immortality? For if there is any other art that professes a knowledge of either coining or choosing words; or if anyone but the orator is said to shape a speech and to vary and distinguish it as if by certain ornaments of words and thoughts; or if any method, whether of arguments, or of thoughts, or, in short, of arrangement and order, is handed down except by this one art—let us confess either that what this art professes is alien to it, or that it is common to it with some other art; but if in this one alone is that method and doctrine, then, even if those of other arts have spoken well, it is not on that account the less proper to this one alone;

[20879] 37. but as the orator can speak best about those matters which belong to the other arts, provided only he has learned them—as Crassus said yesterday—so men of the other arts speak more elegantly of their own matters, if they have learned anything from this art.

[21142] 38. For if some farmer about rustic matters, or even—as many do—some physician about diseases, or some painter about painting, has written or spoken eloquently, eloquence is not on that account to be reckoned of that art; in which, because there is great power in the talents of men, many even without instruction attain something of every kind and art; but, although what is proper to each can be judged from this—when you see what each art teaches—yet nothing can be more certain than this, that all the other arts can perform their function without eloquence, but the orator cannot obtain his name without it; so that the others, if they are eloquent, have something from him, but he, unless he has furnished himself with his own domestic stores, cannot seek the abundance of speaking from elsewhere."

[21948] 39. Then Catulus said: "Although, Antonius, that course of your speech is by no means to be hindered by interruption, yet you will allow me, and will pardon me; 'for I cannot but cry out,' as that man says in the Trinummus: so well did you seem both to express subtly the power of the orator, and to praise it most copiously; which indeed it especially becomes the eloquent man to do—to praise eloquence; for he ought, in praising it, to employ that very thing which he praises. But go on further; for I agree with you that this whole thing—to speak eloquently—is yours, and that if anyone do this in another art, he uses a good thing borrowed from elsewhere, not proper or his own."

[22633] 40. And Crassus said: "The night, Antonius, has polished you for us and made you a man; for in yesterday's conversation you had described to us an orator of some single function, as Caecilius says—some oarsman or porter, a man poor in culture and unrefined." Then Antonius said: "Yesterday I had set this before myself, that, if I refuted you, I should draw these pupils away from you; but now, with Catulus and Caesar listening, I think I ought not so much to fight with you as to say what I myself feel.

[23140] 41. It follows, then—since we must set up here the man of whom we speak in the forum and in the eyes of the citizens—that we see what business we give him and to what office we wish him to be appointed; for Crassus yesterday, when you, Catulus and Caesar, were not present, laid down briefly, in the division of the art, the same thing which most Greeks laid down, nor indeed showed what he himself thought, but what was said by them: that there are two first kinds of questions in which eloquence is engaged—one unlimited, the other definite.

[23685] 42. The unlimited seemed to me to be that in which something is asked generally, in this manner: whether eloquence is to be sought? whether honours are to be sought? The definite, that in which something is asked in regard to persons and to a fixed and defined matter; of which kind are those which are engaged in the forum and in the causes and disputes of citizens.

[24054] 43. These seem to me to be placed either in pleading a suit or in giving counsel; for that third kind, which was touched on both by Crassus and—as I hear—was added by Aristotle himself, who especially illustrated these matters, though it be of use, is yet less necessary." "What, pray?" said Catulus; "is it panegyrics? For I see that this is set down as the third kind."

[24427] 44. "Yes," said Antonius, "and in that kind indeed I know that both I and all who were present were vehemently delighted, when Popilia, your mother, was praised by you—the first woman, I think, to whom this honour was paid in our state. But not all things, whatsoever we speak, seem to me to be referred to art and precepts;

[24753] 45. for from those very fountains whence all the ornaments of speaking are drawn, it will be permitted also to adorn a panegyric, nor to need those elements which, even if no one hand them down, who is there that does not know what is to be praised in a man? For, the things being laid down which Crassus stated at the beginning of that speech of his which he held as censor against his colleague—that, in those things which are given to men by nature or fortune, he could endure with an even mind to be surpassed; but in those things which men could provide for themselves, in those he could not endure to be surpassed—he who shall praise anyone will understand that the goods of fortune are to be set forth by him;

[25471] 46. these are of birth, of wealth, of kindred, of friends, of resources, of health, of beauty, of strength, of talent, and of the other things which are either of the body or external; if the man has had them, that he has used them well; if he has not had them, that he has wisely done without them; if he has lost them, that he has borne it with moderation; then, what the man whom he praises has either done or borne wisely, what generously, what bravely, what justly, what magnificently, what piously, what gratefully, what humanely, and, in short, what with any virtue: these things, and those of this kind, he who wishes to praise will easily see; and he who wishes to blame, the contrary."

[26168] 47. "Why, then," said Catulus, "do you hesitate to make this the third kind, since it lies in the system of things? For it is not, if it is easier, on that account to be struck out of the number." "Because," said he, "I am unwilling to handle all things which sometimes fall to the orator, however slight they be, as though nothing could be said without their own precepts;

[26543] 48. for testimony, too, must often be given, and sometimes even with greater care, as I myself was obliged to do against Sextus Titius, a seditious and turbulent citizen; in giving that testimony I unfolded all the counsels of my consulship, by which I had withstood that tribune of the plebs on behalf of the commonwealth, and I set forth what I judged he had done against the commonwealth; I was long detained, I heard much, I answered much. Do you, then, think it good, when you give precepts about eloquence, to hand down also, as if in an art, something about giving testimony?"

[27128] 49. "There is no need at all," said Catulus. "What if—as often happens to the greatest men—instructions must be set forth either in the senate by a commander, or to a commander, or to a king, or to some people from the senate—must this part of causes, because a more careful kind of speech must be used in matters of this sort, on that account be reckoned, or be furnished with its own precepts?" "By no means," said Catulus; "for the faculty for matters of this kind will not be wanting to the eloquent man, gained from the other matters and causes."

[27681] 50. "Therefore likewise," said he, "those things which must often be eloquently treated, and which I a little while ago, when I was praising eloquence, said belonged to the orator, neither have any place of their own in the division of parts, nor any fixed kind of precepts, and yet must be treated no less eloquently than what is said in a suit—rebuke, exhortation, consolation; of which there is nothing that does not demand the highest ornaments of speaking; but as for the art, those matters do not require precepts."

[28204] 51. "I plainly agree," said Catulus. "Come now," said Antonius, "of what kind of orator, and of how great a man in speaking, do you think it is to write history?" "If, as the Greeks wrote, of the greatest," said Catulus; "if, as ours did, there is no need of an orator; it is enough not to be a liar." "And yet, that you may not despise our countrymen," said Antonius, "the Greeks themselves at first wrote in the same way as our Cato, as Pictor, as Piso;

[28661] 52. for history was nothing else but the compilation of annals; for the sake of which, and of preserving the public record, from the beginning of Roman affairs down to the pontifex maximus Publius Mucius, the pontifex maximus committed to writing all the events of each year, and entered them on a white tablet, and set up the board at his house, so that the people might have the power of knowing them; and these are even now called the Great Annals.

[29114] 53. This manner of writing many have followed, who without any ornaments have left only records of times, men, places, and deeds; and so, just as among the Greeks were Pherecydes, Hellanicus, Acusilaus, and very many others, so was our Cato, and Pictor, and Piso, who neither hold by what things a speech is adorned—for these things have only lately been imported hither—and, provided that what they say be understood, think the one praise of speaking to be brevity.

[29582] 54. A little did he raise himself and add a greater sound of voice to history, that excellent man, the friend of Crassus, Antipater; the rest were not embellishers of facts, but only narrators." "It is," said Catulus, "as you say; but that very Caelius neither distinguished history by variety of colours, nor polished that work by the arrangement of words and a smooth and even flow of speech; but, as a man neither learned nor especially apt for speaking, he hewed it out as best he could; yet he surpassed, as you say, his predecessors."

[30124] 55. "It is no wonder," said Antonius, "if that matter has not yet been illustrated in our tongue; for no one studies the eloquence of our countrymen except to shine in causes and in the forum; but among the Greeks the most eloquent men, removed from forensic causes, applied themselves both to other illustrious matters and most of all to the writing of history: for we have heard that the famous Herodotus, who first adorned this kind, was not at all engaged in causes; and yet his eloquence is so great that he greatly delights me at least, so far as I can understand what is written in Greek; and after him Thucydides, in my opinion, easily surpassed all in the art of speaking;

[30807] 56. who is so crowded with abundance of matter that he well-nigh equals the number of his words by the number of his thoughts, and is so apt and compressed in his words that you would not know whether the matter is illustrated by the speech or the words by the thoughts: and yet not even him, although he was engaged in public affairs, have we received as one of the number of those who often pleaded causes; and these very books he is said to have written when he had been removed from public affairs and—as was wont to happen at Athens to every best man—driven into exile;

[31383] 57. him followed Philistus of Syracuse, who, being most intimate with the tyrant Dionysius, spent his leisure in writing history and especially imitated, as it seems to me, Thucydides. But afterward, from that most famous workshop, as it were, of the rhetorician, two men outstanding in talent, Theopompus and Ephorus, impelled by their master Isocrates, betook themselves to history; they never touched causes at all.

[31803] 58. Finally, setting out even from philosophy, Xenophon, that follower of Socrates, was the first; afterward, from Aristotle's school, Callisthenes, the companion of Alexander, wrote history, and he indeed almost in the rhetorical manner; but that earlier one used a certain gentler tone, and, though he has not that impetus of the orator—less vehement perhaps, yet somewhat, as it seems to me at least, sweeter. The youngest in age of all these, Timaeus—but, so far as I can judge, by far the most learned, and most abounding in copiousness of matter and variety of thoughts, and not unpolished in the very composition of words—brought a great eloquence to writing, but no forensic experience."

[32500] 59. When he had said this, "What is this, Catulus?" said Caesar; "where are those who say Antonius does not know Greek? How many historians he has named! How knowingly, how aptly he has spoken of each one!" "By Hercules," said Catulus, "wondering at this, I now cease to wonder at that which I wondered at much more before—that this man, when he did not know these things, could do so much in speaking." "And yet, Catulus," said Antonius, "I read these books, and some others, not hunting for any usefulness toward speaking, but for the sake of delight, when there is leisure.

[33078] 60. What then? There is, I will confess, nevertheless something; as, when I walk in the sun, even if I walk for another cause, yet it naturally happens that I am coloured; so, when I have read those books at Misenum—for at Rome it is scarcely allowed—rather diligently, I feel that my speech is, as it were, coloured by their touch. But that this may not seem to you to extend too widely, I understand in the Greeks only these things, which the very men who wrote them wished to be understood by the common people:

[33594] 61. into your philosophers, if ever I have fallen, deceived by the titles of the books, which are generally inscribed with known and illustrious subjects, about virtue, about justice, about honour, about pleasure, I understand not a single word; so are they bound by narrow and concise disputations; the poets, who have spoken altogether as if in some other language, I do not attempt to touch. With those, as I said, I delight myself, who have written either deeds or their own speeches, or who so speak that they seem to have wished to be familiar to us who are not most learned.

[34177] 62. But I return thither: do you see how great a function of the orator history is? I scarcely know whether it be not the greatest, by the flood and the variety of the speech; and nowhere do I find it separately set forth in the precepts of the rhetoricians; for they lie before our eyes. For who does not know that the first law of history is that one dare say nothing false? Then that one dare say nothing untrue? That there be no suspicion of favour in writing? None of enmity?

[34659] 63. These foundations, of course, are known to all; but the very building-up rests upon facts and words: the system of facts demands the order of times, the description of regions; it requires also—since in great matters worthy of memory, first counsels, then deeds, afterward outcomes are looked for—both that it be signified, concerning counsels, what the writer approves, and that it be declared, in deeds, not only what was done or said, but also in what manner; and when the outcome is spoken of, that all the causes be unfolded, whether of chance or of wisdom or of rashness, and not only the deeds of the men themselves, but also, concerning those who excel in fame and name, the life and nature of each;

[35372] 64. but the system of words and the kind of speech must be a flowing and extended one, with a certain smoothness evenly streaming on, without this judicial harshness and without the forensic stings of epigrams. Do you see that of all these so great matters there are no precepts which are found in the arts of the rhetoricians? In the same silence many other functions of the orator have lain—exhortations, precepts, consolations, admonitions—all of which must be treated most eloquently, but have no place in these arts which have been handed down.

[35923] 65. And in this kind there is also that boundless forest, in that most writers—as Crassus too showed—have given the orator two kinds for speaking: one about a fixed and definite cause, such as are those which are engaged in suits, in deliberations (let anyone add, if he will, also panegyrics); the other, which almost all writers call, but no one explains, the unlimited question of the kind, without time and without person. What this is and how great it is, when they speak of it, they do not seem to me to understand:

[36446] 66. for if it belongs to the orator to be able to speak on whatever matter is set unlimitedly, he will have to speak how great the magnitude of the sun is, what the shape of the earth; about mathematical, about musical matters he will not be able, having undertaken this burden, to refuse to speak; in short, to him who professes that it is his not only to speak about those controversies which are marked by times and persons—that is, about all forensic matters—but also about the unlimited questions of the kind, no kind of speech can be excepted.

[36997] 67. But if we wish also to add to the orator that part of questions which is wandering and free and widely open—so that we should think the orator must speak about good or evil things, things to be sought or shunned, honourable or base, useful or useless, about virtue, justice, self-restraint, prudence, greatness of soul, liberality, piety, friendship, duty, good faith, and the other virtues and their contrary vices; and likewise about the commonwealth, about empire, about military affairs, about the discipline of the state, about the characters of men—let us assume that part too, but in such a way that it be circumscribed within moderate regions.

[37654] 68. For my part I think that all things which pertain to the practice of citizens, the custom of men, which are engaged in the habit of life, in the system of the commonwealth, in this civil society, in the common sense of man, in nature, in character, must be grasped by the orator; if not so that he may answer separately about these matters after the manner of the philosophers, yet certainly so that he may prudently weave them into a cause; but about these very matters that he should speak in such a way as those who established laws, statutes, and states spoke—simply and splendidly, without any train of disputations and without a meagre wrangling of words.

[38321] 69. At this point, lest there be any wonder if no precepts about so many and so great matters are laid down by me, I lay it down thus: that, as in the other arts, when the most difficult things of each art have been handed down, the rest, because they are either easier or similar, need not be handed down; as in painting, he who has thoroughly learned to paint one form of man can paint of any form or age, even if he has not learned it, and there is no danger that he who paints a lion or a bull excellently cannot do the same with many other quadrupeds—and there is altogether no art in which everything that can be effected by that art is handed down by the teacher, but those who have learned the very kinds of the chief and definite matters attain the rest by themselves—

[39100] 70. similarly I think that in this—whether method or exercise—of speaking, he who has attained that power, of being able to move at his own pleasure the minds of those who hear with some power of deciding, whether about the commonwealth, or about his own matters, or about those against whom or on whose behalf he speaks—he will inquire no more, about that whole kind of the remaining speeches, what he should say, than that famous Polyclitus, when he was fashioning a Hercules, inquired how he should fashion the skin or the hydra, even though he had never learned to do these things separately."

[39699] 71. Then Catulus said: "Excellently, Antonius, you seem to me to have set before our eyes what he ought to learn who is to be an orator, and what, even if he has not learned it, he would assume from what he has learned; for you have led the whole man into two kinds only of causes, and left the rest, countless, to exercise and likeness: but see lest in those two kinds you have the hydra and the skin, while the Hercules and other greater works are left in those matters which you pass over; for it seems to me no less a work to speak about the universal kinds of things than about the causes of individuals, and much greater even to speak about the nature of the gods than about the suits of men." "It is not so," said Antonius;

[40431] 72. "for I will tell you, Catulus, not so much as a learned man as—what is greater—as one who has experience: the speaking about all other matters, believe me, is play to a man not dull, nor unexercised, nor without common letters and the more polished culture; in the contests of causes there is a certain great work, and I scarcely know whether of human works it be by far the greatest; in which the power of the orator is for the most part judged by the inexperienced by the outcome and the victory; where an armed adversary is at hand, who must both be struck and repelled; where often he who is to be the master of the matter is a stranger and angry, or even a friend of the adversary and an enemy to you; when he must be either taught or untaught, or repressed or roused, or in every way moderated by the speech to suit the occasion and the cause (in which often goodwill must be led to hatred, and hatred to goodwill); or, as by some engine, must now be turned to severity, now to mildness, now to sadness, now to gladness of mind;

[41471] 73. the weight of all thoughts, the weights of all words must be used; there must be added a delivery various, vehement, full of spirit, full of breath, full of grief, full of truth. In these works, if anyone has grasped that art, so that he can fashion the image of Minerva like Phidias, he will not indeed labour at how, like the same artist, he should learn to make those lesser works on the shield."

[41876] 74. Then Catulus said: "The greater and more wonderful you have made those things, the greater an expectation holds me, by what methods and by what precepts that so great a power is acquired; not that it now concerns me—for my age does not require it, and we have followed a certain other kind of speaking, who never wrested verdicts from the hands of the judges by a kind of force of speech, but rather, their minds being appeased, received only as much as they themselves allowed—but yet I ask these things of yours for no use of my own, led only by the zeal of knowing.

[42450] 75. Nor do I need some Greek teacher to chant to me well-worn precepts, when he himself has never looked upon the forum, never upon any trial; as that Peripatetic Phormio is said to have done, when Hannibal, expelled from Carthage, had come to Ephesus to Antiochus as an exile, and, because his name had great glory among all, had been invited by his hosts to hear, if he wished, the man I have mentioned; and when he had said that he was not unwilling, the wordy man is said to have spoken some hours about the duty of a commander and about military affairs. Then, when the rest who had heard him were vehemently delighted, they asked of Hannibal what he himself judged of that philosopher: hereupon the Carthaginian is reported to have answered, not in the best Greek, but yet freely, that he had often seen many doting old men, but had seen no one who doted more than Phormio.

[43331] 76. And, by Hercules, not without reason; for what could be done either more arrogant or more wordy than for a Greek, who had never seen an enemy, never a camp, never, in short, touched the least part of any public office, to give precepts about military affairs to Hannibal, who for so many years had contended with the Roman people, the conqueror of all nations, about empire? This all those who give precepts about the art of speaking seem to me to do; for what they themselves have not experienced, that they teach others; but in this perhaps they err less, that they try to teach not you, as that man Hannibal, but boys or youths."

[43969] 77. "You err, Catulus," said Antonius; "for I myself have already fallen in with many a Phormio. For who is there of those Greeks who thinks any of us understands anything? And to me, indeed, they are not so troublesome; I easily bear and endure them all; for either they bring something which does not displease me, or they bring it about that I repent the less of not having learned; but I dismiss them not so insultingly as Hannibal dismissed that philosopher, and on that account I have perhaps even more trouble. But yet their doctrine, so far as I can judge, is very ridiculous:

[44555] 78. for they divide the whole matter into two parts, into the controversy of the cause and into that of the question: they call a cause a matter placed in the dispute and controversy of defendants; but a question a matter placed in unlimited doubt; about the cause they give precepts; about the other part of speaking there is a wonderful silence.

[44904] 79. Then they make, as it were, five members of eloquence: to find what you would say, to arrange what is found, then to adorn it with words, afterward to commit it to memory, then at the last to deliver and pronounce it; a thing surely not recondite; for who would not see this of his own accord—that no one can speak unless he have both what he would say, and in what words, and in what order he would say it, and remember these things? And I do not blame these things, but say that they are set before our eyes, as also those four, or five, or six, or even seven parts (since they are divided differently by different men), into which all speech is by these men distributed:

[45583] 80. for they bid us begin in such a way as to make the hearer well-disposed to us, and teachable, and attentive; then to narrate the matter, and so that the narrative be probable, that it be open, that it be brief; afterward to divide the cause or set it forth; to confirm our own points by arguments and reasons; then to refute the contrary; then some place at this point the conclusion of the speech and, as it were, the peroration, others bid us, before the peroration, digress for the sake of adorning or amplifying, and then conclude and round off.

[46138] 81. Not even these things do I blame; for they are neatly distributed, but yet—a thing which was inevitable for men without experience of the truth—not skilfully: for those precepts which they wished to belong to introductions and narratives must be preserved throughout whole speeches;

[46426] 82. for I can more easily make a judge well-disposed when I am in the course of my speech than when all is unheard; and teachable, not when I promise that I shall demonstrate, but then, when I teach and explain; and attentive we can make him in the whole action by rousing the minds of the judges, not by the first announcement.

[46756] 83. But as to their bidding the narrative be probable and open and brief, they rightly admonish us: that they think these things to be more proper to the narrative than to the whole speech—in this they seem to me greatly to err; and altogether in this is all their error, that they think this to be a certain art not unlike the others, of such a kind as Crassus said yesterday could be composed about the civil law itself: that the kinds of matters should first be set forth—in which there is a fault if any kind is passed over; then the parts of the several kinds—in which both to omit some part and to have a superfluous one is faulty; then the definitions of all the words—in which neither ought anything to be absent nor to overflow.

[47495] 84. But if this can be attained in the civil law, if even in small or moderate matters by the more learned, I do not think the same can be done in so great and so boundless a matter as this; but if there are some who think so, they must be led to those who teach these things; they will attain everything already explained and polished; for there are countless books about these matters, neither hidden nor obscure: but let them see what they wish—whether they are going to take up arms for play or for fight; for fight and the battle-line require one thing, our play and exercise-ground another; and yet the very playful art of arms profits somewhat both the gladiator and the soldier; but a keen mind, present and acute and likewise versatile, makes men invincible.

[48264] 85. Wherefore I will now so train the orator for you, if I can, that I may first foresee what he can effect: for let him be tinged with letters; let him have heard something, read something, received those very precepts; I will try what becomes him, what he can effect with his voice, his strength, his breath, his tongue. If I understand that he can attain to the highest, I will not only exhort him to labour, but, if he shall also seem to me to be a good man, I will entreat him; so great is the ornament I reckon there is in an excellent orator who is at the same time a good man, for the whole state; but if it shall seem, when he has done everything to the utmost, that he will nevertheless come only to the rank of moderate orators, I will permit him to do what he wishes; I will not be greatly troublesome; but if he shall plainly be unfit and absurd, I will admonish him to restrain himself or to transfer himself to another study;

[49206] 86. for neither is he who can do best to be in any way deserted by our exhortation, nor is he who can do something to be deterred: of which the one seems to me to be of a certain divinity; the other—either not to do what you cannot do best, or to do what you do not do worst—of humanity; but that third, to cry out contrary to what becomes one and to what one can do, is the mark of a man who, as you, Catulus, said of a certain bawler, gathers by his own domestic crying as many witnesses as possible of his own folly.

[49727] 87. Of him, then, who shall be such that he must be exhorted and helped, let us so speak that we may hand down to him only those things which experience has taught us, so that, with us as guides, he may come whither we ourselves came without a guide, since we cannot teach him better things.

[50020] 88. And, to begin with our friend, this Sulpicius, Catulus, I first heard as a very young man in a small cause, with his voice and form and movement of body and the other things apt for this function of which we are inquiring, but with a speech swift and impetuous, which was of his talent, and with words boiling over and a little too redundant, which was of his age. I did not despise it; for I wish fecundity to pour itself forth in a young man; for, as in vines, those things which have poured themselves forth too much are more easily checked than, if the stock have no strength, new shoots are roused up by cultivation; likewise I wish there to be in a young man that from which I may prune something; for there cannot be lasting sap in that which has too quickly run through to maturity.

[50816] 89. I saw at once his natural quality, and I did not let the moment slip, and I exhorted him to think the forum his school for learning, and to choose for his master whomever he wished; me, indeed, if he would hear me, Lucius Crassus: which he eagerly caught at, and affirmed that he would so do, and even added—for the sake of compliment, of course—that I too should be his master. Scarcely a year had passed from this conversation of my exhortation, when he accused Gaius Norbanus, I defending: it is not credible what a difference there seemed to me between him who then was and him who had been a year before. Altogether nature itself was leading him toward that magnificent and splendid kind of Crassus, but that could not have profited him enough, unless he had bent himself with the same zeal and imitation, and had so accustomed himself to speak as to regard Crassus with his whole mind and his whole soul.

[51732] 90. Therefore let this be first in my precepts—that we point out whom he should imitate; then let exercise be added, by which, in imitating, he may fashion and express him whom he has chosen, not as I have often known many imitators to do, who pursue in imitation either those things which are easy, or even those which are conspicuous and almost faulty.

[52088] 91. Nothing is easier than to imitate someone's dress, or carriage, or movement; but if there be even something faulty, to take that and to be like in that fault is no great thing—as that man who, even now, his voice lost, rages in the commonwealth, Fufius, does not attain the sinews in speaking of Gaius Fimbria, which yet that man had, but imitates the distortion of the mouth and the broadness of the words; but yet that man neither knew how to choose whom he would most resemble, and in the very man he had chosen wished to imitate even the faults;

[52643] 92. but he who shall do as he ought must first be watchful in choosing; then, in him whom he has approved, must pursue most diligently those things which most excel. For what cause do you think there is why the several ages have brought forth almost several kinds of speaking? A thing which we cannot so easily judge in our own orators, because they have left no very many writings from which a judgement could be made, as in the Greeks, from whose writings it can be understood what the method and inclination of speaking of each age was.

[53184] 93. The most ancient, of whom indeed the writings survive, are well-nigh Pericles and Alcibiades, and of the same age Thucydides—subtle, acute, brief, abounding more in thoughts than in words: it could not have happened that there should be one kind common to all, unless they set someone before themselves for imitation. These were followed by Critias, Theramenes, Lysias: many of Lysias's writings exist; some of Critias's; of Theramenes we hear; all even then retained that sap of Pericles, but were of a somewhat richer thread.

[53717] 94. Behold, then, there arose Isocrates, from whose school, as from the Trojan horse, none but leaders came forth; but of them some wished to be illustrious in the procession, some in the battle-line. And both those—Theopompus, Ephorus, Philistus, Naucrates, and many others—differ in their natures, but in their inclination are like both one another and their master; and those who betook themselves to causes, as Demosthenes, Hyperides, Lycurgus, Aeschines, Dinarchus, and several others, though they were not equal among themselves, yet were all engaged in the same kind of imitating the truth, and so long as the imitation of them remained, so long did that kind of speaking and the zeal for it live;

[54423] 95. but after these were extinguished, and all memory of them was gradually obscured and vanished, certain other softer and more relaxed kinds of speaking flourished. Thence Demochares, whom they say was the son of Demosthenes's sister; then that Demetrius of Phalerum, in my opinion the most polished of all those, and others like these arose. And if we wish to pursue this down to our own time, we shall understand that, as today all Asia imitates that Menecles of Alabanda and his brother Hierocles, whom I heard, so there has always been someone whom most men wished to resemble.

[55008] 96. This likeness, then, whoever wishes to attain by imitation, let him pursue it both by frequent and great exercises and most of all by writing; which if our Sulpicius would do, his speech would be much more compressed; in which now sometimes—as rustics are wont to say of plants in their greatest luxuriance—there is a certain rankness, which must be cropped away by the pen."

[55389] 97. Hereupon Sulpicius said: "You admonish me rightly, and it is grateful to me; but I do not think that even you, Antonius, have done much writing." Then he said: "As though I did not give others precepts which I myself lack: but yet I am thought not even to keep accounts; however, in the one matter judgement can be made from my private estate, and in the other from what I say, however little that is, what I do.

[55807] 98. And yet we see that there are many who imitate no one, and by their own nature attain what they wish without the likeness of anyone; which can rightly be observed in you, Caesar and Cotta; of whom the one has attained a certain charm and wit unusual at least to our orators, the other a most acute and most subtle kind of speaking; nor indeed does your contemporary Gaius Curio—whose father was in my opinion the most eloquent of those times—seem to me to imitate anyone greatly; who yet, by the weight and elegance and abundance of his words, has expressed a certain form and figure of speaking of his own; which I was best able to judge in that cause which he spoke against me before the centumviri on behalf of the brothers Cossus; in which nothing was wanting to him that not only a copious but even a wise orator ought to have.

[56645] 99. But, to lead at length to causes that man whom we have set up—and to those indeed in which there is a little more business, of trials and suits—someone perhaps will have laughed at this precept; for it is not so much acute as necessary, and rather of a not foolish admonisher than of a learned master—this we shall enjoin upon him first: that whatever causes he is going to handle, he should learn them diligently and thoroughly.

[57080] 100. This is not taught in the school; for easy causes are brought to boys; 'the law forbids a foreigner to ascend the wall; he ascended; he repelled the enemy: he is accused.' There is no trouble in learning a cause of this kind; rightly, then, do they give no precepts about learning the cause. But in the forum the documents, the testimonies, the agreements, the compacts, the stipulations, the relationships, the connections, the decrees, the responses, in short the whole life of those who are engaged in the cause, must be learned; by neglect of which things we see most causes—and especially private ones, for they are often much more obscure—lost.

[57737] 101. Thus some, while they wish their own labour to be thought great, so that they may seem to flit about the whole forum and to go from cause to cause, plead causes that they have not learned; in which there is indeed that great offence either of negligence, in matters undertaken, or of treachery, in matters accepted; but there is also that, greater than they suppose, that no one can speak otherwise than most disgracefully about a matter which he does not know: so, while they despise the censure of indolence, which is the greater, they incur even that which they themselves the more shun, of slowness.

[58347] 102. For my part I am wont to take pains that each one should himself teach me about his own matter, and that no one else be present, that he may speak the more freely, and to plead the adversary's cause, that he may plead his own and bring out into the open whatever he has thought about his case: and so, when he has departed, I alone sustain three persons with the greatest equanimity of mind—my own, the adversary's, the judge's. Whatever point is such that it has more of help than of harm, this I judge must be spoken; where I find more of evil than of good, that I wholly reject and cast out.

[58948] 103. Thus I attain this—that at one time I think what I shall say, at another I say it; which two things most men, relying on talent, do at the same time; but certainly those very men would speak somewhat better, if they thought they should take one time for thinking, another for speaking.

[59240] 104. When I have thoroughly learned the matter and the cause, there at once occurs to my mind what the point of dispute is; for there is nothing that is disputed among men—whether the cause consists of a charge, as of a crime, or of a controversy, as of an inheritance, or of a deliberation, as of war, or of a discussion, as about the method of living—in which it is not asked either what has been done or is being done or will be done, or of what kind it is, or by what name it is called.

[59732] 105. And our causes, at least those that are of charges, are for the most part defended by denial; for both in cases of extortion, which are the greatest, almost everything must be denied, and in cases of bribery it is rarely granted that you can separate liberality and kindness from canvassing and largess; in cases of assassins, of poisonings, of embezzlement, one must deny: this, then, is the first kind of causes in trials, from the controversy of fact; in deliberations, for the most part from the future, rarely from the present or the past.

[60283] 106. Often, too, it is asked not whether a thing is so or not, but of what kind it is; as when Gaius Carbo the consul was defending the cause of Lucius Opimius before the people, in my hearing, he denied nothing about the killing of Gaius Gracchus, but said that it had been done rightly for the safety of the fatherland; as Publius Africanus had answered the same Carbo, then a tribune of the plebs governing the commonwealth with another mind, when he asked about Tiberius Gracchus, that he seemed to have been justly slain; and 'justly' all things are defended which are of such a kind that they seem either to have had to be done, or to have been allowed, or to have been necessary, or to have been done through ignorance or by chance.

[61024] 107. Then it is asked what a thing is called, when there is a dispute by what word something is to be named; as I myself had the greatest contention with this Sulpicius in the cause of Norbanus; for, though I confessed most of the things that were objected by him, yet I denied that majesty had been diminished by him—on which word that whole cause depended, under the Apuleian law.

[61408] 108. And in this kind of causes some give the precept that each side should briefly define that word which makes the cause—which to me at least is wont to seem altogether childish: for there is one definition of words when there is a dispute among learned men about those very matters which are engaged in the arts—as when it is asked what art is, what law is, what a state is—in which reason and learning prescribe this, that the force of the thing which you define be so expressed that nothing be absent and nothing be superfluous;

[61943] 109. which indeed in that cause neither Sulpicius did nor I attempted to do; for, so far as each of us could, we expanded with all abundance of speaking what it was to diminish majesty: for a definition, in the first place, is often wrested from one's hands by reproving one word, or adding, or taking away; then by its very kind it smacks of learning and a well-nigh boyish exercise; and again it cannot enter into the perception and the mind of the judge, for it slips past before it is grasped.

[62442] 110. But in that kind in which it is disputed of what kind a thing is, there often arises also a contention from the interpretation of a writing, in which there can be no controversy except from an ambiguity; for that very thing, that the writing differs from the intention, has a certain kind of ambiguity; which is then explained, when those words which are wanting are supplied, by the adding of which it is defended that the meaning of the writing was clear; and if anything is disputed from contradictory writings, no new kind arises, but the cause of the former kind is doubled; and that either can never be decided, or will be so decided that, by bringing back the omitted words, that writing, whichever we shall defend, is supplemented; thus it comes about that one kind is left in those causes which are disputed on account of a writing, if anything has been written ambiguously.

[63332] 111. But of ambiguities, since there are several kinds, which seem to me to be better known by those who are called dialecticians, while these our countrymen are ignorant of them, though they ought to know them no less—then that is most frequent in all usage either of speech or of writing, when something is made ambiguous because either a word or words have been omitted.

[63707] 112. But again they err, when they separate this kind of causes, which is engaged in the interpretation of a writing, from those causes in which it is disputed of what kind each thing is; for nowhere is it so much asked of what kind the very nature of the thing is as in a writing, which is wholly separated from the controversy of fact.

[64046] 113. Thus there are altogether three kinds which can fall into discussion and controversy: what is being done or has been done or will be done; or of what kind it is; or by what name it is named; for that which certain Greeks add, 'whether a thing has been rightly done,' is wholly contained in 'of what kind it is.' But now I will return to my purpose.

[64401] 114. When, then, the cause being received and its kind being known, I begin to handle the matter, I settle nothing before what that is to which all that speech, proper to the question and the trial, must be referred; then I most diligently consider those two things, of which the one has a commendation of ourselves or of those whom we defend, the other is fitted to moving the minds of those before whom we speak, toward that which we wish.

[64844] 115. Thus all the method of speaking rests upon three things for persuading: that we prove that what we maintain is true; that we win over to ourselves those who listen; that we summon their minds to whatever motion the cause shall demand.

[65085] 116. For proving, moreover, a twofold material is laid before the orator: one of those things which are not devised by the orator, but, being placed in the matter, are handled by method—as documents, testimonies, agreements, examinations, laws, decrees of the senate, things judged, decrees, responses, and the rest, if there are any, which are not found by the orator, but are brought to the orator from the cause; the other is that which is placed wholly in the disputation and argumentation of the orator;

[65595] 117. thus in the former kind one must think about handling the arguments, in the latter even about finding them. And those, indeed, who teach, when they have cut up causes into several kinds, supply to the several kinds an abundance of arguments; which, even if it is more apt for instructing youths, so that, as soon as a cause is set down, they may have something to which to refer, whence they may at once draw forth ready arguments, yet it is the mark of a slow talent to pursue the rivulets and not to see the springs of things; and it is now of our age and practice to fetch what we wish from the head, and to see whence all things flow.

[66240] 118. And the first kind of those things which are brought to the orator must be meditated by us once for all, for every use of like matters; for both for documents and against documents, for witnesses and against witnesses, for examinations and against examinations, and likewise about the other matters of the same kind, we are wont to speak either separately about the universal kind, or definitely about particular times, men, causes; which topics—this I say to you, Cotta and Sulpicius—you ought to have prepared and ready by much study and meditation.

[66798] 119. For it is long now for me to set forth by what method one ought either to confirm or to weaken witnesses, documents, examinations. These are all matters of even moderate talent, but of the greatest exercise; art and precepts they require only so far as to be adorned with certain lights of speaking.

[67104] 120. And likewise those things which are of the other kind, which are wholly produced by the orator, have no difficult devising, but require a more brilliant and polished setting-forth; and so, since these two things must be sought by us in causes—first, what, then, in what manner we should speak—the latter, which seems wholly tinged with art, although it requires art, yet it is of well-nigh moderate prudence to see what should be said; the other is that in which is discerned that divine power and virtue of the orator—to speak the things which must be spoken elegantly, copiously, and variously.

[67707] 121. Wherefore that former part, since it has once so pleased you, I will not refuse to polish and finish—how much I attain, you will judge—from what topics the speech may be led to those three things which alone avail for producing conviction, that the minds be both won over and taught and moved; but in what manner those things may be illustrated, there is at hand one who can teach all, who first brought this into our customs, who most increased it, who alone perfected it.

[68187] 122. For I, Catulus—for I will say it without fearing the suspicion of flattery—think that there is no orator of any little distinction whom our age has produced whom I have not both often and diligently heard; and so, if there is anything in me—which I now seem to hope, since indeed you, men of these talents, give me so much labour to listen to—it is from this, that no one ever did anything as an orator in my hearing which did not deeply settle in my memory: and so I, such as I am, however small I am for judging, having heard all the orators, without any doubt thus lay down and judge that no one of all has had so many and so great ornaments of speaking as are in Crassus.

[68869] 123. Wherefore, if you too think this same thing, the division will not, I think, be unfair, if, when I have created, nourished, confirmed this orator whom I am now fashioning, as I have undertaken, I hand him over to Crassus to be clothed and adorned."

[69124] 124. Then Crassus said: "Do you indeed, Antonius, go on as you have begun; for it is the mark neither of a good nor of a generous parent not to clothe and adorn him whom you have begotten and reared, especially since you cannot deny that you are wealthy. For what ornament, what power, what spirit, what dignity was wanting to that orator who, in winding up a cause, did not hesitate to raise up a defendant of consular rank and to tear open his tunic and to show the judges the scars on the front of the old commander? who likewise, when this Sulpicius was the accuser, defending a seditious and frenzied man, did not hesitate to adorn the very seditions and to show, in the weightiest words, that many of the people's onsets were often not unjust, which no one could prevent; that many seditions, too, had often been made for the good of the commonwealth—as when the kings were driven out, as when the tribunician power was established; that that sedition of Norbanus, arising from the grief of the citizens and from hatred of Caepio, who had lost an army, could neither be repressed and had been justly kindled?

[70240] 125. Could so doubtful, so unheard-of, so slippery, so novel a topic be handled without a certain incredible power and faculty of speaking? What shall I say of the appeal to pity for Gnaeus Manlius, what of that for Quintus Rex? What of countless others? In which this did not shine forth most—that single acuteness which all grant you—but these very things which you now wish to make over to me have always been excellent and outstanding in you."

[70689] 126. Then Catulus said: "I, indeed, am wont to admire this most of all in you—that, although you are most unlike one another in speaking, yet each of you so speaks that nothing seems to him to have been denied by nature or not conferred by learning; wherefore, Crassus, you will not deprive us of your sweetness, but, if anything has been omitted or left by Antonius, will set it forth; nor of you, Antonius, if you shall not have said something, shall we suppose that you could not, rather than that you preferred it to be said by Crassus."

[71232] 127. Hereupon Crassus said: "Why do you not, Antonius, omit those things which you have proposed, which none of these desire—from what topics those things which must be said in causes may be found; which, although they are said by you in a certain new and excellent way, are yet both easier in fact and common in the precepts; bring forth to us whence you draw those things which you most often handle, and always divinely."

[71658] 128. "I will bring them forth, indeed," said he; "and that I may the more easily exact from you what I seek, I will refuse you nothing that you ask of me. Of my whole method in speaking, and of that very faculty which Crassus just now extolled to heaven in words, there are three things, as I said before: one of winning over men, another of teaching them, the third of stirring them up.

[72047] 129. Of these three parts the first requires gentleness of speech, the second acuteness, the third force; for it is necessary that he who is to adjudge the cause to us either incline toward us by an inclination of will, or be led by the arguments of the defence, or be compelled by an emotion of the mind. But since that part in which the unfolding and defence of the matters themselves is placed seems to contain all the doctrine, as it were, of this kind, of it we will speak first, and will say a few things; for there are few things which we seem to have, now handled by practice and as it were noted in the mind.

[72666] 130. And to you, Crassus, wisely admonishing, we will gladly assent—that we should leave aside the defences of particular causes which the masters are wont to hand down to boys, but should open up those heads whence all disputation is drawn for every cause and every speech. For neither, as often as some word must be written by us, must the letters of that word be sought out by thought; nor, as often as a cause must be pleaded, must we revolve back to the arguments set apart for that cause, but must have certain topics which, as letters for writing a word, so may at once occur for unfolding a cause.

[73273] 131. But these topics can at length profit only that orator who is versed either in the practice of affairs, which age finally brings, or in the hearing and reflection which zeal and diligence have outrun in advance of age. For if you bring me a man however learned, however keen and acute in thinking, however ready in delivery, if he be at the same time a stranger to the custom of the state, to its precedents, its institutions, its characters and the inclinations of his fellow-citizens, those topics from which arguments are drawn will profit him little: I need a worked-over mind, as a field not once ploughed but ploughed again, that it may bring forth better and larger crops; and the working-over is practice, hearing, reading, letters.

[74020] 132. And first let him see the nature of the cause, which is never hidden—whether it is asked whether a thing was done, or of what kind it is, or what name it has; which being perceived, there at once occurs, by a certain natural prudence—not by those subtractions which those men teach—what makes the cause, that is, that which, being removed, the controversy cannot stand; then what comes into judgement: which those men bid us seek thus: 'Opimius killed Gracchus. What makes the cause? That he did it for the commonwealth's sake, when, by a decree of the senate, he had called to arms. Take this away, there will be no cause. But Decius denies that this very thing was lawful against the laws. It will come, then, into judgement whether it was lawful, by a decree of the senate, for the sake of saving the commonwealth.' These things, indeed, are plain and set in vulgar prudence; but those things must be sought which both the accuser and the defender ought to bring forward as arguments looking to that which comes into judgement.

[75057] 133. And here that must be seen in which is the greatest error of those masters to whom we send our children—not that this, indeed, greatly pertains to speaking, but that you may see what kind this is of those who seem learned to themselves. It is dull and unpolished: for in dividing the modes of speeches they set up two kinds of causes: one they call that in which, without persons and times, it is inquired about the universal kind; the other, that which is defined by fixed persons and times; ignorant that all controversies are referred to the force and nature of the universal kind;

[75648] 134. for in that very cause of which I spoke before, the person of Opimius pertains nothing to the orator's topics, nothing that of Decius; about the universal kind itself there is an unlimited question—whether he seems liable to punishment who has slain a citizen, by a decree of the senate, for the sake of preserving the fatherland, when this was not lawful by the laws; in short, there is no cause in which that which comes into judgement is inquired about by the persons of the defendants and not by the universal doubt of the kinds themselves.

[76199] 135. Nay even, in those very cases where it is disputed about the fact—whether Decius took moneys against the laws—the arguments both of the charges and of the defence ought to be referred to the kind and the universal nature: because he is extravagant, to luxury; because greedy of another's property, to avarice; because seditious, to turbulent and bad citizens; because he is accused by many, to the kind of witnesses; and on the contrary, what is said for the defendant, all must necessarily be revolved from the time and the man to the common heads of things and kinds.

[76775] 136. And these, perhaps, to a man not quickly grasping in mind all things that are in the nature of things, may seem very many, which come into judgement when it is inquired about the fact; but yet the multitude is of charges and of defences, not unlimited of topics.

[77044] 137. But those things which, when it is not disputed about the fact, are inquired of what kind they are—if you count them from the defendants, they are both countless and obscure; if from the matters, they are both quite moderate and clear; for if we place Mancinus's cause in Mancinus alone, as often as a man whom the pater patratus has surrendered shall not have been received, so often a new cause will arise; but if that controversy makes the cause—whether he whom the pater patratus has surrendered, if he be not received, seems to have the right of return—then the name of Mancinus pertains nothing to the art of speaking nor to the arguments of Mancinus's defence;

[77718] 138. and, if besides the dignity or unworthiness of the man brings anything, it is outside the question, and yet that very speech must necessarily be referred to the disputation of the universal kind. These things I do not dispute with the purpose of refuting learned men; although they are to be censured who, in defining the kind, describe these causes as placed in persons and times; for although times and persons come in, yet it must be understood that the causes depend not on these, but on the kind of the question.

[78242] 139. But this is nothing to me; for we ought to have no contest with those men; it is enough only that it be understood that they have not even attained this, which in so great leisure, even without this forensic exercise, they could have effected—to distinguish the kinds of things and to set them forth a little more subtly.

[78570] 140. But this, as I said, is nothing to me; that is to me, and much more to you, our Cotta and Sulpicius: in the way in which those men's arts now stand, the multitude of causes is to be dreaded; for it is unlimited, if it is placed in persons—as many men, so many causes; but if it is referred to the universal questions of the kinds, it is so moderate and few that all diligent and mindful and sober orators ought to have them run through in mind and, I may almost say, conned by heart; unless perchance you think that Lucius Crassus learned the cause from Manius Curius, and for that reason brought forward many points, why, though no posthumous son had been born, Curius ought nevertheless to be the heir of Coponius:

[79293] 141. the name of Coponius or Curius pertained nothing to the abundance of arguments, nor to the force and nature of the cause; the whole question was in the universal kind of the matter and the business, not in the time and the names: when it is so written, 'if a son be born to me, and he die before, etc., then let that man be my heir,' whether he seems to be heir who is appointed heir, the son being dead—the question of perpetual law and of the universal kind requires not the names of men, but the method of speaking and the sources of arguments.

[79847] 142. In which even these our jurisconsults hinder us from learning and deter us; for I see that in the books of Cato and of Brutus it is generally reported by name what each man answered to some man or woman about a point of law; I suppose so that we might think that the cause of consultation or doubt was in the men, not in the matter; so that, because men were countless, we, disheartened, might cast away the wish to learn together with the hope of learning thoroughly. But these things Crassus will some day unfold for us and set forth, described by kinds; for—lest perchance you do not know—yesterday he promised us this, Catulus, that he would gather the civil law, which is now diffused and scattered, into fixed kinds, and reduce it to an easy art."

[80607] 143. "And indeed," said Catulus, "that is by no means difficult for Crassus, who both learned what could be learned of the law, and what was wanting to those who taught him, he himself will supply, so that he can either aptly arrange or ornately illustrate what is in the law." "Therefore," said Antonius, "we shall learn those things from Crassus then, when he has betaken himself, as he intends, from the crowd and the benches into leisure and the chair."

[81066] 144. "This indeed I have often heard from him," said Catulus, "when he said it was now fixed for him to retire from the courts and causes; but, as I am wont myself to say to him, it will not be allowed; for neither will he suffer his aid often to be implored in vain by good men, nor will the state bear it with an even mind, which, if it lacks the voice of Lucius Crassus, will think itself robbed of a certain ornament." "Why, by Hercules," said Antonius, "if these things have been truly said by Catulus, you must live with me in the same mill, Crassus; and let us yield that yawning and drowsy wisdom to the leisure of the Scaevolae and the other blessed ones."

[81733] 145. Hereupon Crassus smiled gently and said: "Only weave to the end, Antonius, what you have begun; but that yawning wisdom, as soon as I have fled to it, will claim me into liberty." "Of this topic, which I have just begun, this is the end," said Antonius; "since it has been understood that not in the countless persons of men nor in the unlimited variety of times, but in the kinds and natures of causes, are all things placed which are called into doubt, but that the kinds are defined not only in number but also in fewness, so that those who were zealous of speaking might grasp the material of speech which belonged to each kind, described in all its topics, furnished and adorned—I mean in facts and thoughts.

[82453] 146. These by their own force will bring forth words, which always seem to me at least sufficiently adorned, if they are of such a kind that the matter itself seems to have brought them forth; and if you ask the truth, what seems true to me at least—for I can affirm nothing else but my own opinion and view—this equipment of causes and of the universal kinds we ought to bring into the forum, and not, as each matter is brought to us, then at last to search out the topics from which we may dig out arguments; which indeed can be thoroughly handled, with zeal applied and practice, by all who have but moderately considered them; but yet the mind must be referred to those heads and to those topics, which I have now often named, from which all things invented are drawn for every speech; and this whole thing, whether of art or of observation or of habit, is to know the regions within which you may hunt out and track down what you seek:

[83395] 147. when you have hedged about in thought all that region, if only you have become thoroughly versed in the practice of affairs, nothing will escape you, and everything that is in the matter will occur and fall in your way. And so, since for finding in speaking there are three things—acuteness, then method, which, if we wish, we may call art, and third diligence—I cannot indeed but concede the first place to talent; but yet diligence rouses even the very talent out of slowness;

[83880] 148. diligence, I say, which in all matters, as in defending causes, avails most. This must be especially cultivated by us; this must always be applied; there is nothing which it does not attain: that the cause be thoroughly known, which I said at the outset, is of diligence; that we listen attentively to the adversary, and catch not only his thoughts but even all his words, in short perceive all his looks, which generally indicate the feelings of the mind, is of diligence;

[84360] 149. yet to do this dissemblingly, lest he seem to himself to gain anything, is of prudence; then that the mind be revolved in those topics which I shall set forth a little later, that it may thoroughly insinuate itself into the cause, that it be intent with care and reflection, is of diligence; that to these things it apply, as a kind of light, the memory, the voice, the strength, is of diligence.

[84763] 150. Between talent indeed and diligence very little room is left for art: art shows only where you should seek, and where that is which you are eager to find; the rest are in care, attention of mind, reflection, vigilance, assiduity, labour; I will embrace it in one word, which we have now often used—diligence; in which one virtue all the remaining virtues are contained.

[85139] 151. For we see how the philosophers abound in abundance of speech, who—as I think, but you, Catulus, know these things better—give no precepts of speaking, nor on that account the less undertake, whatever matter is proposed, to speak about it copiously and abundantly."

[85411] 152. Then Catulus said: "It is, Antonius, as you say, that most philosophers hand down no precepts of speaking and yet have ready what to say about each thing; but Aristotle, the man whom I most admire, set down certain topics, from which the whole way of every argument might be found, not only for the disputation of philosophers, but also for this speaking which we use in causes; from which man, indeed, Antonius, your speech has not for a long time strayed, whether by a likeness to that divine talent you fall into the same footsteps, or whether you have even read and learned those very things—which to me at least seems more probable; for I see that you have given more labour to Greek matters than we had supposed."

[86137] 153. Then he said: "The truth you shall hear from me, Catulus: I always thought the orator would be more pleasant and more acceptable to this people who should give, first, as little indication as possible of any art, and then none of Greek matters: and I likewise thought it was the mark of a beast, not a man, when the Greeks were undertaking, professing, treating such great matters, and were promising to give men the method both of seeing the most obscure things and of living well and speaking copiously, not to lend an ear; and, if you did not dare to hear them openly, lest you diminish your authority among your fellow-citizens, yet by listening on the side to catch their voices and to attend from afar to what they related. And so I did, Catulus, and I tasted, in summary, the causes and the very kinds of all those men."

[86971] 154. "By Hercules," said Catulus, "very timidly, as if toward some rock of lust, did you put in your mind to philosophy, which this state has never spurned; for Italy was once full of Pythagoreans, then when that great Greece was in this nation; from which some even report that Numa Pompilius, our king, was a Pythagorean, who lived very many years before Pythagoras himself; on which account he must be held the greater man, since he knew that wisdom of establishing a state almost two centuries before the Greeks perceived that it was born; and certainly this state has produced none more famous, or weightier in authority, or more polished in culture than Publius Africanus, Gaius Laelius, Lucius Furius, who always had openly with them most learned men from Greece.

[87743] 155. And I often heard this from them, when they said that the Athenians had done a most acceptable thing both to themselves and to many of the leading men of the state, in that, when they were sending ambassadors to the senate about their greatest affairs, they had sent the three most noble philosophers of that age—Carneades and Critolaus and Diogenes; and so, while they were at Rome, they were frequently heard both by themselves and by others; whom, when you had as authorities, Antonius, I wonder why you have declared, like that Zethus of Pacuvius, almost war upon philosophy."

[88330] 156. "By no means," said Antonius; "and I have so resolved rather to philosophize, as Neoptolemus in Ennius does, 'in a few things; for altogether it does not please me.' But yet this is my opinion, which I seemed to have set forth: I do not disapprove of those studies, provided only they be moderate; but I think the reputation of those studies and the suspicion of art, among those who judge causes, is adverse to the orator; for it diminishes both the authority of the orator and the credit of the speech.

[88841] 157. But, that the speech may be called back whither it has digressed, of those three most famous philosophers whom you said came to Rome, do you not see that Diogenes was the one who said that he handed down the art of reasoning well and of distinguishing the true and the false, which he called by the Greek word dialectic? In this art, if indeed it be an art, there is no precept how the truth may be found, but only how it may be judged;

[89284] 158. for both everything that we utter in such a way that we say it either is or is not, and, if it be simply stated, the dialecticians undertake to judge whether it be true or false; and, if it be uttered in combination and other things be joined to it, they judge whether they are rightly joined and whether the sum of each particular reasoning is true; and at the last they prick themselves with their own subtleties, and by much questioning find out not only those things which they themselves can no longer untie, but even those by which things already begun and rather woven are well-nigh unwoven again.

[89895] 159. Here, then, this Stoic helps us nothing, since he does not teach in what manner I may find what to say; and the same even hinders, because he both discovers many things which he says can in no way be untied, and brings a kind of speech that is not liquid, not flowing and streaming, but meagre, dry, concise and minute, which if anyone shall approve, he will so approve it as yet to confess that it is not suited to the orator; for this speech of ours must be accommodated to the ears of the multitude, to delight their minds, to impel them, to prove those things which are weighed not in the goldsmith's balance, but in a certain popular scale;

[90547] 160. wherefore we dismiss that whole art, which is too dumb in devising arguments, too talkative in judging them. That Critolaus, whom you mention as having come with Diogenes, I think could have profited this our study more; for he was of that Aristotle, from whose discoveries I seem to you not to wander far. And between this Aristotle—both that book of whom I read, in which he set forth the arts of speaking of all his predecessors, and those in which he himself said certain things of his own about the same art—and those true masters of this art, this seemed to me to be the difference, that he with the same edge of mind with which he had seen the force and nature of all things, looked also upon these things which pertained to the art of speaking, which he despised; but those who thought this alone worth cultivating dwelt in handling this one method, not with the same prudence as he, but with greater practice and zeal in this one kind.

[91498] 161. But Carneades's incredible power of speaking and his versatility would be very much to be wished for by us—a man who in those disputations of his never defended a thing which he did not make probable, never attacked one which he did not overthrow. But this is something greater than is to be demanded from those who hand down and teach these things.

[91854] 162. But I, for my part, if I now wished to train someone altogether raw for speaking, would rather hand him over to those assiduous men beating the same anvil day and night in one task, who would insert into his mouth all the most minute particles and all the smallest morsels chewed up, as nurses do for infant boys; but if it be one who seems to me both liberally instructed in learning and already imbued with some practice and to be of a sufficiently keen talent, thither I would hurry him, where he might be held not by some secluded little stream, but whence the whole river bursts forth; one who may point out to him the seats and, as it were, dwelling-places of all arguments, and briefly illustrate them and define them in words.

[92595] 163. For what is there in which he can stick fast who has seen that everything which is taken in a speech, either for proving or for refuting, is either taken from its own matter by its own force and nature, or assumed from without? from its own force, when either the whole matter, what it is, is inquired, or a part of it, or the name which it has, or something which touches that matter; but from without, when those things are gathered which are outside and do not inhere in the nature of the matter.

[93101] 164. If the whole matter is inquired, the force must be unfolded by a universal definition, thus: 'if majesty is the greatness and dignity of the state, he diminishes it who has handed over an army to the enemies of the Roman people, not he who has handed over him who did this to the power of the Roman people.'

[93415] 165. But if a part, by partition, in this manner: 'either the senate had to be obeyed about the safety of the commonwealth, or another counsel had to be devised, or it had to be done of one's own accord; another counsel is proud, one's own is arrogant; the counsel of the senate, therefore, had to be used.' If from the name, as Carbo: 'if he is a consul who consults for his fatherland, what else did Opimius do?'

[93831] 166. But if from that which touches the matter, there are several seats and topics of arguments; for we shall seek both conjuncts, and kinds, and the parts subjected to the kinds, and likenesses, and unlikenesses, and contraries, and consequents, and consentaneous things, and, as it were, antecedents, and repugnant things; and we shall track out the causes of things, and those things which have arisen from causes; and we shall seek the greater, the equal, the lesser.

[94304] 167. From conjuncts arguments are drawn thus: 'if the highest praise is to be given to piety, you ought to be moved when you see Quintus Metellus mourn so piously.' But from kind: 'if magistrates ought to be in the power of the Roman people, why do you accuse Norbanus, whose tribunate obeyed the will of the state?'

[94622] 168. But from a part which is subjected to a kind: 'if all who take thought for the commonwealth ought to be dear to us, surely above all the commanders, by whose counsels, virtue, and dangers we keep both our safety and the dignity of empire.' But from likeness: 'if wild beasts love their offspring, with what indulgence ought we to be toward our children?'

[94983] 169. But from unlikeness: 'if it is the mark of barbarians to live for the day, our counsels ought to look to everlasting time.' And in each kind, both of likeness and of unlikeness, examples are to be set down, drawn from the deeds or sayings or fortunes of others, and often feigned narratives. Now from the contrary: 'if Gracchus acted wickedly, Opimius acted nobly.' From consequents: 'if both that man was slain with the sword, and you, his enemy, were seized in that very place with a bloody sword, and no one besides you was seen there, and no one had a motive, and you were always bold, what is there that we can doubt about the crime?'

[95629] 170. From consentaneous and antecedent and repugnant things, as once Crassus when a young man: 'not, Carbo, if you defended Opimius, on that account will these men think you a good citizen: that you simulated and sought something is evident, because you often bewailed the death of Tiberius Gracchus in assemblies, because you were a partner in the slaying of Publius Africanus, because you brought forward that law in your tribunate, because you always dissented from the good.'

[96110] 171. But from the causes of things thus: 'if you wish to take away avarice, its mother must be taken away, luxury.' But from those things which have arisen from causes: 'if we use the resources of the treasury both for the aids of war and for the ornaments of peace, let us be slaves to the revenues.'

[96413] 172. But the greater and the lesser and the equal we shall compare thus: from the greater: 'if a good reputation surpasses riches, and money is so greatly sought after, how much more is glory to be sought!' from the lesser: 'this man, for the sake of a slight acquaintance, bears that man's death so familiarly: what if he had himself loved? what will this man do to me, his father?' From the equal: 'it is the mark of the same man both to rob and to lavish moneys against the commonwealth.'

[96906] 173. But from without are assumed those things which are supported not by their own force but by a foreign one, as these: 'this is true; for Quintus Lutatius said it. This is false; for an examination was held. This must necessarily follow; for I recite the documents.' About which whole kind I spoke a little while ago.

[97228] 174. These, as briefly as they could be said, so have they been said by me; for as, if I wished to point out to someone gold which had been buried in many places, it ought to be enough if I showed the signs and marks of the places, which being known he might himself dig for himself and find what he wished with little labour and no error; so I have noted these marks of arguments, which show the seeker where they are; the rest is dug out by care and reflection;

[97693] 175. but what kind of argument best suits each kind of cause is not the part of an exquisite art to prescribe, but it is of moderate talent to judge; for we are not now doing this, to set forth some art of speaking, but to hand down to most learned men certain admonitions, as it were, of our practice. With these topics, then, fixed in the mind and reflection, and roused in every matter set before us for speaking, there will be nothing that can escape the orator, not only in forensic disputes, but altogether in any kind of speaking whatever.

[98241] 176. But if he shall attain to seem such as he wishes to seem, and so to affect the minds of those before whom he pleads that he can either draw or hurry them whithersoever he wishes, surely he will require nothing further for speaking. Now we see that it is by no means enough to find what you should say, unless you can handle what is found;

[98586] 177. but the handling ought to be various, lest the hearer either recognize the art or be wearied by the satiety of likeness: one ought to set forth what one brings, and to show why it is so; sometimes to conclude from those same topics, sometimes to leave them and pass to another; often not to set forth, but, by bringing forward the very reasoning, to declare what should have been set forth; if you say anything is like something, first to confirm that it is like, then to join what is at issue; for the most part to conceal the points of division of the arguments, lest anyone be able to number them, so that they are distinguished in substance but seem confused in words.

[99265] 178. These things, hastening, both before the learned and as myself half-learned, I run through, that we may at length come to those greater matters: for there is nothing greater in speaking, Catulus, than that the hearer favour the orator, and be himself so moved that he is governed by a certain impulse and disturbance of mind rather than by judgement or counsel: for men judge far more by hatred or love or desire or anger or grief or gladness or hope or fear or error or some emotion of the mind, than by truth or precept or any norm of law or formula of trial or by the laws.

[99848] 179. Wherefore, unless something else pleases you, let us proceed to those matters." "A little," said Catulus, "even now seems to be wanting to those things which you have set forth, Antonius, which must be unfolded by you before you set out thither whither you say you are aiming." "What, pray?" said he. "What order pleases you," said Catulus, "and what arrangement of arguments, in which you always seem to me a god."

[100270] 180. "See how much of a god I am," said he, "in that kind, Catulus: by Hercules, it would not have come into my mind unless I had been reminded; so that you may judge that in those things in which I sometimes seem to effect something, I am wont in speaking to fall in by practice, or rather by chance. And indeed that very matter, which, because I did not know it, I passed by as one passes an unknown man, has so great force in speaking that none has more for winning; but yet you seem to me to have asked me before the time the method of order and of arranging matters;

[100843] 181. for if I had placed all the force of the orator in arguments and in the matter itself proved by itself, it would now be time to say something about the order of arguments and the arrangement of matters; but since three things were proposed by me, and one has been spoken of, when I have spoken of the two remaining, then at last will be the time to inquire about arranging the whole speech.

[101240] 182. It avails much, then, for winning, that the character and institutions and deeds and life of those who plead causes, and of those for whom, be approved, and likewise that those of the adversaries be disapproved, and that the minds of those before whom it is pleaded be won over, as much as possible, to goodwill both toward the orator and toward him for whom the orator speaks. But minds are won over by the dignity of a man, by his deeds, by the estimation of his life; which can more easily be adorned, if they exist, than feigned, if they are none. But these things help in the orator: gentleness of voice, modesty of countenance, friendliness of words; if you pursue anything more keenly, that you seem to do it unwillingly and under compulsion. To bring forward signs of facility, liberality, gentleness, piety, a grateful mind, not grasping, not greedy, is very useful; and all those things which belong to the upright, the modest, the not keen, the not stubborn, the not litigious, the not bitter, greatly win goodwill and alienate it from those in whom these things are not; and so the same things are to be applied conversely against the adversaries.

[102406] 183. But this whole kind of speech excels in those causes in which the mind of the judge can less be inflamed by a keen and vehement incitement; for not always is a forcible speech sought, but often a placid, lowered, gentle one, which most commends defendants. But I call defendants not only those who are accused, but all about whose matter it is disputed; for so they spoke of old.

[102792] 184. To express, then, the characters of these in speech as just, upright, religious, modest, patient of injuries, has a wonderful force; and this, whether in the introductions or in narrating the matter or in the peroration, has so great force, if it be handled sweetly and with feeling, that often it avails more than the cause. But so much is effected by a certain feeling and method of speaking, that the speech, as it were, fashions the character of the orator; for by a certain kind of thoughts and a certain kind of words, with a gentle delivery added that signifies friendliness, it is brought about that we seem upright, well-conducted, good men.

[103449] 185. But to this is joined that unlike method of speech, which by a certain other kind moves and impels the minds of the judges, that they either hate or love or envy or wish safe or fear or hope or desire or shrink or rejoice or grieve or pity or wish to punish, or are led to those emotions, if any are akin to such emotions of the mind.

[103790] 186. And this is to be wished for by the orator, that the judges bring of their own accord to the cause some emotion of mind suited to that which the orator's advantage requires; for it is easier, as they say, to spur on one who is running than to move one who is languid; but if that be not, or be more obscure, then, just as for a diligent physician, before he tries to apply medicine to the sick, not only the disease of him whom he wishes to heal, but also the habit of the well man and the nature of the body must be learned, so I, when I approach the handling of the minds of the judges in a doubtful and weighty cause, busy myself with my whole mind in this thought and care, that I may smell out, as sagaciously as I can, what they feel, what they think, what they expect, what they wish, whither they seem able most easily to be led by the speech.

[104648] 187. If they give themselves and, as I said before, of their own accord incline and lean whither we impel, I accept what is given and set sail toward that whence some breeze shows itself; but if the judge is untouched and quiet, there is more work; for everything must be roused by speaking, with nature helping nothing. But so great force has that which has been rightly said by a good poet—'speech, that bends the soul and is the queen of all things'—that not only can it catch one who is inclining, or incline one who is standing, but even take one who is opposed and resisting, like a brave and good commander.

[105264] 188. These are those things which Crassus, jesting, just now demanded of me, when he said they were wont to be handled by me divinely, and praised in the cause of Manius Aquilius and Gaius Norbanus and some others as having been done excellently; which, by Hercules, Crassus, when they are handled by you in causes, I am wont to shudder at: so great a force of mind, so great an impulse, so great a grief is wont to be signified by your eyes, your countenance, your gesture, in short by that finger of yours; so great is the flood of the weightiest and best words, the thoughts so genuine, so true, so new, so without paint and boyish daubing, that you seem to me not only to set the judge on fire, but yourself to burn.

[105986] 189. And it cannot happen that he who hears should grieve, should hate, should envy, should dread anything, should be led to weeping and pity, unless all those emotions which the orator wishes to apply to the judge shall seem impressed and branded upon the orator himself. But if some feigned grief were to be undertaken, and if in this kind of speech there were nothing but what was false and simulated by imitation, perhaps some greater art would be required: now I do not know what happens to you, Crassus, or to the rest; but as for myself there is no reason why I should lie before men most prudent and most friendly: never, by Hercules, did I wish to rouse grief or pity or envy or hatred in speaking before the judges, without being myself moved, in stirring the judges, by those very feelings to which I wished to lead them;

[106820] 190. for neither is it easy to bring it about that the judge be angry with him whom you wish, if you yourself seem to take it calmly; nor that he hate him whom you wish, unless he first see you burning with hatred; nor will he be led to pity, unless you show him signs of your grief by words, thoughts, voice, countenance, in short by weeping with him; for as no material is so easy to kindle that it can catch fire unless fire be applied to it, so no mind is so prepared to grasp the force of the orator that it can be set on fire, unless he himself approach it inflamed and burning.

[107406] 191. And, lest this perhaps seem great and wonderful, that a man should so often be angry, so often grieve, so often be roused by every emotion of mind, especially in matters that concern others, great is the force of those thoughts and those topics which you handle and treat in speaking, so that there is no need of simulation and deceit; for the very nature of that speech which is undertaken to move the minds of others moves the orator himself even more than any of those who hear.

[107894] 192. And, lest we wonder that this happens in causes, in trials, in the dangers of friends, in the gathering of men, in the state, in the forum, when there is at stake not only the estimation of our talent—for that would be a lighter matter (although, when you have professed that you can do what few can, not even that is to be neglected)—but there are other things much greater, good faith, duty, diligence, by which, led, even when we defend most utter strangers, yet we cannot reckon them strangers, if we ourselves wish to be held good men—

[108441] 193. but, as I said, lest this seem strange in us, what can be so feigned as a verse, as a stage, as plays? Yet in this kind I myself have often seen that, from the part, the eyes of the actor seemed to me to burn, as he spoke those very verses: 'Did you dare to separate him from you, or to enter Salamis without him? And did you not stand in awe of your father's face?'

[108814] 194. He never spoke that 'face' but that Telamon seemed to me to rage, angry, in grief for his son; but the same, his voice bent to a piteous sound, 'when, my life now spent, you mangled, bereaved, extinguished me of my children; nor of your brother's death, nor of his little son, who was handed to your guardianship'—he seemed to speak weeping and lamenting; and if that actor, though he acted it daily, yet could not act it without grief, what do you think of Pacuvius in the writing—was he of a gentle and relaxed mind? In no way could it be.

[109362] 195. For I have often heard that no one can be a good poet—a thing which they say was left in writing by Democritus and Plato—without an inflammation of the mind and as it were a certain breath of madness. Wherefore do not think that I myself—who do not wish to imitate and shadow forth in speaking the ancient and feigned griefs of heroes, nor am the actor of another's part, but the author of my own—when Manius Aquilius had to be kept in the state, did, in the winding-up of that cause, what I did without great grief: