WORK: On Oratory  (slug: cicero-marcus-tullius-on-oratory-6f2b26)

CHAPTER: 01-book-1



[110140] 209. Then Crassus said: 'Only go on, Antonius; for there is no danger that you should say anything except so prudently that none of us would repent of having urged you to this conversation.' 'I will indeed go on,' he said, 'and will do that which I think ought to be done at the beginning of all discussions—that it should be explained what that is about which the discussion is held, lest the speech be compelled to wander and stray, if those who disagree with one another do not understand that same thing about which it is treated.

[110676] 210. For if it were perchance asked what is the art of the general, I should think it must first be settled who the general is; and when he had been established as a certain manager of the conduct of war, then we should add about the army, about the camp, about marches, about the joining of battle, about the storming of towns, about supplies, about laying and avoiding ambushes, about the other matters which are proper to the conducting of war; and those who were masters in mind and knowledge of these things, those I should call generals, and I should use the examples of the Africani and the Maximi, and I should name Epaminondas and Hannibal and men of that kind.

[111348] 211. But if we were inquiring who he is who has brought his experience and knowledge and zeal to the governing of the commonwealth, I should define it thus: that he who held and used those things by which the advantage of the commonwealth is procured and increased should be reckoned the director of the commonwealth and the author of public counsel; and I should proclaim that famous Publius Lentulus the leader, and Tiberius Gracchus the father, and Quintus Metellus, and Publius Africanus, and Gaius Laelius, and countless others both from our own state and from others.

[111923] 212. But if it were asked who is truly named a jurisconsult, I should say he who is skilled in the laws and in that custom which private men use in the state, both for giving opinions, and for conducting cases, and for taking precaution; and from that class I should name Sextus Aelius, Manius Manilius, Publius Mucius. And, to come now to the lighter studies of the arts, if the musician, the grammarian, the poet be sought, I could similarly explain what each of them professes and what no more is to be demanded of each. Of the philosopher himself, finally, who alone professes well-nigh everything about his own power and wisdom, there is yet a certain description—that he who studies to know the force, nature, and causes of all things divine and human, and to hold and follow the whole method of living well, should be called by this name.

[112770] 213. But the orator, since we are inquiring about him, I for my part do not make the same as Crassus, who seemed to me to comprehend all knowledge of all things and arts in the one office and name of orator; but I think him to be one who can use words pleasant to hear and thoughts adapted to proving in forensic and common causes: this man I call an orator, and I wish him besides to be furnished with voice and delivery and a certain charm.

[113214] 214. But our friend Crassus seemed to me to describe the orator's faculty not by the bounds of that art, but by the well-nigh boundless limits of his own talent; for he handed over to the orator, by his opinion, the helm of governing states, in which it seemed very wonderful to me, Scaevola, that you conceded this to him, since the senate has very often assented to you when speaking briefly and unpolishedly on the greatest matters. But Marcus Scaurus—whom I hear to be not far off in the country at his own place—a man most skilled in governing the commonwealth, if he shall hear this authority of weight and counsel claimed by you, Crassus, because you say it is proper to the orator, will, I believe, come hither at once and terrify this loquacity of ours by his very look and aspect; who, although in speaking he is by no means to be despised, yet relies upon prudence in great matters rather than upon the art of speaking.

[114146] 215. Nor indeed, if anyone can do both, is either that author of public counsel and good senator on that very account an orator, or is this fluent and eloquent man, if he is likewise excellent in the management of the state, on that account possessed of that knowledge of speaking through abundance of speech: those faculties are far distant from one another, and are widely diverse and distinct; nor by the same method and way did Marcus Cato, Publius Africanus, Quintus Metellus, Gaius Laelius, who were all eloquent, adorn their own speech and the dignity of the commonwealth. For it is not forbidden either by the nature of things or by any law or custom that single men should not be allowed to know more than single arts.

[114875] 216. Wherefore not, if Pericles was most eloquent at Athens, and the same man was for very many years the leader of public counsel in that state, are both faculties on that account to be thought to belong to the same man and the same art; nor, if Publius Crassus was at once eloquent and skilled in law, is on that account a knowledge of the civil law inherent in the faculty of speaking.

[115265] 217. For if, as each man, excelling in some art and faculty, has also taken to himself another art, he will bring it about that what he knows besides should seem to be a certain part of that in which he excels, then by that reasoning we may say that to play well at ball and at the twelve-line game is proper to the civil law, since Publius Mucius did both excellently; and by the same reasoning those whom the Greeks call natural philosophers might be called poets, because the natural philosopher Empedocles made an excellent poem. But not even the philosophers themselves, who wish all things to be their own as if their own property and to be possessed by themselves, dare to say that geometry or music belongs to the philosopher, because all confess that Plato was most outstanding in those arts.

[116068] 218. And if it now pleases us to subject all the arts to the orator, it is more tolerable to say it rather thus: that, since the faculty of speaking ought not to be meagre and bare, but sprinkled and varied with a certain pleasant variety of many things, it belongs to a good orator to have heard much, to have seen much, to have run over much in mind and thought, much also in reading, yet not to have possessed these as his own but to have tasted them as another's; for I confess that he must be a man clever and in no respect a novice or untrained, nor a stranger and guest in pleading.

[116659] 219. Nor indeed, Crassus, am I disturbed by those tragedies of yours, which the philosophers are especially wont to use, in that you said that no one can either inflame the minds of those who listen by speaking, or extinguish them when inflamed—wherein the force and greatness of the orator is most discerned—unless he has thoroughly examined the nature and characters and reasonings of men, in which philosophy must necessarily be grasped by the orator; in which study we see whole lives of men most talented and most leisured worn away. The abundance and greatness of whose knowledge and art I not only do not despise, but even vehemently admire; yet for us, who are engaged in this populace and forum, it is enough to know and to say about the movements of the mind those things which are not at variance with the characters of men.

[117496] 220. For what great and weighty orator, when he wished to make the judge angry with his adversary, ever hesitated for this reason, that he did not know what anger was—whether a heat of the mind or a desire of avenging pain? Who, when he wished to stir up and excite the other movements of the mind in the judges or the people by speaking, said those things which are wont to be said by the philosophers? Some of whom deny that there ought to be any movements at all in the mind, and say that those who stir them up in the minds of judges commit a nefarious crime; others, who wish to be more tolerable and to approach nearer to the truth of life, say that the movements ought to be very moderate and rather slight.

[118212] 221. But the orator makes all these things, which are thought in the common course of life evil and troublesome and to be avoided, by his words much greater and more bitter; and likewise those things which commonly seem desirable and to be wished for, he amplifies and adorns by speaking; nor does he wish to seem so wise among the foolish that those who listen should either think him silly and a little Greek, or, even if they greatly approve his talent, admire the orator's wisdom but be vexed that they themselves are fools;

[118742] 222. but he so ranges through their minds, so handles the feelings and minds of men, that he does not need the descriptions of the philosophers, nor inquire in his speech whether that highest good is in the mind or in the body, whether it is defined by virtue or by pleasure, whether these can be joined and coupled together; or indeed whether, as it has seemed to some, nothing certain can be known, nothing clearly comprehended and perceived; of which matters I confess that there is a great and manifold discipline, and many copious and various theories.

[119301] 223. But something else, far different, Crassus, do we seek: we need a keen man, clever both by nature and by practice, who shrewdly investigates what his fellow-citizens, and those men whom he wishes to persuade of something by speaking, think, feel, suppose, expect; he ought to hold the pulse of every kind, age, and order, and to taste the minds and feelings of those before whom he is pleading or will plead;

[119716] 224. but let him reserve the books of the philosophers for himself, for the rest and leisure of a Tusculan villa such as this, lest, if ever he must speak about justice and good faith, he borrow from Plato; who, when he thought these things must be expressed in words, fashioned a certain new state in his books; so far did those things which he thought must be said about justice depart from the custom of life and the manners of states.

[120156] 225. But if these things were approved among peoples and in states, who would have conceded to you, Crassus, a most distinguished and eminent man and the leader of the state, to say in the greatest assembly of your fellow-citizens those things which you said? 'Rescue us from our miseries, rescue us from the jaws of those whose cruelty cannot be sated except by our blood; do not suffer us to be slaves to anyone except to you all together, to whom we both can and ought to be.' I pass over the miseries, in which, as they say, a brave man cannot be; I pass over the jaws from which you wish to be rescued, lest your blood be drained by an unjust trial, which they deny can happen to a wise man: but to be a slave—did you dare to say that not only you, but the whole senate, whose cause you were then pleading?

[120969] 226. Can virtue, Crassus, be a slave, according to those authorities whose precepts you embrace by the orator's faculty? Which is both always and alone free, and which, even if bodies be captured by arms or bound by chains, yet ought to keep its own right and the unpunished liberty of all things. But as to what you added—that the senate not only can but even ought to be a slave to the people—what philosopher so soft, so languid, so enervated, so referring all things to the pleasure and pain of the body, could approve this, that the senate should be a slave to the people, to whom the people itself had handed over the power of moderating and governing itself, like a kind of reins?

[121658] 227. And so, although I thought these things had been said by you divinely, Publius Rutilius Rufus, a learned man and devoted to philosophy, said that they had been spoken not only ill-suitedly, but even basely and disgracefully; and the same man was wont very gravely to censure Servius Galba—a man whom he said he well remembered—because he, when Lucius Scribonius was bringing an inquiry against him, had roused the pity of the people, although Marcus Cato, the grave and bitter enemy of Galba, had spoken harshly and vehemently before the Roman people, which speech he himself set forth in his Origins.

[122266] 228. Rutilius, then, censured Galba, because he had himself lifted up well-nigh upon his shoulders the ward son of his kinsman Gaius Sulpicius Galus, that he might by the recollection and memory of his most distinguished father move the people to weeping; and had commended his own two little sons to the guardianship of the people, and had said that, as if making a will in readiness for battle without scales and tablets, he appointed the Roman people guardian for the orphanhood of those boys. And so, although Galba was then pressed both by the envy and the hatred of the people, Rutilius said he was freed by these tragedies; which I see is likewise written in Cato, that, unless he had used boys and tears, he would have suffered punishment. These things Rutilius greatly censured, and said that exile or even death was to be preferred to this humiliation.

[123130] 229. Nor indeed did he only say this, but he himself both felt and did it: for, though that man was, as you know, an example of innocence, and there was no one in the state either more upright or more holy than he, he not only was unwilling to be a suppliant to the judges, but would not have his cause pleaded even more ornately or freely than the simple plan of truth bore. He assigned a small part of the pleading to this Cotta, a most eloquent young man, the son of his sister; Quintus Mucius also pleaded that cause in some part, in his own manner, without any ornament, purely and clearly.

[123727] 230. But if you had then spoken, Crassus—you who a little while ago said that the orator must seek aid for his abundance of speaking from those disputations which the philosophers use—and if it had been permitted you to speak on behalf of Publius Rutilius not after the manner of the philosophers, but in your own, however wicked those men had been—as in fact they were pestilent citizens and worthy of punishment—yet the force of your speech would have torn out all their wickedness from the very depths of men's minds. Now such a man has been lost, while the cause is pleaded as if the matter were being conducted in that fictitious state of Plato. No one of the advocates groaned, no one cried out, nothing grieved anyone, no one complained, no one implored the commonwealth, no one supplicated; in short, no one stamped his foot in that trial, I suppose, lest it should be reported to the Stoics.

[124629] 231. A Roman man and of consular rank imitated that old Socrates, who, when he was the wisest of all and had lived most holily, so spoke for himself in a capital trial that he seemed not a suppliant or a defendant, but the master or lord of the judges. Nay even, when the most eloquent orator Lysias had brought him a written speech, which, if it seemed good to him, he might learn by heart, that he might use it for himself in the trial, he read it not unwillingly and said it was suitably written; 'but,' he said, 'as, if you had brought me Sicyonian shoes, I would not use them, although they were handy and fitted to the foot, because they were not manly,' so that speech seemed to him eloquent and oratorical, but not brave and manly. Therefore he too was condemned; and not only by the first votes, by which the judges only decided whether to condemn or acquit, but also by those which they had to give a second time according to the laws;

[125576] 232. for at Athens, when a defendant had been condemned, if the offence were not capital, there was, as it were, an assessment of the penalty; and when the verdict was being given to the judges, the defendant was asked what penalty he confessed he had most deserved. When Socrates was asked this, he answered that he had deserved to be honoured with the most ample honours and rewards, and that daily sustenance should be provided for him at public expense in the Prytaneum, which is held the greatest honour among the Greeks.

[126104] 233. By this answer the judges were so inflamed that they condemned to death the most innocent of men; who, indeed, if he had been acquitted—which, by Hercules, even if it concerns us not at all, yet on account of the greatness of his talent I should wish—in what way could we endure those philosophers who now, when that man was condemned for no other fault except his ignorance of speaking, nevertheless say that the precepts of speaking ought to be sought from them? With whom I do not contend which is better or truer: I only say that this is one thing and that another, and that this can be supreme without that.

[126723] 234. For as to your having so vehemently embraced the civil law, Crassus, I see what you have done; even when you were speaking, I saw it: first, you devoted yourself to Scaevola, whom we all ought most deservedly to love for his singular sweetness; whose art, when you saw it was undowered and unadorned, you enriched and adorned it with the dowry of words; then, because you had spent more labour and toil upon it, since you had at home both the encourager and the master of that study, you feared, unless you exalted that art by your speech, lest you should have wasted your pains.

[127309] 235. But I do not contend even with that art. Let it be as great as you wish it to be—for without controversy it is both great and widely extends and concerns many and has always been in the highest honour, and the most distinguished citizens even today preside over its study—but see, Crassus, lest, while you wish to adorn the knowledge of the civil law with a new and foreign ornament, you also despoil and strip it of its own granted and acknowledged ornament.

[127775] 236. For if you said that he who is a jurisconsult is therefore an orator, and likewise that he who is an orator is the same a jurisconsult, you would establish two noble arts, equal to one another and partners of the same dignity. But now you confess that the jurisconsult can exist without this eloquence about which we are inquiring, and that there have been very many such; but you deny that the orator can exist unless he has taken on that knowledge. Thus to you the jurisconsult is in himself nothing but a kind of cautious and shrewd quibbler, a crier of actions, a chanter of formulae, a catcher of syllables; but because the orator often uses the aid of law in causes, you have therefore joined that knowledge of law to eloquence as a little handmaid and attendant.

[128551] 237. But as for your having wondered at the impudence of those advocates who either, when they were ignorant of small things, professed great ones, or dared to handle in causes those things which were greatest in the civil law, when they did not know them and had never learned them—of both things the defence is easy and ready. For neither is it to be wondered at that he who does not know by what words a coemption is made should be able to defend the cause of that woman who has made a coemption; nor, if the science of steering a small ship and a great one is the same, can it be that he who does not know by what words an inheritance ought to be divided cannot conduct a cause for the dividing of an estate.

[129265] 238. For as to your having brought forward the greatest centumviral causes as resting on law, which, pray, of those causes was there that could not have been most ornately pleaded by an eloquent man unskilled in law? In all which causes—as in that very cause of Manius Curius, which was lately pleaded by you, and in the dispute of Gaius Hostilius Mancinus, and in the case of that boy who had been born of another wife, no notice of divorce having been sent to the former—there was the highest disagreement about the law among the most skilled men: I ask, then, what knowledge of law helped the orator in these causes, when this jurisconsult here was about to come off the inferior, who was sustained not by his own art, but by another's—that is, not by knowledge of law, but by eloquence.

[130057] 239. For my part, I have often heard this: that when Publius Crassus was a candidate for the aedileship, and the elder and now consular Servius Galba accompanied him, because he had betrothed Crassus's daughter to his son Gaius, a certain countryman came up to Crassus to consult him; and when he had drawn Crassus aside and laid his case before him, and had carried off an answer truer than suited to his own purpose, when Galba saw him downcast, he called him by name and asked on what matter he had consulted Crassus; and when he had heard it, and saw the man disturbed,

[130632] 240. 'with an anxious and preoccupied mind,' he said, 'I see Crassus answered you,' and then he himself took Crassus by the hand and said, 'Hark you, what came into your mind to answer thus?' Then that most skilled man confidently affirmed that the matter was as he had answered, and that there could be no doubt; but Galba, sporting variously and copiously, brought forward many comparisons and said many things for equity against law; and Crassus—though Crassus was in the number of the eloquent, but in no way Galba's equal—since he could not be his match in disputing, took refuge in authorities, and produced what he himself had said, written both in the books of his brother Publius Mucius and in the commentaries of Sextus Aelius, and yet conceded that Galba's argument seemed to him probable and well-nigh true.

[131453] 241. And yet those causes which are of such a kind that there can be no doubt about their law are not at all wont to be brought into court. Does anyone claim an inheritance under that will which a head of a family made before a son was born to him? No one; because it is agreed that a will is broken by the subsequent birth of an heir; therefore in this kind of law there are no trials: the orator, then, may with impunity be ignorant of all this part of uncontroverted law, which part is without doubt by far the greatest;

[131978] 242. but in that law which is disputed among the most skilled, it is not difficult for the orator to find some authority for whatever side he shall defend; from whom, when he has received the javelins fitted with thongs, he will himself hurl them with the arms and strength of an orator. Unless indeed—I would say it with the good leave of this excellent man—you, Crassus, defended the cause of Manius Curius by the little books or precepts of your father-in-law Scaevola, and did not snatch up the patronage of equity and the defence of wills and of the wishes of the dead.

[132554] 243. And in my opinion—for I often heard you and was present—you won over much the greater part of the verdicts by your wit and charm and most polished pleasantries, when you both mocked that excessive subtlety and wondered at the talent of Scaevola, who had discovered that one must be born before one dies; and when you gathered many things both from the laws and from decrees of the senate and from life and common speech, not only acutely but also ridiculously and wittily, where, if we followed the words and not the substance, nothing could be made out: and so the trial was full of merriment and gladness; in which what your practice of the civil law profited you, I do not understand; your excellent power of speaking, joined with the highest gaiety and grace, profited you.

[133338] 244. That very Mucius, the defender of his father's law and, as it were, the champion of his own patrimony, what did he bring forward in that cause, when he spoke against you, that seemed drawn from the civil law? What law did he recite? What did he open up by speaking that had been too hidden for the unskilled? Surely all his speech was concerned with this—to maintain that the written word ought to have the most weight; but in this kind all boys are exercised under their masters, when in causes of this sort they are taught to defend now the written word, now equity.

[133913] 245. And, I suppose, in that cause of the soldier, if you had defended either the heir or the soldier, you would have had recourse to the Hostilian actions, not to your own force and oratorical faculty: but you, indeed, even if you were defending the will, would so plead that all the law of all wills would seem to rest upon that trial; or if you were pleading the soldier's cause, you would, as you are wont, by speaking have raised his father from the dead; you would have set him before our eyes; he would have embraced his son and, weeping, commended him to the centumviri; you would, by Hercules, have compelled the very stones to weep and lament, so that all that 'as the tongue shall have pronounced' would seem written not in the Twelve Tables, which you prefer to all libraries, but in a schoolmaster's lay.

[134732] 246. For as to your accusing the indolence of young men, who do not first learn that art, the easiest of all—how easy it is, let those see who walk about so puffed up with the arrogance of that art, as if it were the most difficult of all; and then let yourself also see, who say that that art is easy, which you grant is not yet an art at all, but will some day, if anyone shall have learned another art, so that he can make this an art, then become an art; then, that it is full of delight—in which all remit to you that pleasure and suffer themselves to be deprived of it; nor is there anyone of them who, if something must now be learned by heart, would not prefer to learn the Teucer of Pacuvius than the Manilian laws of selling things for sale;

[135485] 247. then, as to your thinking that out of love of country we ought to know the inventions of our ancestors, do you not see that the old laws have either grown old by their very antiquity, or have been abolished by new laws? But as to your thinking that men become good by the civil law, because by the laws both rewards are set before the virtues and punishments before the vices, for my part I used to think that virtue was imparted to men—if indeed it can be imparted by method—by instructing and persuading, not by threats and force and fear. For that very thing, indeed, how good it is to beware of evil, we can know even without the knowledge of law.

[136143] 248. But of myself, to whom alone you concede that I can satisfy causes without any knowledge of law, I answer you this, Crassus: that I never learned the civil law, nor yet ever, in those causes which I could defend in court, missed that knowledge; for it is one thing to be the artist of a certain kind and art, another to be in the common life and ordinary intercourse of men neither dull nor untrained.

[136551] 249. Which of us is free to go over our farms or to visit our country property either for the sake of profit or of delight? Yet no one lives so without eyes, so without mind, as to be wholly ignorant of what sowing and harvest are, what the pruning of trees and vines is, at what time of year or in what manner these things are done. If, then, some farm must be inspected, or something be entrusted to a steward about the cultivation of the land, or commanded to a bailiff, must the books of Mago the Carthaginian be thoroughly learned? Or can we be content with this common understanding? Why, then, can we not, in the civil law also—especially since we are worn out in causes and business and in the forum—be sufficiently instructed at least to this extent, that we do not seem to be foreigners and strangers in our own country?

[137383] 250. And if now some obscurer cause be brought to us, it would, I suppose, be difficult to confer with Scaevola here; although those very persons whose business it is bring to us everything consulted and inquired into. Or indeed, if there is a controversy about the matter itself, about boundaries, when we have come upon the spot, about deeds and accounts, do we necessarily learn thoroughly intricate and often difficult matters; but if statutes or the responses of skilled men must be learned, do we fear that, if from our youth we have less studied the civil law, we cannot learn these things? Does, then, the knowledge of the civil law profit the orator nothing? I cannot deny that any knowledge profits, especially him whose eloquence ought to be adorned with abundance of matter; but those things which are necessary for the orator are many and great and difficult, so that I would not wish to distract his industry into more studies.

[138326] 251. Who would deny that the orator needs, in this oratorical movement and posture, the gesture and grace of Roscius? Yet no one would advise young men zealous for speaking to labour in learning gesture after the manner of actors. What is so necessary to the orator as the voice? Yet, on my authority, no one zealous for speaking will, after the manner of the Greek tragedians, be a slave to the voice—men who both for several years declaim sitting, and daily, before they deliver, raise their voice gradually as they lie down, and the same, when they have pleaded, sitting, bring it back from the sharpest tone all the way to the deepest, and, as it were, gather it up. If we wished to do this, those whose causes we had undertaken would be condemned before we had recited, as often as is prescribed, the Paean or the hymn.

[139152] 252. But if in gesture, which much helps the orator, and in voice, which alone most commends or sustains eloquence, we are not allowed to labour, and can only attain in each as much as the space of our daily task in this battle-line allows us, how much less must we descend to the occupation of thoroughly learning the civil law? Which can both be grasped in summary without instruction, and has this unlikeness to those other things, that voice and gesture cannot be taken up suddenly and snatched from elsewhere, while the usefulness of the law can be drawn out for any cause, however suddenly, either from the skilled or from books.

[139789] 253. And so those most eloquent men have, as assistants in causes, men skilled in law, though they themselves are most unskilled—those who, as was said by you a little while ago, are called pragmatici; in which respect ours have done altogether much better, in that they wished the laws and the law to be protected by the authority of most distinguished men. But yet this would not have escaped the Greeks, if they had thought it so necessary, to instruct the orator himself in the civil law, and not to give him a pragmaticus as a helper.

[140330] 254. For as to your saying that old age is rescued from solitude by the knowledge of the civil law, perhaps also by greatness of money; but we are inquiring not what is useful to us, but what is necessary for the orator. Although—since we take many things for our likeness of the orator from one artist—that same Roscius is wont to say that, the more years are added to him, the slower will he make the measures of the flute-player and the more relaxed the songs. But if he, bound by a certain fixed regulation of numbers and feet, yet devises something for the rest of old age, how much more easily can we, not relax our measures, but change them wholly?

[140987] 255. For it does not escape you, Crassus, how many and how various are the kinds of speaking—a thing which I scarcely know whether you were not the first to show, who now for a long time speak much more remissly and gently than you used to; and yet this gentleness of your most weighty discourse is no less approved than that highest force and vehemence: and there have been many orators, as we hear of that Scipio and Laelius, who carried through everything in a discourse a little more intense, never, like Servius Galba, contending with lungs or clamour. But if you now cannot or will not do this, do you fear lest your house, that of such a man and citizen, if it be not courted by litigious men, should be deserted by the rest? For my part, I am so far from that opinion that I not only do not think the support of old age is to be placed in the multitude of those who come to consult, but I look forward to that solitude which you fear as to a kind of haven. For I think that leisure is the most beautiful support of old age.

[142020] 256. As for the rest, even if they help—I mean history and the knowledge of public law and the memory of antiquity and the store of precedents—if ever there be need, I shall borrow them from a most excellent man and one most furnished with these things, my friend Congus; nor will I oppose what you just now exhorted, that they should read everything, hear everything, be engaged in every honourable study and culture; but, by Hercules, they do not seem to me to have so very much time, if only they shall be willing to do and pursue those things which were enjoined by you, Crassus, who seemed to me to lay almost too hard laws upon this age, but yet such as are well-nigh necessary for attaining what they desire.

[142737] 257. For both the sudden exercises upon proposed causes, and the careful and meditated reflections, and that pen of yours, which you truly said is the perfecter and master of speaking, are a matter of much sweat; and that comparison of one's own speech with the writings of others, and that disputation about another's writing for the sake of praising, or censuring, or approving, or refuting it, is no slight effort either for memory or for imitation.

[143191] 258. But that was a terrible thing, which, by Hercules, I fear may have had more force to deter than to encourage: for you wished each one of us to be, in his own kind, a kind of Roscius; and you said that those things which are right are not so much approved as that those which are faulty cleave to men's distastes; which I think is regarded not so fastidiously in us as in actors;

[143576] 259. and so I see that we, even when hoarse, are often listened to most attentively; for the matter itself and the cause hold the hearer; but Aesopus, if he is even a little hoarse, is hissed off. For from those of whom nothing is sought except the pleasure of the ears, offence is taken as soon as anything is diminished from the pleasure; but in the eloquent man there are many things which hold the hearer; which, if they are not all supreme, and yet most are great, those very things which exist must of necessity seem wonderful.

[144111] 260. Therefore, to return to that first point, let the orator be for us he who, as Crassus described, can speak in a manner adapted to persuading; but let him be confined to those things which are in the common and forensic use of states, and, the other studies being set aside, however ample and noble they be, let him be pressed, so to speak, night and day in this one work; and let him imitate that man to whom without doubt the highest force of speaking is conceded, the Athenian Demosthenes, in whom there is said to have been so great zeal and so great labour that first he overcame the impediments of nature by diligence and industry; and, since he was so stammering that he could not pronounce the first letter of that very art which he studied, he accomplished by practice that no one was thought to speak more plainly; then, since his breath was rather short, he attained by holding in his breath in speaking so much that—as his writings show—in one continuous stretch of words two risings and fallings of the voice were comprised;

[145154] 261. who also, as it is handed down in tradition, was accustomed, with pebbles thrown into his mouth, to pronounce many verses in a loud voice with one breath; nor that standing in one place, but walking about and advancing up a steep ascent.

[145398] 262. With these exhortations, Crassus, to rouse young men to zeal and to labour, I heartily agree; but the rest, which you have gathered from various and diverse studies and arts—although you yourself have attained them all—I think are nevertheless separate from the orator's proper office and function.' When Antonius had said this, Sulpicius and Cotta seemed altogether in doubt which of the two speeches seemed to come nearer to the truth.

[145842] 263. Then Crassus said: 'You make of us a kind of mere journeyman orator, Antonius, and I scarcely know whether you do not think otherwise and use that wonderful habit of yours for refuting, in which no one ever surpassed you; the very practice of which faculty is proper to orators, but is now engaged in the habit of the philosophers, and most of all of those who are wont to speak most copiously on both sides of every proposed question.

[146284] 264. But I thought, especially with these gentlemen listening, that I ought to portray what manner of man he could be who should dwell upon the benches and bring nothing more than the necessity of causes demanded; but I saw something greater, when I judged that the orator, especially in our commonwealth, ought to be without no ornament. You, however, since you have surrounded the whole office of the orator with certain narrow bounds, will the more easily set forth to us those things which have been asked of you about the duties and precepts of the orator; but, I think, on the day after this; for enough has been said by us today.

[146922] 265. Now both Scaevola, since he has resolved to go to his Tusculan villa, will rest a little, until the heat breaks; and let us ourselves, since it is that time of day, give heed to our health.' It pleased all so. Then Scaevola said: 'Indeed I could wish I had not resolved to go today to Lucius Aelius; I would gladly hear Antonius'; and, as he rose, smiling at the same time, he said: 'for he was not so troublesome to me, because he plucked at our civil law, as pleasant, because he confessed that he did not know it.'