WORK: Lucullus  (slug: cicero-marcus-tullius-lucullus-ae01c1)

CHAPTER: 01-book-1



[109593] 112. 'And I seem to myself even now to be acting too meagrely. For since there is a field in which discourse might exult, why do we drive it into such straits and into the brambles of the Stoics? For if I had to do with a Peripatetic, who said that what was stamped from the true could be perceived, and that there did not adhere that great addition, "in such a way that it could not be stamped from the false," I should deal simply with a simple man, nor should I greatly contend; and even if, when I said that nothing could be comprehended, he said that the wise man sometimes holds an opinion, I should not resist — especially since not even Carneades strongly resists this point. As it is, what can I do? For I ask what there is that can be comprehended.'

[110354] 113. 'There answers me not Aristotle or Theophrastus, not even Xenocrates or Polemo, but these lesser men, that a truth is of such a kind as a falsehood could not be. I find nothing of that kind: therefore, doubtless, I shall assent to the unknown, that is, I shall hold an opinion. This both the Peripatetics and the Old Academy concede me; you deny it, Antiochus above all. He moves me greatly, both because I loved the man as he did me, and because I so judge — the most polished and acute of all the philosophers of our memory. Of whom I ask first, in what manner, pray, he is of that Academy of which he professes to be. To pass over other things, of these two matters at issue, who ever said, either of the Old Academy or of the Peripatetics, either that that alone could be perceived which was a truth of such a kind as a falsehood could not be, or that the wise man holds no opinion? Certainly no one. Neither of these was strongly defended before Zeno; I, however, think both true, nor do I say so for the occasion, but I plainly approve them so.'

[111412] 114. 'This I cannot bear: that you, when you forbid me to assent to the unknown, and say that this is most base and most full of rashness, should arrogate so much to yourself as to set forth the doctrine of wisdom, to unfold the nature of all things, to fashion characters, to establish the ends of good and evil, to describe duties, to define what life I am to enter upon, and at the same time to say that you will hand down a criterion and an art of arguing and understanding — will you bring it about that I, embracing those innumerable things, should nowhere slip, should hold no opinion? What, pray, is that doctrine to which you would lead me, if you should draw me away from this one? I fear you act somewhat arrogantly if you say "your own"; and yet you must necessarily say so. Nor indeed you alone, but each man will snatch me to his own.'

[112263] 115. 'Come — should I withstand the Peripatetics, who say that they have a kinship with orators, who say that illustrious men trained by them have often governed the commonwealth; should I hold out against the Epicureans, so many of my friends, men so good, so loving toward one another; what shall I do with Diodotus the Stoic, whom I heard from boyhood, who lives with me so many years, who dwells in my house, whom I both admire and love, who despises those Antiochean things? "Ours alone," you will say, "are true." Certainly alone, if true; for there cannot be several true things at variance with each other. Are we, then, the shameless ones, who do not wish to slip, or they the arrogant, who have persuaded themselves that they alone know all things? "Not I indeed," he says, "but the wise man, I say, knows." Excellent: namely, knows those things which are in your doctrine. What is this in the first place — that wisdom is explained by one who is not wise? But let us depart from our own selves, let us speak of the wise man, about whom, as I have often said already, is this whole question.'

[113367] 116. 'Into three parts, then, both by most men and by your own selves, is wisdom divided. First, then, let us see, if you please, what has been inquired about the nature of things — or, as before: is there anyone puffed up with so great an error as to have persuaded himself that he knows those things? I do not seek those reasonings which depend on conjecture, which are dragged this way and that by discussions, and bring no necessity of persuading; let the geometers see to it, who profess not to persuade but to compel, and who prove to you all the things they describe. I do not seek from them those first principles of the mathematicians, which not being conceded they cannot advance a finger's breadth: that a point is that which has no magnitude, an extremity and as it were a boundary in which there is no thickness at all, a line a length without any breadth. When I shall have conceded these to be true, if I should put the wise man to his oath — and not before Archimedes, while he looks on, has described all those reasonings by which it is made out that the sun is many times larger than the earth — do you think he would swear? If he should do so, he would have despised the sun itself, which he thinks to be a god.'

[114600] 117. 'But if he is not going to believe geometrical reasonings, which bring force in teaching, as you yourselves say, that man will be far from believing the arguments of the philosophers — or, if he is going to believe, those of which men's especially? For one may unfold all the views of the natural philosophers, but it is long; yet I ask whom he follows. Suppose someone now becomes wise, is not yet so; what opinion and doctrine will he choose by preference? And yet whatever he shall choose, he will choose as a fool; but let him be of divine genius: which one of the natural philosophers will he most approve? Nor will he be able to approve more than one. I do not pursue the infinite questions; only about the first principles of things, of which all things consist, let us see whom he approves; for among great men there is the highest dissension.'

[115459] 118. 'Thales, the chief, one of the seven, to whom the remaining six are said to have yielded the first place, said that all things consist of water. But he did not persuade Anaximander, his fellow-citizen and companion, of this; for he said that the infinity of nature was that from which all things were begotten. Afterward his pupil Anaximenes said that the air was infinite, but that the things which arose from it were finite; and that earth, water, fire were begotten, then from these all things. Anaxagoras said matter was infinite, but that from it there were minute particles like one another, these at first confused, afterward brought into order by a divine mind. Xenophanes, a little earlier even, said that all things were one, and that this was not changeable, and that this was god, never born and everlasting, of a spherical figure. Parmenides said it was fire which moves, earth which is formed by it. Leucippus, the full and the void. Democritus is in this like him, but richer in the rest. Empedocles those four well-known and familiar elements. Heraclitus, fire. Melissus, that which was infinite and unchangeable, and had been always and would be. Plato thinks that the world was made by a god out of matter receiving all things into itself, and is everlasting. The Pythagoreans wish all things to proceed from numbers and the first principles of the mathematicians. Out of these your wise man will choose, I suppose, some one whom he will follow; the rest, so many and so great men, rejected and condemned by him, will depart.'

[117010] 119. 'But whatever opinion he shall have approved, he will so hold it comprehended in his mind as the things which he holds by the senses; nor will he any more approve that it is now light than, since he is a Stoic, that this world is wise, that it has a mind which has fashioned both itself and the world and moderates, moves, rules all things; he will be persuaded too that the sun, moon, all the stars, the earth, the sea are gods, because a certain animate intelligence pervades and passes through all those things; yet that there will be a time when this whole world shall blaze up with fire. Let those things be true (for you now laugh that I confess there is something true), yet I deny that they are comprehended and perceived. For when that Stoic wise man of yours has told you those things syllable by syllable, there will come Aristotle pouring forth a golden river of speech, who says that he raves; for the world was never born, because there was no beginning of so glorious a work upon any new counsel taken; and it is so fitted together on every side that no force can contrive such great motions and change, no old age arise through length of time that this fair order should ever fall away and perish. For you it will be necessary to reject this, but to defend that earlier view as your head and reputation: am I not left even to doubt?'

[118366] 120. 'To pass over the levity of those who assent rashly, of how great worth is liberty itself — that it is not necessary for me what is necessary for you. For I ask why god, when he made all things for our sake (for so you wish), made so great a quantity of water-snakes and vipers, why he scattered so many deadly and pernicious things over land and sea. You deny that these could be wrought so finely and so subtly without some divine skill; whose majesty indeed you bring down even to the perfection of bees and ants, so that there might seem to have been even among the gods some Myrmecides, a fashioner of tiny little works.'

[118999] 121. 'You deny that anything can be without a god: behold, there comes at you from the flank Strato of Lampsacus, who would grant to that god of yours an exemption — a great gift indeed; but since the priests of the gods have a dispensation, how much fairer that the gods themselves should have one. He denies that he uses the labour of the gods for fashioning the world, and teaches that all things, whatever they be, have been wrought by nature — not, like that other man, who says these things are concreted of rough and smooth and hooked and crooked bodies with void interposed: he thinks these are the dreams of Democritus, not teaching but wishing; but he himself, pursuing the single parts of the world, teaches that whatever either is or comes to be, comes to be or has been made by natural weights and motions. Truly that man both frees god from a great labour and frees me from fear. For who, when he thinks himself cared for by a god, can fail both day and night to dread the divine power, and, if anything adverse has happened — which has happened to whom does it not? — to be afraid lest it have come about by justice? Yet I assent neither to Strato nor indeed to you; now this, now that seems more probable.'

[120223] 122. 'All these things lie hidden, Lucullus, concealed and surrounded by thick darkness, so that no keenness of human genius is so great as to be able to penetrate into the sky, to enter into the earth. We do not know our own bodies; what is the position of the parts, what power each part has we are ignorant; and so the physicians themselves, whose interest it was to know these things, laid them open that they might be seen, nor do the empirics say that these things are on that account more known, because it may happen that, laid bare and uncovered, they are changed. But can we in the same way dissect, lay open, divide the natures of things, so as to see whether the earth is fixed deep down and clings as it were by its own roots, or hangs in the midst?'

[120988] 123. 'Xenophanes says that the moon is inhabited, and that it is an earth of many cities and mountains: these seem portents; but yet neither could he who said it swear that it is so, nor I that it is not. You too say that there are men over against us, on the contrary part of the earth, who stand with feet opposed to our feet, whom you call antipodes: why are you more angry with me, who do not spurn those things, than with those who, when they hear them, think you are out of your minds? Hicetas of Syracuse, as Theophrastus says, thinks that the sky, sun, moon, stars, and in fine all the things above stand still, and that nothing in the world is moved except the earth; which, since it turns and twists about its axis with the highest swiftness, all the same things are brought about as if, the earth standing still, the heaven were moved. And some think that Plato too says this in the Timaeus, but a little more obscurely. What of you, Epicurus, speak: do you think the sun so small? "I? For us indeed it is just so great." And you are mocked by him, and you yourselves in turn make sport of him. Free, then, from such mockery is Socrates, free Aristo of Chios, who think that none of these things can be known.'

[122211] 124. 'But I return to the soul and the body. Are these things at last well enough known to us — what the nature of the nerves is, what of the veins? Do we grasp what the soul is, where it is, in fine whether it is, or, as it seemed to Dicaearchus, is not at all? If it is, whether it has three parts, as it pleased Plato, of reason, of anger, of desire, or is simple and one; if simple, whether it is fire, or breath, or blood, or, as Xenocrates held, a number without any body — which can scarcely be understood of what kind it is; and, whatever it is, whether it is mortal or eternal, for on either side many things are said. Of these some one thing seems certain to your wise man; to ours not even what is most probable occurs; so equal in most matters are the weights of contrary reasonings.'

[123009] 125. 'But if you act more modestly and accuse me not because I do not assent to your reasonings but because I assent to none, I will conquer my mind and choose someone to assent to — whom in particular, whom? Democritus; for, as you know, I was always a lover of nobility. Now I shall be pressed by the reproach of you all: "Can you either think that there is any void, when all things are so filled and crammed that both the body which is moved gives way to bodies, and wherever each thing has given way another follows immediately into its place; or that there are any atoms, from which whatever is produced is most unlike them; or that anything excellent can be produced without some mind? And, when in one world this order is so wonderful, that there are innumerable worlds above, below, on the right, on the left, before, behind, some unlike, some of the same kind; and that, as we now are at Bauli and look upon Puteoli, so there are innumerable men in like places, with the same names, honours, deeds, geniuses, forms, ages, disputing about the same matters; and that, if now, or even if while sleeping, we seem to see something in the mind, images from without break into our minds through the body. Do you not adopt those things, nor assent to fabricated matters; to feel nothing is better than to feel things so perverse."'

[124344] 126. 'It is not, then, the point that I should approve something by my assent, but that you should beware lest you demand the same things which you do, even shamelessly, not only arrogantly — especially since those things of yours do not seem to me even probable. For I think there is no divination, which you approve; and that fate by which you say all things are bound together I despise; nor do I think that this world was built by divine counsel. And perhaps it may be so; but why am I dragged into ill-will? Is it allowed me, by your leave, not to know what I do not know, or for the Stoics themselves to dispute among themselves, when it shall not be allowed to me? To Zeno and nearly all the rest of the Stoics the highest god seems to be the aether, endowed with a mind by which all things are ruled; Cleanthes, who is as it were a Stoic of the greater clans, the pupil of Zeno, thinks that the sun rules and holds power over things: so we are compelled, by the dissension of the wise, not to know our own lord, since we know not whether we serve the sun or the aether. But the magnitude of the sun (for he himself here, all radiant, seems to look at me, warning me to make frequent mention of him) — you, then, report the magnitude of this body as if you had measured it with a ten-foot rod; I refuse to trust your measure, as one trusts bad architects: is it doubtful which of us, to put it gently, is the more modest?'

[125775] 127. 'Nor yet do I think these questions of the natural philosophers ought to be banished. For the consideration and contemplation of nature is a kind of natural pasture, as it were, of minds and geniuses: we are raised up, we seem to become loftier, we look down on human things, and, thinking of the upper and heavenly things, we despise these our own as scanty and trivial. The very investigation of things both greatest and most hidden has a delight; but if anything occurs that seems like the truth, the mind is filled with the most human pleasure. This, then, both your wise man and this one of ours will inquire into.'

[126402] 128. 'But yours so as to assent, believe, affirm; ours so as to fear to hold an opinion rashly, and to think it goes excellently with him if in matters of this kind he has found what is like the truth. Let us come now to the notion of good and evil; but first a little must be said. The natural philosophers do not seem to me to consider, when they affirm those things very strongly, that they lose the authority even of those matters which seem more clear. For they no more assent and approve that it is now light than, when a crow has croaked, that it then either orders or forbids something; nor will they more affirm that that statue is six feet, if they shall have measured it, than that the sun, which they cannot measure, is more than eighteen times larger than the earth. Whence arises that conclusion: "if the sun cannot be perceived how great it is; he who approves the rest in the same way as he approves the magnitude of the sun does not perceive those things; but the magnitude of the sun cannot be perceived; he, then, who approves it as if he perceived it, perceives no thing." They will answer that it can be perceived how great the sun is: I will not resist, provided only they say that the rest are perceived and comprehended in the same way. For they cannot say that one thing is more or less comprehended than another, since of all things there is one definition of comprehending.'

[127805] 129. 'But, as I had begun: what have we ascertained in matters good and evil? Surely ends must be established to which the sum of both goods and evils may be referred. On what matter, then, is there a greater dissension among the highest men? And I omit those views which now seem abandoned — Herillus, who places the highest good in cognition and knowledge; who, though he was a pupil of Zeno, you see how greatly he dissented from him, and how not much from Plato. Noble was the school of the Megarians, of which, as I see it written, the chief was Xenophanes, whom I just now named, then Parmenides and Zeno following him (and so by these they were called the Eleatic philosophers), afterward Euclides, a pupil of Socrates, of Megara, from whom those same were called Megarians, who said that that alone is good which is one and like and the same always; these too took much from Plato. From Menedemus, however — because he was of Eretria — they were called Eretrians, whose whole good was placed in the mind and in the keenness of mind by which the truth was discerned — things like those of Herillus, but, I suppose, explained more richly and more ornately.'

[128970] 130. 'If we despise these and now think them cast aside, those at least we ought to despise less: Aristo, who, when he had been a pupil of Zeno, approved in fact those things which that man approved in words — that nothing is good except virtue, nor evil except what is contrary to virtue; he thought that in the things between there were none of those weights which Zeno wished there to be. For this man the highest good is to be moved to neither side in those matters — which is by himself called adiaphoria (indifference). But Pyrrho held that the wise man does not even feel those things — which is named apatheia (impassivity). These, then, and so many opinions let us pass over; let us look at these, which now have been long and much defended.'

[129723] 131. 'Others have wished pleasure to be the end, of whom the chief was Aristippus, who had heard Socrates — whence the Cyrenaics — afterward Epicurus, whose school is now better known, yet not agreeing with the Cyrenaics about pleasure itself. But Callipho judged that pleasure and honour are the ends; freedom from all distress, Hieronymus; this same thing joined with honour, Diodorus — both these Peripatetics. But to live honourably, enjoying those things which nature first reconciles to man, the Old Academy too judged, as the writings of Polemo show, whom Antiochus most approves, and Aristotle and his friends seem to come very near to this. Carneades too introduced — not that he approved it, but that he might oppose it to the Stoics — that the highest good is to enjoy those things which nature first reconciled to us. But to live honourably, which is derived from the reconciliation of nature, Zeno, who was the inventor and chief of the Stoics, established to be the end of goods.'

[130719] 132. 'Now this is plain — that, to all those ends of goods which I have set forth, the ends of evils are contrary. To you now I refer the question whom I should follow; only let no one give that answer so unlearned and absurd, "any one you please, only some one": nothing can be said more inconsiderate. I desire to follow the Stoics. Is it allowed — I omit by way of Aristotle, in my judgement nearly unique in philosophy — by way of Antiochus himself, who was called an Academic, though he was, if he had changed very few things, a most genuine Stoic? The matter, then, will now be at a crisis; for either the wise man must be set down as a Stoic, or as one of the Old Academy — both he cannot be; for between them there is a contention not about boundaries but about the whole possession; for the whole reason of life is contained in the definition of the highest good, and those who disagree about it disagree about the whole reason of life; both, then, cannot be wise, since they so greatly dissent, but one — : if the Polemonian view is right, the Stoic errs, assenting to a false thing (and you yourselves say that nothing is so alien to the wise man); but if Zeno's things are true, the same must be said against the Old Academics and Peripatetics. Here, then, assenting to neither — if never — which is the more prudent?'

[132051] 133. 'What, when Antiochus himself dissents in certain matters from those Stoics whom he loves, does he not show that those things cannot be approved by the wise man? It pleases the Stoics that all sins are equal; but this displeases Antiochus most vehemently. Let it be allowed me at last to consider which opinion I shall follow. "Cut it short," he says, "determine at last upon something whatever it be." What, when the things that are said seem to me both acute on either side and equal, should I not beware lest I commit a crime? For you said, Lucullus, that it is a crime to betray a dogma; I restrain myself, then, lest I assent to the unknown, which is a dogma common to me with you.'

[132745] 134. 'Behold, a much greater dissension still. Zeno thinks the happy life is placed in virtue alone. What of Antiochus? "Happy too," he says, "but not the happiest." That god, who judged that nothing is wanting to virtue; this little man, who thinks that many things besides virtue are to a man partly dear, partly even necessary. But I fear both that the former assigns more to virtue than nature allows — especially as Theophrastus says many things eloquently and copiously — and I am afraid that the latter is scarcely consistent with himself, who, while he says that there are certain evils both of body and of fortune, yet judges that he who is in all these will be happy if he is wise: I am pulled apart; now this seems to me more probable, now that; and yet, unless one or the other be so, I plainly think that virtue lies prostrate. But in these things they disagree.'

[133623] 135. 'What of those things in which they agree — can we approve them as true: that the mind of the wise man is never moved by desire nor carried away by gladness? Come, let these be granted probable; what of those — never to fear, never to grieve: should the wise man not fear lest his country be destroyed, not grieve if it has been destroyed? Hard; but necessary for Zeno, to whom there is nothing among goods except the honourable; but for you, Antiochus, least of all, to whom, besides the honourable, many things seem goods, and besides baseness many things evils, which the wise man must necessarily both fear as they come and grieve at as having come. But I ask when these things were doctrines of the Old Academy — that they should deny that the mind of the wise man is moved and disturbed: they approved means, and wished there to be a certain natural measure in every emotion. We have all read the book of Crantor, the Old Academic, on grief; for it is not great, but a little golden one, and, as Panaetius advises Tubero, to be learned by heart word for word. And those men indeed even said that those emotions were given to our minds usefully by nature — fear for the sake of caution, pity and grief for the sake of mercy; anger itself they said was as it were the whetstone of courage — whether rightly or not we shall see another time; but how that severity of yours has broken into the Old Academy I do not know. But those things indeed I cannot bear — not that they displease me, for most of the marvels of the Stoics which are called paradoxa are Socratic; but where did Xenocrates, where did Aristotle touch those things (for you wish these to be as it were the same)? — would they ever say that the wise alone are kings, alone rich, alone fair; that all things everywhere are the wise man's; that no one is consul, praetor, general — I know not whether even one of the board of five — unless he be wise; finally, that he alone is a citizen, alone free, and that the unwise are all foreigners, exiles, slaves, in fine madmen; that the writings of Lycurgus, of Solon, our Twelve Tables are not laws, nor even is it a city or a state unless it be of the wise?'

[135801] 137. 'These things, Lucullus, if you have assented to your friend Antiochus, are to be defended by you as much as the walls; but by me only in moderation, only so far as shall seem good. I read in Clitomachus that, when Carneades and the Stoic Diogenes were standing before the senate on the Capitol, Aulus Albinus — who was then praetor, in the consulship of Publius Scipio and Marcus Marcellus, the man who was consul with your grandfather, Lucullus, a learned man indeed, as his own history written in Greek shows — said jestingly to Carneades: "I, Carneades, do not seem to you to be praetor, because I am not wise, nor this a city, nor in it a state?" Then he: "To this Stoic you do not seem so." Aristotle or Xenocrates, whom Antiochus wished to follow, would not have doubted that both that man was praetor and that Rome was a city and that a state dwelt in it; but that man of ours is plainly, as I said above, a Stoic stammering a very few things.'

[136760] 138. 'But you — to me, fearing lest I slip into opinion and adopt and approve something unknown, which you least of all wish — what counsel do you give? Chrysippus testifies often that there are only three opinions which can be defended about the ends of goods; he cuts down and lops off the multitude. For either the honourable is the end, or pleasure, or both. For those who say that the highest good is this, if we be free from all distress, flee the invidious name of pleasure but dwell in its neighbourhood; which those also do who joined that same thing with the honourable, and not much otherwise those who added to the honourable the first advantages of nature. So he leaves three opinions which he thinks can be defended with probability.'

[137510] 139. 'Let it be so indeed — although from the ends of Polemo and the Peripatetics and Antiochus I am not easily torn away, nor have I anything as yet more probable. Yet I see how sweetly pleasure flatters our senses; I am slipping to the point of assenting to Epicurus or Aristippus: virtue calls me back, or rather rebukes me with the hand, says those are the movements of cattle, and joins man to god. I can be in the middle, so that, since Aristippus, as though we had no soul, guards the body alone, while Zeno, as though we were devoid of body, embraces the soul alone, I should follow Callipho — whose opinion indeed Carneades so zealously kept defending that he even seemed to approve it; although Clitomachus affirmed that he could never understand what Carneades approved — but if I should wish to follow that very end, would not severity itself and gravity and right reason confront me: "Will you, when honour consists in the despising of pleasure, couple honour with pleasure as one couples a man with a beast?"'

[138535] 140. 'There remains, then, one pair to fight it out — pleasure with honour; about which, as far as I perceive, there is no great contention for Chrysippus. If you follow the one, many things fall, and most of all fellowship with the human race, affection, friendship, justice, and the rest of the virtues, of which there can be none unless it be gratuitous; for that which is impelled to duty by pleasure as by a kind of wage is not virtue but a deceitful imitation and pretence of virtue. Hear, on the other side, those who say that the very name of honour is not even understood by them (unless perhaps we should wish to call honourable that which is glorious in the eyes of the crowd), that the fountain of all goods is in the body, that this is the norm, this the rule, this the prescription of nature, from which whoever has strayed will never have anything to follow in life.'

[139419] 141. 'Do you think, then, that I am moved by nothing, when I hear these things and innumerable others? I am moved as much as you, Lucullus, and you should not think me less a man than yourself; only this is the difference, that you, when you are moved, adopt, assent, approve, and wish that to have been true, certain, comprehended, perceived, ratified, firm, fixed, and can by no reasoning be either driven or moved from it; whereas I think there is nothing of such a kind that, if I should assent to it, I should not often assent to a falsehood, since true things are separated from false by no distinction of impression — especially since those criteria of dialectic are nothing.'

[140104] 142. 'For I come now to the third part of philosophy. Different is the criterion of Protagoras, who thinks that to each that is true which seems so to each; different that of the Cyrenaics, who think there is no criterion except inner emotions; different that of Epicurus, who places all criterion in the senses and in the notions of things and in pleasure; but Plato wished that all judgement of truth, and truth itself, drawn away from opinions and from the senses, should belong to thought itself and to the mind.'

[140623] 143. 'Does our friend Antiochus approve any of these? Not even, indeed, that of his own elders. For where does he follow Xenocrates, whose books on the method of speaking are many and much approved, or Aristotle himself, than whom certainly nothing is more acute, nothing more polished? From Chrysippus he nowhere stirs a foot. We, then, who are called Academics (or do we abuse the glory of the name?) — or why are we compelled to follow those who disagree among themselves? In this very thing which the dialecticians teach in their elements — in what way one ought to judge whether it be true or false, if anything is so connected as this, "if it is day, it is light" — how great is the contention: it pleases Diodorus one way, Philo another, Chrysippus another. What of Chrysippus — in how many matters does he disagree with his own teacher Cleanthes? What of the two leaders, as it were, of the dialecticians, Antipater and Archidemus, most thorny men — do they not dissent in many matters?'

[141620] 144. 'Why, then, Lucullus, do you call me into ill-will and as it were into an assembly, and, as seditious tribunes are wont, order the shops to be closed? For to what does that tend, when you complain that the arts are taken away by us, except that the craftsmen may be stirred up — who, if from all sides they all come together, will easily be incited against you? I will first set forth those invidious things — that you say all those who stand in the assembly are exiles, slaves, madmen. Then I will come to those things which now pertain not to the multitude but to your own selves who are present. For Zeno denies, Antiochus denies, that you know anything. "How so?" you will say; "for we defend that even the unwise man comprehends many things."'

[142375] 145. 'But you deny that anyone knows any thing except the wise man. And this indeed Zeno used to set forth by a gesture. For when he had held out his hand with the fingers extended, "an impression," he would say, "is of this kind"; then when he had drawn the fingers in a little, "assent of this kind"; then when he had wholly closed it and made a fist, he said that was comprehension — from which likeness he even imposed on that thing the name, which it had not had before, katalepsis; but when he had brought his left hand to it and pressed that fist tightly and forcibly, he said that knowledge was of such a kind, of which no one was possessed except the wise man. But who is or has been wise not even they themselves are wont to say. So you now, Catulus, do not know that it is light, nor you, Hortensius, that we are in your villa.'

[143216] 146. 'Are these things said any less invidiously? Yet not too elegantly; those other things more subtly. But, just as you, if nothing could be comprehended, said that the arts collapse, nor granted me that the probable has force great enough for the arts, so I now bring back to you that there cannot be art without knowledge. Or would Zeuxis, or Phidias, or Polyclitus have endured this — that they knew nothing, when in them there was such great skill? But if someone had taught them how great a force knowledge was said to have, they would cease to be angry; nor would they be wroth even with us, when they had learned that we take away that which exists nowhere, but leave to them that which is enough. This method the diligence of our ancestors also approves, who first wished each man to swear according to the conviction of his own mind, then that he be held bound if he should knowingly deceive — because much ignorance is involved in life; then, that he who gave testimony should say that he thought so, even of what he himself had seen, and that the things which sworn judges had ascertained should be pronounced not as having been done or not done, but as seeming so.'

[144397] 147. 'But since not only the sailor signals but the west wind itself whispers to us, Lucullus, that it is time for us to sail, and since I have said enough, let me make an end. Hereafter, however, when we inquire into these matters, let us rather discourse about the so great dissensions of the highest men, about the obscurity of nature, and about the error of so many philosophers, who disagree so greatly about good and contrary things that — since more than one cannot be true — it is necessary that so many and so noble schools lie prostrate, rather than about the falsehoods of the eyes and of the rest of the senses, and about the sorites or the liar — those nets which the Stoics have woven against themselves.'

[145118] 148. Then Lucullus said: 'I do not take it ill that we have compared these views. For meeting more often, and especially at our places near Tusculum, we shall inquire into whatever shall seem good.' 'Excellent,' said I; 'but what does Catulus think, what Hortensius?' Then Catulus said: 'I? I return to my father's opinion, which indeed he used to say was that of Carneades — that I think nothing can be perceived, yet judge that the wise man will assent to the unperceived, that is, will hold an opinion, but so that he understands that he is holding an opinion, and knows that there is nothing which can be comprehended and perceived. And so, while approving that withholding of assent in all things, I vehemently assent to that other opinion, that there is nothing which can be perceived.' 'I have your opinion,' said I, 'and I do not greatly spurn it. But what, pray, seems good to you, Hortensius?' Then he, laughing, said: 'It must be done away with.' 'I have you,' said I; 'for that is the Academy's own opinion.' The discourse thus finished, Catulus stayed behind, and we went down to our little boats.