WORK: Orator  (slug: cicero-marcus-tullius-orator-a10c4c)

CHAPTER: 01-orator



[109712] 176. Both of these go before Isocrates in age, so that he surpassed them by moderation, not by invention. For he is, as in transferring and making words more tranquil, so in the very rhythms more sedate. But Gorgias is more greedy of that kind, and uses these festive devices—for so he himself reckons them—too insolently; which Isocrates, however, when as a young man he had heard Gorgias, already an old man, in Thessaly, tempered more moderately. Nay, he himself, as far as he advanced in age—for he completed nearly a hundred years—relaxed from the excessive constraint of rhythms; which he declares in that book which he wrote to Philip of Macedon, when he was now quite old; in which he says that he is now less in bondage to rhythms than he had been wont. Thus he had corrected not only his predecessors but even himself.

[110542] 177. Since, then, we have those leaders and authors of apt oratory whom we have named, and the origin has been found, let the cause be sought. Which is so plain that I marvel the ancients were not stirred—especially since, as happens, they often by chance said something close-knit and apt. And when this had struck men's minds and ears, so that it could be understood that what chance had poured forth had fallen pleasantly, surely the kind was to be marked, and they were to imitate themselves. For the ears themselves, or the mind by the report of the ears, contain within them a certain natural measuring of all sounds.

[111167] 178. And so they judge both the longer and the shorter, and always expect the perfect and measured; they feel certain things maimed and, as it were, docked, by which, defrauded as of a debt, they are offended; others too drawn-out and, as it were, running on immoderately, which the ears reject even more; for, as in most things, so in this kind, what is too much offends more vehemently than what seems too little. As, therefore, the verse of poetry was discovered by the terminating of the ears, by the observation of the discerning, so in oratory there was noted—much later, indeed, but with the same Nature admonishing—that there are certain fixed runs and closings of words.

[111848] 179. Since, then, we have shown the cause too, let us now, if you please, unfold the nature—for that was the third thing; which disputation is not of this kind of discourse we have undertaken, but of the inmost art. For it can be asked what the rhythm of oratory is, and where it is placed, and born of what, and whether it is one or two or more, and by what method it is composed, and to what end, and when, and in what place, and in what manner applied it brings some pleasure.

[112329] 180. But as in most matters, so in this there is a twofold way of considering, of which one is longer, the other shorter and also plainer. Now of the longer the first question is whether there be any rhythmical oratory at all; for to some it does not seem so, because there is nothing fixed in it as in verse, and because those very men who affirm that these rhythms exist cannot render the reason why they exist. Next, if there be rhythm in oratory, of what sort it is, or what sorts, and whether from poetic rhythms or from some other kind, and, if from the poetic, which of them or what kind; for to some only one seems the same, to others several, to others all. Next, whatever they are, whether one or several, whether they are common to every kind of oratory—since one kind is of narrating, another of persuading, another of teaching—or whether unlike rhythms are suited to each kind of oratory; if common, which they are; if unlike, what the difference is, and why rhythm does not appear equally in oratory and in verse.

[113358] 181. Next, that which is called rhythmical in oratory, whether it is produced by rhythm alone, or also by a certain composition or kind of words; or whether each has its own, so that rhythm appears in the intervals, composition in the sounds, the very kind of words by a certain form and light of oratory, and whether the fount of all is composition, and from it are produced both rhythm and those things which are called, as it were, the forms and lights of oratory, which, as I said, the Greeks call schemata.

[113871] 182. But it is not one and the same thing that is pleasant to the voice, and that which is perfected by measure, and that which is lit up by the kind of words; though this last indeed is near to rhythm, because it is for the most part of itself perfect; composition, however, differs from both, since it wholly serves the weight or sweetness of the sounds. These, then, are about the matters in which the nature of the thing is to be sought.

[114314] 183. That there is, therefore, a certain rhythm in oratory is not difficult to know. For the sense judges it; in which it is unjust not to acknowledge what happens, if we cannot find why it happens. For not even verse itself was known by reason, but by nature and sense, which reason afterward, by measuring, taught what was happening. Thus the marking of nature and observation begot art. But in verse the matter is plainer—although even oratory, with the chant removed by certain measures, seems to be loosed, and that most of all in the best of those poets who are called by the Greeks lyric, whom, when you have stripped them of the chant, almost naked oratory remains.

[114989] 184. Things like these are found even among our own, as those in the Thyestes: "Who, pray, shall I say you are? who in slow old age," and what follows; which, except when the flute-player has come in, are most like loosed oratory. But the senarii of the comic poets, on account of their likeness to ordinary talk, are often so cast down that sometimes the rhythm and verse can scarcely be perceived in them. Whence rhythm is harder to find in oratory than in verse.

[115456] 185. There are, in all, two things which season oratory: the pleasantness of words and of rhythms. In words there is, as it were, a certain matter; in rhythm, however, the polishing. But, as in other matters, the inventions of necessity are older than those of pleasure—

[115728] 186. for what is both easier and more necessary is always known first—so transferred or made or joined words were easily known, because they were taken from common and everyday talk. Rhythm, however, was not drawn from home, nor had it any necessity or kinship with oratory. And so, noted and known somewhat later, it brought to oratory, as it were, a certain wrestling-school and final outlines.

[116126] 187. But if there is one oratory somewhat narrow and chopped up, and another widened and poured-out, it must be that this happens not by the nature of the letters but by the variety of long and short intervals; by which, oratory being entangled and intermixed, since it is now stable, now voluble, it must be that the nature of rhythm is contained in a force of this kind. For that circuit, of which we have already often spoken, is borne along and glides the more impetuously by the rhythm itself, until it reaches its end and takes its stand. It is plain, then, that oratory ought to be bound by rhythms, but to be without verses.

[116760] 188. But whether these rhythms are poetic, or from some other kind, is next to be seen. There is, then, no rhythm outside the poetic, for the kinds of rhythms are fixed. For every such rhythm is so constituted that it is one of three. For the foot, which is brought to bear on rhythms, is divided into three, so that it is necessary that one part of the foot be either equal to the other part, or twice as great, or half again as great. Thus the dactyl is equal, the iambus double, the paean half-again; and how can these feet not fall into oratory? When these are set in order, what is produced must of necessity be rhythmical.

[117390] 189. But it is asked by what rhythm, or which especially, one should use. That all fall into oratory can be understood even from this, that we often through inadvertence speak verses in oratory. This is vehemently faulty, but we do not attend to it nor hear ourselves; senarii indeed and Hipponacteans we can scarcely escape, for our oratory consists for a great part of iambs. But yet the hearer easily recognizes those verses, for they are most familiar; we, however, through inadvertence often crowd in even less familiar ones, but verses nonetheless: a faulty kind, and to be shunned by long forethought of the mind.

[118012] 190. Hieronymus the Peripatetic, a man noble among the first, chose out of the many books of Isocrates perhaps thirty verses, most of them senarii, but also anapaests; than which what can be baser? Although in his reading he acted maliciously; for, taking away the first syllable from the first word of a thought, he joined to the last word the first syllable again of the following thought; thus was made that anapaest which is called Aristophanean; which, that it may not happen, can neither be guarded against nor is it necessary. But yet this corrector, in that very place where he censures—as was noted by me, who eagerly inquired into him—himself unwittingly thrusts in a senarius. Let this, then, be acknowledged, that rhythms are present even in loosed words, and that the same are oratorical which are poetic.

[118832] 191. It follows, therefore, that we must see which rhythms fall most into apt oratory. For there are those who think the iambic, because it is most like oratory—for which cause it comes about that it especially, on account of its likeness to the truth, is used in plays—while that dactylic rhythm of hexameters is more suited to grand-speaking. Ephorus, however—himself a smooth orator, and one who came forth from the best discipline—pursues the paean or the dactyl, but shuns the spondee and the trochee. For because the paean had three short syllables, the dactyl two, by the shortness and swiftness of the syllables he thinks the words glide more readily; and the contrary happens in the spondee and the trochee, of which, because the one consists of long syllables, the other of short, oratory becomes in the one case too impetuous, in the other too slow, and in neither tempered.

[119719] 192. But both those former men err, and Ephorus is at fault. For those who pass over the paean do not see that the softest rhythm, and the same the amplest, is passed over by them. Which seems to Aristotle far otherwise, who judges the heroic rhythm grander than loosed oratory requires, but the iamb too much of common talk. Thus he approves neither a lowly and abject oratory nor one too lofty and exaggerated, yet wishes it to be full of weight, so that it can carry those who hear over to greater admiration.

[120233] 193. The trochee, however, which is of the same span as the choreus, he calls the cordax, because contraction and shortness have no dignity. Thus he approves the paean, and says all use it, but do not themselves perceive it when they use it; and that it is a third thing, and a middle, between those; and that those feet are so constituted that in each single one there is a measure either half-again, or double, or equal. And so those of whom I spoke before took account only of convenience, none of dignity.

[120744] 194. For the iamb and the dactyl fall most of all into verse; and so, as we shun verse in oratory, so these feet, continued, are to be avoided; for oratory is something different, and nothing more hostile to it than that which belongs to verses; the paean, however, is least apt for verse, wherefore oratory the more gladly received it. But Ephorus does not understand that even the spondee, which he shuns, is equal to the dactyl, which he approves. For he thinks feet are to be measured by syllables, not by intervals; which he does likewise in the trochee, which is, in times and intervals, equal to the iamb, but faulty in oratory if it be set at the end, because words fall better into longer syllables. And these things, which are in Aristotle, are said by Theophrastus and Theodectes about the paean in the same way.

[121569] 195. But for my part I feel that all the feet are, as it were, mixed and confused in oratory; for we could not escape notice if we always used the same, because oratory ought neither to be rhythmical like a poem, nor outside rhythm like the talk of the crowd—the one is too bound, so that it appears to be done of set purpose, the other too loosed, so that it seems vagabond and vulgar; so that by the one you are not delighted, the other you would hate—;

[122026] 196. let it be, then, as I said above, mixed and tempered with rhythms, neither loosed nor wholly rhythmical, most of all with the paean, since the best authority so judges, but tempered also with the rest of the rhythms, which he passes over.

[122271] But now it must be said which rhythms ought to be mixed with which, like purple, and also to which kinds of oratory each is most suited. For the iamb is most frequent in those things which are said in a lowered and humble style;

[122501] 197. the paean, however, in the ampler; in both the dactyl. And so in varied and continuous oratory these are to be mixed and tempered among themselves. Thus the hunting after delight and the industry of squaring off the oratory will least be noticed; which will lie hidden the more, if we use the weights both of words and of thoughts. For those who hear notice these two things and reckon them pleasant to themselves—the words, I mean, and the thoughts—and while with attentive minds, admiring, they take them in, the rhythm escapes and flies past them; which yet, if it were absent, those very things would delight less.

[123126] 198. Nor indeed is the run of rhythms—of oratory, I mean, for it is far otherwise in verse—such that nothing is done outside measure; for that indeed would be a poem; but all oratory that walks evenly and steadily, neither limping nor, as it were, wavering, is held to be rhythmical. And that is thought rhythmical in speaking, not which wholly consists of rhythms, but which comes nearest to rhythms; whereby it is even harder to use oratory than verse, because in the latter there is a certain fixed and defined law, which it is necessary to follow; in speaking, however, nothing is proposed save that the oratory be not immoderate, or narrow, or loosed, or flowing. And so there are not in it, as for the flute-player, the measures of beats, but the whole comprehension and form of the oratory is rounded off and terminated, which is judged by the pleasure of the ears.

[124000] 199. But it is usual to ask whether rhythms are to be kept throughout the whole round of words, or in the first parts and in the last; for most men think that one need only fall rhythmically and terminate the thought. But it is so, that this is most becoming, not that it is the only thing; for that round must be set down, not cast away. Wherefore, since the ears always expect the end and rest upon it, that ought not to be void of rhythm, but to this end already from the beginning that comprehension of words ought to be borne, and the whole, from the head, so to flow that, coming to the end, it of itself comes to a stand.

[124630] 200. But this, to men exercised in a good discipline, who have both written much and have made whatever they say even without writing like to written things, will not be very difficult. For first the thought is circumscribed in the mind, and at once the words run together, which that same mind—than which nothing is swifter—straightway sends off, so that each answers in its own place; whose distributed order is closed off, now by one termination, now by another. And all those words, both the first and the middle, ought to look to the last.

[125176] 201. For at times the run in oratory is more impetuous, at times a measured entry, so that already from the beginning it must be seen in what manner you wish to come to the end. Nor in rhythms more than in the other adornments of oratory, though we do the same things as the poets, do we yet escape, in oratory, the likeness of a poem. For in each there is both matter and handling: matter in the words, handling in the arrangement of words. And of each there are three parts: of words, the transferred, the new, the ancient—for of the proper we say nothing in this place—; of arrangement, those which we have named, composition, trimness, rhythm.

[125825] 202. But in each the poets are more frequent and more free; for they both transfer words more often and even more boldly, and use the ancient more gladly and the new more freely. The same happens in rhythms, in which they are compelled, as it were, to obey necessity. Yet it may be understood that these things are neither too diverse nor in no way joined. Thus it comes about that rhythm appears not in the same way in oratory as in verse, and that what is called rhythmical in oratory is not always made by rhythm, but sometimes by trimness or by the construction of words.

[126402] 203. So, if it is asked what the rhythm of oratory is, it is all rhythm, but one is better and apter than another; if where it is, in every part of the words; if whence it has sprung, from the pleasure of the ears; if the method of composing it, that will be said in another place, because it pertains to use, which was the fourth and last part in our dividing; if to what end it is brought to bear, to delight; if when, always; if in what place, in the whole continuation of words; if what it is that produces the pleasure, the same as in verses, whose measure art notes, but the ears themselves, by a silent sense, define without art.

[127040] 204. Enough of the nature; the use follows, of which we must dispute more accurately. In which it has been asked whether rhythm is to be kept in that whole round of oratory, which the Greeks call period, and we call now ambitus, now circuitus, now comprehensio or continuatio or circumscriptio, or in the beginnings only, or in the ends, or in both parts; then, since rhythm seems to be one thing, rhythmical another, what the difference is.

[127483] 205. Then, whether it is becoming to cut up the little parts equally in all rhythms, or to make some shorter, some longer, and when or why that should be; and in which parts, whether several or single, unequal or equal, and when one is to use either these or those; and which are most aptly arranged among themselves and in what manner, or whether there is no distinction at all in that kind; and—what most of all pertains to the matter—by what method oratory is made rhythmical.

[127964] 206. It must also be unfolded whence the form of words has arisen, and it must be said how large a circuit it is becoming to make, and we must discourse of their little parts and, as it were, sections, and inquire whether there is one kind and length of them or several, and, if several, in what place or when and of what kind it is becoming to use each. Lastly, the usefulness of the whole kind must be unfolded, which indeed lies more widely open; for it is fitted not to some one thing alone, but to several.

[128477] 207. And it is permitted, without answering to each single point, so to speak of the whole kind that the single points too may seem to have been sufficiently answered. The other kinds, then, being set aside, we have chosen this one alone of which to speak—the one that is engaged in cases and in the forum. Therefore in the others—that is, in history and in that which we call epideictic—it is decided that all be said in the Isocratean and Theopompean manner, with that circumscription and round, so that oratory may run as if enclosed in a circle, until it takes its stand in single perfect and finished thoughts.

[129094] 208. And so, after this circumscription, or comprehension, or continuation, or round was born, if it is permitted so to speak, no one who was of any account wrote oratory of that kind which was prepared for delight and removed from judicial and forensic contest, but that he reduced almost all his thoughts to a square and a rhythm. For when the hearer is one who does not fear that his good faith may be assailed by the snares of composed oratory, he even feels gratitude toward the orator who serves the pleasure of the ears.

[129623] 209. But this kind of oratory is neither wholly to be taken up for forensic cases nor altogether to be rejected; for if you use it always, it both brings satiety and is recognized for what it is even by the unskilled; it takes away, besides, the grief of the pleading, removes the human feeling of the hearer, and utterly destroys truth and good faith. But since it must sometimes be applied, first it is to be seen in what place, then how long it is to be retained, then in how many ways it is to be varied.

[130133] 210. Rhythmical oratory, then, is to be applied if either something is to be praised more ornately—as we did in the second book of the accusation about the praise of Sicily, as in the senate about my own consulship—or a narrative is to be set forth which requires more of dignity than of grief, as in the fourth book of the accusation we spoke about the Hennensian Ceres, about the Segestan Diana, about the situation of Syracuse. Often, too, in amplifying a matter, by the consent of all, oratory is poured forth rhythmically and volubly. This we perhaps have not perfected, but have very often attempted; which in very many places our perorations declare that we wished and strove for in mind. But this avails when he who hears is already, as it were, besieged by the orator and held. For he does not act so as to lie in wait and watch, but already favours, and wishes the advance, and, admiring the force of the speaking, does not seek out what to censure.

[131094] 211. But this form is not long to be retained—and I mean not in the peroration, which itself encloses it, but in the rest of the parts of the oration. For when you have used those passages in which I have shown that it is permitted, the whole diction must be transferred to those things which—I know not why, when the Greeks name them kommata and kola—we do not rightly call incisa and membra. For there cannot be known names for unknown things; but since we are wont to transfer words either for sweetness or for poverty, this happens in all arts, that, when something is to be named which, on account of ignorance of the things themselves, had before no name, necessity compels us either to make a new word or to borrow from a like one.

[131834] 212. But in what manner it is becoming to speak by clauses and by members we shall presently see; now it must be said in how many ways comprehensions and conclusions are varied. Rhythm flows altogether from the beginning, now more impetuously by the shortness of the feet, now more slowly by their length. Vehement passages require a run, expositions of matters require slowness. But the round comes to a stand by several measures, of which Asia most followed one, which is called the dichoreus, when there are two final choreuses, that is, each made of a long and a short. For it must be explained, since by some the same feet are called by other names.

[132490] 213. The dichoreus is not indeed of itself faulty in closings, but in the rhythm of oratory there is nothing so faulty as if the same is always used. Now that very foot falls of itself splendidly, wherefore satiety is the more to be feared. While I was standing by, Gaius Carbo, son of Gaius, tribune of the plebs, said in the assembly in these words: "O Marcus Drusus, I appeal to your father"—these two by twos in feet, by clauses; then by members: "you used to say that the commonwealth was a sacred thing"—these likewise are members, in threes; afterward the round:

[133061] 214. "whoever had violated it, the penalties were paid to him by all"—a dichoreus; for it is nothing to the matter whether that final syllable be long or short; then: "your father's saying your wise rashness, son, confirmed"—at this dichoreus so great an outcry of the assembly was raised that it was wonderful. I ask: did not the rhythm produce it? Change the order of the words, make it thus: "confirmed your son's rashness," and now it will be nothing—although "temeritas" is of three short syllables and a long, which Aristotle approves as the best, from whom I dissent. "But the same words, the same thought."

[133677] 215. For the mind that is enough, for the ears not enough. But this ought not to be done too frequently; for first the rhythm is recognized, then it sates, afterward, when its facility is known, it is despised.

[133889] But there are several closings that fall rhythmically and pleasantly. For both the cretic, which is of a long and a short and a long, and its equal the paean, which is equal in span, a syllable longer, are thought most fitly to be bound into loosed oratory, since it is double. For it is either of a long and three shorts, which rhythm is vigorous at the beginning, lies dead at the end, or of as many shorts and a long, which the ancients judge to fall best; I do not plainly reject it, but prefer others.

[134397] 216. Not even the spondee is utterly to be rejected, although, because it is of two longs, it seems duller and slower; yet it has a certain stable step, not devoid of dignity—in clauses, indeed, and in members, much more so; for it makes up for the fewness of its feet by its own weight and slowness. But when I name these feet in closings, I do not speak of one final foot: I add, what is the least, the next one above, often even the third.

[134841] 217. Not even the iamb, which is of a short and a long, or—equal to the choreus, which has three shorts, the trochee, equal in span, not in syllables—or even the dactyl, which is of a long and two shorts, if it be next from the last, arrives smoothly enough at the end, if the last be a choreus or a spondee; for it never matters which of these be in the final foot. But these same three feet conclude badly, if any one of them be set at the end, except when, in place of a cretic, the last is a dactyl; for it matters nothing whether a dactyl be at the end or a cretic, because whether the last syllable be short or long does not matter even in verse.

[135495] 218. Wherefore he too who said the paean was apter, in which the last syllable was long, saw too little, since it is nothing to the matter how long the last be. Now the paean, because it has more syllables than three, is held by some to be a rhythm, not a foot. It is indeed—as is agreed among all the ancients, Aristotle, Theophrastus, Theodectes, Ephorus—the one most apt for oratory either at the beginning or in the middle; they think it apt even at the close, in which place the cretic seems to me apter. The dochmius, however, of five syllables—a short, two longs, a short, a long, as is this: "you hold your friends"—is apt in any place, provided it be set down once: repeated or continued it makes the rhythm open and too conspicuous.

[136239] 219. If, then, we use these so many and so various changes, neither will it be detected manifestly what we do of set purpose, and satiety will be met. And because rhythmical oratory is made not by rhythm alone but also by composition and by the kind of trimness which was spoken of before—by composition it can be understood, when words are so built that the rhythm seems not sought but to have followed of itself, as in Crassus: "For where lust rules, there is a slight guard for innocence"; for the order of the words produces the rhythm without any open industry of the orator—and so, if those ancients—Herodotus, I mean, and Thucydides, and that whole age—said anything aptly and rhythmically, those things fell not by sought rhythm but by the arrangement of words.

[137010] 220. But there are certain forms of oratory in which there is such trimness that rhythm follows of necessity. For when either equal is rendered for equal, or contrary opposed to contrary, or words that fall alike are matched with words, whatever is so concluded for the most part falls rhythmically—of which kind, with examples, we have spoken above; so that this abundance too may bring the faculty of not always ending in the same manner. Nor yet are these things so tight and bound that we cannot, when we wish, loosen them. There is much difference whether oratory is rhythmical—that is, like rhythms—or plainly consists of rhythms; the latter, if it happens, is an intolerable fault, the former, unless it happens, the oratory is scattered and uncultivated and flowing.

[137786] 221. But since not only not frequently but even rarely, in true cases or forensic ones, one must speak circumscribedly and rhythmically, it seems to follow that we should see what those things are which I called above incisa and membra. For these hold the greatest part of the oratory in true cases. For that round and full comprehension consists of about four parts, which we call members, so that it both fills the ear and is neither shorter than is enough nor longer. Although each happens sometimes—or rather often—either that one must stop sooner or proceed further, lest brevity seem to have defrauded the ears or length to have dulled them. But I have the reckoning of moderation; for I am not speaking of verse, and oratory is somewhat freer.

[138538] 222. In these single members, then, there appear, as it were, the knots of the continuation, which we join in the round. But if we wish to speak by members, we make a stop, and, when there is need, easily and often disjoin ourselves from that much-envied run. But nothing ought to be so rhythmical as this, which least appears and avails most. Of this kind is that of Crassus: "Let them dismiss their patrons; let them themselves come forward"—had he not, with an interval, said "let them themselves come forward," he would surely have felt that he had poured out a senarius; altogether it would fall better, "let them come forward themselves"; but I am now disputing of the kind;—

[139221] 223. "why do they attack us with hidden counsels? why do they prepare forces of deserters against us?" The first two are those which the Greeks call kommata, we call incisa; then the third the Greeks call kolon, we membrum; there follows a not long comprehension—for of two verses, that is, members, the comprehension is perfected and falls into spondees; and Crassus indeed for the most part spoke thus, and I myself most approve that kind of speaking. But those things which are brought out by clauses or by members ought to fall most aptly, as it is in me: "Was a house lacking to you? but you had one. Was money over and above? but you were in want;"

[139877] 224. these are said by clauses, four of them; but by members those two that follow: "you ran madly upon the columns, you raged insanely against another's property." Then all is sustained, as if by a certain base, by a longer comprehension: "you have valued that sunk, blind, prostrate house at more than yourself and than your fortunes." It is ended by a dichoreus. But that other, by spondees. For in those, which one ought to use like little daggers, brevity itself will make the feet freer; for often single feet are to be used, for the most part double, and to each may be added a part of a foot, scarcely ever more than three.

[140510] 225. But oratory handled by clauses and by members avails most in true cases, and most of all in those places where you either accuse or refute, as we did in the second book of the Cornelian: "O cunning men! O thing devised! O talents to be feared!" By members thus far; then by cuttings: "we said"; again by members: "we wish to bring witnesses." There follows the final comprehension, but of two members, than which there can be none shorter: "Who, pray, of us did not see that you would do thus?"

[141011] 226. And there is no kind of speaking either better or stronger than to strike by twos or threes of words, sometimes by single ones, a little otherwise by more, among which, with varied closings, rhythmical comprehension rarely interposes itself; which Hegesias, perversely shunning, while he too wishes to imitate Lysias, almost a second Demosthenes, leaps about, cutting up little parts. And he indeed errs no less in his thoughts than in his words, so that whoever has known him need not seek whom to call inept. But I have set down those things of Crassus and of mine, that whoever wished might judge by the ears themselves what is rhythmical even in the smallest little parts of oratory. And since we have said more about rhythmical oratory than anyone before us, now we shall speak of the usefulness of that kind.

[141832] 227. For there is nothing else, Brutus—which you of all men least fail to know—to speak beautifully and oratorically than to speak with the best thoughts and the choicest words. And there is no thought that brings fruit to the orator unless it is aptly and finishedly set forth, nor does the light of words appear unless they are carefully arranged, and rhythm lights up both of these; rhythm, however—for this often must be attested—not only not bound poetically but even fleeing it and most unlike it of all; not that the rhythms are not the same, not only of orators and poets but of all who speak at all, and finally of all sounds which we can measure by the ears, but the order of feet brings it about that what is pronounced seems like either oratory or a poem.

[142601] 228. This, then—whether it please to be called composition or perfection or rhythm—it is necessary to apply, if you wish to speak ornately, not only, as Aristotle and Theophrastus say, lest oratory be borne along boundlessly like a river, which ought to come to a stand not by the breath of the speaker nor by the stop of a copyist, but compelled by rhythm—but also because apt oratory has far greater force than loosed. For as we see athletes, and not much otherwise gladiators, do nothing either in avoiding cautiously or in attacking vehemently in which the very movement has not a certain grace of the wrestling-school, so that whatever is done usefully for the fight is also comely to the sight, so the orator neither makes a heavy blow unless his thrust was apt, nor sufficiently covertly turns aside an onset unless even in giving ground he understands what is becoming.

[143480] 229. And so, as is the movement of those whom the Greeks call "graceless," such seems to me the oratory of those who do not close their thoughts with rhythms; and so far is it from being true that—what those who, either through lack of teachers or through slowness of genius or through flight from labour, have not attained it are wont to say—oratory is enervated by the composition of words, that otherwise there can be in it neither any onset nor force. But the matter demands great exercise, lest we do anything like those who, having followed this kind, did not master it—lest we either transpose words openly, so that the oratory may fall or roll the better; which

[144151] 230. Lucius Caelius Antipater, in the preface to the Punic War, says he will not do except of necessity. O simple man, who hides nothing from us; wise man, who thinks one must be a slave to necessity! But this man is altogether rude; in us, however, in writing and in speaking, the excuse of necessity is not approved; for nothing is necessary, and, if anything were, it nevertheless was not necessary to confess it. And this man indeed, who seeks this indulgence from Laelius, to whom he wrote and to whom he excuses himself, both uses that transposition of words and nonetheless fills out and concludes his thoughts no more aptly. But among others, and most of all the Asiatics, who are slaves to rhythm, you may find certain empty words crammed in, as it were, to complete the rhythms. There are also those who, by that fault which flowed most of all from Hegesias, in breaking and chopping up rhythms, fall into a certain abject kind most like little verses.

[145115] 231. The third is that in which were those brothers, the chiefs of the Asiatic rhetoricians, Hierocles and Menecles, in my judgment by no means to be despised. For although they are far from the form of truth and from the rule of the Attic writers, yet they make up for this fault either by their faculty or by their abundance. But among them there was no variety, because almost everything was concluded in one manner. He who has shunned these faults, so as neither to transpose a word in such a way that it is understood to have been done of set purpose, nor, stuffing in words, to fill up cracks, as it were, nor, pursuing minute rhythms, to chop up and hamstring his thoughts, nor, without any change, always to be engaged in the same kind of rhythms—he will have avoided almost all faults. For of the merits we have said much, to which those faults are plainly contrary.

[145992] 232. But how great a thing it is to speak aptly, one may make trial, if you either dissolve the well-built arrangement of a composing orator by transposing the words;—for the whole thing is spoiled, as those words of ours in the Cornelian, and all that follow: "Neither do riches move me, in which all the Africani and Laelii many slave-dealers and merchants have surpassed": change a little, so that it be "many have surpassed, merchants and slave-dealers," the whole thing will perish; and what follows: "Nor robes or chased gold and silver, in which many eunuchs from Syria and Egypt have outdone our ancient Marcelli and Maximi"; transpose the words thus, so that it be "have outdone eunuchs from Syria and Egypt"; add the third: "Nor indeed those adornments of villas, in which I see that Lucius Paullus and Lucius Mummius, who crammed full of these things both the city and all Italy, could very easily have been surpassed by some Delian or Syrian"; make it thus: "could have been surpassed by some Syrian or Delian";

[147017] 233. do you see how, with the order of the words a little changed—the thought, however, standing in the same words—all comes to nothing, when, from apt, the things are loosed? Or if you seize some scattered thought of some ill-built writer, and, with the order of the words a little changed, reduce it to a square, that thing which before was flowing and loosed would be made apt. Come, take from Gracchus that passage before the censors: "It cannot be but that it is of the same man to disapprove the upright who approves the wicked"; how much more aptly, had he said thus: "but that it is of the same man, who approves the wicked, to disapprove the upright!"

[147679] 234. To speak in this manner no one ever was unwilling, and no one was able without speaking so; but those who have spoken otherwise could not attain it. Thus they suddenly became Attic; as if forsooth Demosthenes had been a man of Tralles! whose thunderbolts would not so vibrate, were they not borne twisted by rhythms. But if loosed oratory delights anyone more, let him follow that, by all means—provided only thus, that if a man dissolve the shield of Phidias, he will have taken away the whole appearance of the arrangement, not the grace of the single works; as in Thucydides I miss only the round of the oratory, while the adornments are present.

[148335] 235. But those men, when they dissolve oratory in which there is neither matter nor any word but an abject one, seem to me to dissolve not a shield but—as is the proverb, although it is too lowly a saying—a besom of twigs. And, that they may seem plainly to have despised this kind which I praise, either let them write something either in the Isocratean manner or in that which Aeschines or Demosthenes uses, and then I shall judge that they have shrunk from this kind not through despair but have fled it by judgment; or I myself will find, on the same condition, someone willing to use it, who shall either speak or write in whichever language you please in that kind in which they wish; for it is easier to dissolve apt things than to connect scattered ones.

[149099] 236. But the matter stands thus—that I may say most briefly what I feel: to speak with composition and aptly without thoughts is madness; but to speak with thoughts without both the order and the measure of words is dumbness—yet such a dumbness, however, that those who use it can be held not foolish men, even for the most part discerning; with which let him who is content use it. But the eloquent man, who ought to move not only approvals but admirations, outcries, applause, if it be allowed, ought so to excel in all things that it would be base for him that anything else should be either expected or heard more gladly.

[149726] 237. You have my judgment about the orator, Brutus; which either follow, if you approve it, or stand by your own, if some other is yours. In which I shall neither contend with you, nor shall I ever affirm that this view of mine, which I have so strongly asserted in this book, is truer than yours. For not only may another thing seem true to me and to you, but to me myself one thing at one time, another at another. Nor in this matter alone, which looks to the assent of the crowd and to the pleasure of the ears—two things most trivial for judging—but not even in the greatest matters have I as yet found anything firmer, which I might hold, or by which I might direct my judgment, than whatever should seem to me as like to the truth as possible, since the truth itself nonetheless lay hidden in obscurity.

[150537] 238. But I would have you, if these things which have been disputed shall less win your approval, either think that a greater work was undertaken than could be accomplished, or that, while I wished to comply with your request, out of the modesty of refusing I took upon myself the shamelessness of writing.