WORK: Stromata  (slug: clement-of-alexandria-stromata-694383)

CHAPTER: 01-book-1



[108938] 19.93. Does he not seem to you, from the Hebrew Scriptures, to be making plain the hope of the just man after death? And in the Demodocus — if indeed the work is Plato's — he says that this is not philosophizing: to live stooping over the arts, nor being a man of much learning, but something else; "since I, for one, thought it even a reproach." For he knew, I think, that "much learning does not teach one to have understanding," according to Heraclitus. And in the fifth book of the Republic he says: "Shall we, then, set down all these, and others of such sort, as mathematicians and as philosophers of the little arts? By no means, I said, but as like to philosophers. And whom, he said, do you call the true ones? Those, I said, who love to behold the truth." For philosophy is not in geometry, which has its postulates and hypotheses, nor in music, which is conjectural, nor in astronomy, crammed with physical and flowing and probable accounts, but is the knowledge of the Good itself and of the truth — those other things being distinct from the Good, but ways toward the Good. So not even he grants that the cyclic education of itself accomplishes anything toward the Good, but that it works together to rouse and to exercise the soul toward the objects of thought.

[110215] 19.94. Whether, then, they say that the Greeks uttered some sayings of the true philosophy by chance, the chance is of the divine dispensation (for no one will deify the spontaneous through his ambition toward us); or whether by coincidence, the coincidence is not without providence; or whether, again, one should say the Greeks had a natural notion — we know the Maker of nature to be one, in the sense in which we have called righteousness too natural; or whether, indeed, they had a common mind, let us consider who is the father of this and of the righteousness that comes according to the apportioning of mind. For if one speaks of a foreannouncement and alleges a joint utterance, he speaks of kinds of prophecy. Indeed, others wish that some things were said to the philosophers by a reflection of the truth. The divine Apostle, then, writes concerning us: "For we now see as through a mirror" — knowing ourselves by reflection in it, and contemplating, so far as we can, the efficient cause from the divine within us. For "You have seen your brother," it says, "you have seen your God." The Saviour, I think, is called God to us now; but after the laying aside of the flesh, "face to face," then at last definitely and comprehensibly, when the heart has become pure. And by reflection and through a medium those who have exactly philosophized among the Greeks discern God; for such are the true impressions seen through weakness, as an image is seen in the waters, and as we see through transparent and translucent bodies.

[111748] 19.95. Well, then, does Solomon say: "He who sows righteousness works faith. And there are those who, sowing their own, make more." And again: "Take care of the green things in the field, and you will shear grass; and gather the ripe hay, that you may have sheep for clothing." You see how one must take thought for the covering and the guarding from outside. "And you will know with knowledge the souls of your flock." For "when the nations that do not have the Law do by nature the things of the Law, these, not having the Law, are a law to themselves" — the uncircumcision keeping the ordinances of the Law, according to the Apostle, both before the Law and before the coming. And the discourse, as if making a comparison of those from philosophy with those called heretics, says very plainly: "Better is a friend near than a brother dwelling far off; and he who leans upon falsehoods, this man herds the winds and pursues winged birds." I do not think the discourse means philosophy here. Indeed, in many things philosophy attempts what is probable and is persuasive; but it rebukes the heresies. So it adds: "For he has left the ways of his own vineyard, and has wandered from the tracks of his own tillage." And these are they who forsake the Church that is from the beginning. So the man who has fallen into heresy passes through a waterless desert, having left the truly existing God; bereft of God, seeking waterless water, coming upon the uninhabited and thirsty land, gathering barrenness with his hands.

[113265] 19.96. "And to those wanting in understanding I give command, saying" — says wisdom, meaning, of course, those about the heresies — "Touch with pleasure the hidden loaves and the sweet stolen water." By "bread and water" the Scripture plainly means none other than the heresies that use bread and water in the offering not according to the rule of the Church. For there are some who give thanks even with bare water. "But spring away; do not linger in her place" — calling the synagogue a "place," and not, by the same name, a church. Then it cries out: "For so you will cross over strange water" — reckoning the heretical baptism not proper and genuine water — "and you will pass over a strange river" that carries along and drags down into the sea, into which the man who has turned aside from the steadfastness that is according to truth is poured out, swept away again into the worldly and disordered waves of life.

[114186] 20.97. As the many men who drag down the ship would not be said to be many causes, but, of many men, one cause (for each is not a cause of the ship's being dragged down, but together with the others), so philosophy too, being a search for truth, contributes to the grasping of the truth, not being a cause of the grasping, but, together with the others, a cause and a co-worker. And perhaps the joint cause is a cause. And as, happiness being one, the virtues that are its causes are several; and as of being warmed the sun and the fire and the bath and clothing are causes; so, truth being one, many are the things that contribute to the search for it, but the finding is through the Son. If, then, we consider, virtue is one in power, but it has come about that, when present in these matters, it is called prudence, in these temperance, in these courage or righteousness. By the same account, then, truth too being one, in geometry there is the truth of geometry, in music that of music, and in right philosophy there would be Greek truth. But this sovereign truth alone is not to be tampered with, in which we are educated by the Son of God.

[115333] 20.98. In this way we say that one and the same drachma, when given to the shipmaster, is called fare; to the tax-collector, toll; rent to the landlord; wage to the teacher; and earnest-money to the seller. And each thing, whether virtue or truth, called by a synonymous name, is the cause only of the result that belongs to it. And by the joint use of these comes about the living happily (for let us not be happy merely in names), when we call the right life happiness, and call happy the man whose soul is virtuously ordered. And if philosophy contributes, even from afar, to the finding of truth — reaching, by its various attempts, toward the knowledge that is according to us, which touches truth nearly — yet it does contribute to the man who has been earnest to lay hold of knowledge by attempting it rationally. But Greek truth is separated from ours, even if it has shared the same name, both in the greatness of knowledge and in the more authoritative demonstration and in the divine power and the like. For we are taught of God, being instructed in the truly sacred letters by the Son of God; whence, too, they do not move souls in the same way, but by a different teaching.

[116521] 20.99. And if, for the sake of the fault-finders, we must make a distinction, then in calling philosophy a joint cause and a co-worker of the true apprehension, being a search for truth, we shall confess it to be a preliminary education of the gnostic, not setting down the joint cause as a cause, nor the co-worker as something that holds together, nor philosophy as a thing without which there is nothing. For nearly all of us, without the cyclic education and Greek philosophy — and some even without letters — moved by the divine and barbarian philosophy, have received by faith, in power, the word concerning God, educated by self-acting wisdom. And what acts with another, being incomplete to act of itself, we call a co-worker and a joint cause, named from being a cause together with a cause, or from becoming a cause by coming together with another, but not able of itself to furnish the result that is according to truth. And yet philosophy of itself once justified the Greeks, not unto the universal righteousness, toward which it is found a co-worker (just as the first and second step are to the man going up to the upper room, and the writing-master is to the one who is to be a philosopher); nor as though, by its removal, the universal account would be deficient or the truth done away. For sight contributes, and hearing and voice, toward truth, but it is the mind that recognizes it of itself. But of the co-workers some bring greater, some less power. So clearness is a co-worker toward the handing down of the truth, and dialectic toward not falling before the heresies that run riot.

[118127] 20.100. Self-complete, then, and in need of nothing, is the teaching that is according to the Saviour, being the power and wisdom of God; and Greek philosophy, coming to it, does not make the truth more powerful, but, by rendering powerless the sophistical attempt against it and beating back the treacherous plots against the truth, it has fitly been called a fence and a wall of the vineyard. And the truth that is according to faith is necessary for life, as bread; while the preliminary education is like a relish and a dessert — "a sweet morsel at the close of dinner," according to Pindar the Theban. The Scripture has plainly declared: "The harmless man, understanding, will become more cunning, and the wise man will receive knowledge." And "he who speaks of himself seeks his own glory," says the Lord, "but he who seeks the glory of the one who sent him is true, and there is no unrighteousness in him." On the contrary, then, he does wrong who appropriates the things of the barbarians and boasts of them as his own, increasing his own glory and falsifying the truth. This man is called a thief by the Scripture. So it says: "My son, do not become a liar; for the lie leads to theft." And the thief truly has what he has stolen, whether it be gold or silver or speech or doctrine. In part, then, the things they have stolen are true, but they know them by conjecture and by the necessities of argument. Once discipled, then, they will recognize them comprehensibly.

[119605] 21.101. Concerning the fashioning of the doctrines of the philosophers from the Hebrews, we shall treat a little later; but first, as was the next thing, we must now speak of the times of Moses, by which it will be shown beyond dispute that the philosophy of the Hebrews is the most ancient of all wisdom. These matters have been treated exactly by Tatian in his Against the Greeks, and also by Cassian in the first book of his Exegetica; yet the present work requires that we too run over what has been said on the subject. Apion the grammarian, then, surnamed Pleistonices, in the fourth book of his Egyptian Histories — though he was hostile in disposition toward the Hebrews, being an Egyptian by race, so that he even composed a book against the Jews — mentioning Amosis, king of the Egyptians, and the deeds done in his time, cites as witness Ptolemy of Mendes. And his words run thus: "Amosis razed Auaris, living in the time of Inachus the Argive, as Ptolemy of Mendes recorded in his Chronicles." And this Ptolemy was a priest, who, setting out the deeds of the Egyptian kings in three whole books, says that under Amosis, king of Egypt, the journey of the Jews out of Egypt took place under the leadership of Moses; from which it is seen that Moses flourished in the time of Inachus.

[120900] 21.102. The most ancient of Greek matters are the Argive, those from Inachus I mean, as Dionysius of Halicarnassus teaches in his Chronicles. Younger than these by forty generations are the Attic matters, those from Cecrops, the two-natured and earth-born, as Tatian says word for word; and by nine generations the Arcadian, those from Pelasgus — he too is said to be earth-born. And by another two generations younger than these are the Phthiotic matters, those from Deucalion. From Inachus to the time of the Trojan War twenty generations, or one more, are reckoned, and, so to speak, four hundred years and beyond. And if the Assyrian matters are, by many years, older than the Greek, from what Ctesias says, the departure of Moses from Egypt, under Amosis the Egyptian and under Inachus the Argive, will appear to fall in the four hundred and second year of the Assyrian empire, and in the thirty-second year of the dynasty of Belochus the eighth. And in Greece there were, under Phoroneus who came after Inachus, the flood in the time of Ogyges and the kingdom in Sicyon — first of Aegialeus, then of Europs, then of Telchis — and the kingdom of Cres in Crete. For Acusilaus says that Phoroneus was the first man; whence the author of the Phoronis too said that he was "the father of mortal men."

[122203] 21.103. From this Plato, following Acusilaus, writes in the Timaeus: "And once, wishing to draw them on to discourse about the ancient things, he tries to tell the most ancient things of this city, concerning Phoroneus, said to be the first, and Niobe, and the things after the flood." Under Phorbas was Actaeus, from whom Attica is called Actaea. Under Triopas were Prometheus and Atlas and Epimetheus and the two-natured Cecrops and Io. Under Crotopus was the conflagration in the time of Phaethon and the deluge in the time of Deucalion. Under Sthenelus were both the kingdom of Amphictyon and the coming of Danaus to the Peloponnese, and the founding of Dardania by Dardanus, whom "first," says Homer, "the cloud-gatherer Zeus begot," and the carrying back of Europa from Phoenicia to Crete. Under Lynceus were the rape of the maiden and the founding of the precinct at Eleusis, and the husbandry of Triptolemus, and the coming of Cadmus to Thebes, and the kingdom of Minos. Under Proetus was the war of Eumolpus against the Athenians. Under Acrisius were the crossing of Pelops from Phrygia, and the arrival of Ion at Athens, and the second Cecrops, and the deeds of Perseus and of Dionysus, and Orpheus and Musaeus.

[123426] 21.104. And in the eighteenth year of the kingdom of Agamemnon Ilium was taken, in the first year of the reign at Athens of Demophon, son of Theseus, on the twelfth of the month Thargelion, as Dionysius the Argive says; but Agias and Dercylus say on the eighth from the end of the month Panemus; for Hellanicus says on the twelfth of the month Thargelion. And some of those who have written the Attic histories say on the eighth from the end, in the last year of the reign of Menestheus, when the moon was full. "It was midnight," says the author of the Little Iliad, "and the bright moon was rising." Others say on the same day of the month Scirophorion. And Theseus, being a rival of Heracles, is older than the Trojan matters by one generation. For Homer mentions Tlepolemus, who was a son of Heracles, as having marched against Ilium.

[124266] 21.105. Moses, then, is shown to be earlier than the deification of Dionysus by six hundred and four years, if indeed Dionysus was made a god in the thirty-second year of the reign of Perseus, as Apollodorus says in his Chronicles. And from Dionysus to Heracles and the chiefs about Jason who sailed in the Argo, sixty-three years are reckoned together; and Asclepius and the Dioscuri sailed with them, as Apollonius of Rhodes testifies in his Argonautica. And from the reign of Heracles in Argos to the deification of Heracles himself and of Asclepius thirty-eight years are reckoned, according to the chronographer Apollodorus. From that point to the deification of Castor and Polydeuces, fifty-three years. And somewhere here is the capture of Ilium. And if we must trust Hesiod the poet too, let us hear him: "To Zeus the Atlantid Maia bore glorious Hermes, the herald of the immortals, having mounted the holy bed; and the Cadmean Semele bore him a shining son, having joined in love, Dionysus the bringer of much joy."

[125292] 21.106. Cadmus, the father of Semele, comes to Thebes in the time of Lynceus and becomes the inventor of Greek letters; and Triopas is contemporary with Isis in the seventh generation from Inachus (and they say Isis is the same as Io, because she went, wandering, through the whole earth); and Ister, in his work On the Egyptian Colony, says she was the daughter of Prometheus. And Prometheus, under Triopas, is in the seventh generation after Moses, so that Moses is shown to have flourished even before the origin of mankind according to the Greeks. And Leon, who treated of the gods of Egypt, says that Isis is called Demeter by the Greeks, who comes in the time of Lynceus, in the eleventh generation later than Moses. And Apis, the king of Argos, founds Memphis, as Aristippus says in the first book of his Arcadica. And Aristeas the Argive says that this man was surnamed Sarapis, and that this is the one whom the Egyptians worship; while Nymphodorus of Amphipolis, in the third book of the Customs of Asia, says that the bull Apis, having died and been embalmed, was laid in a coffin (soros) in the temple of the honoured deity, and that from this he was called Soroapis, and later, by a certain habit of the natives, Sarapis.

[126528] 21.107. And Apis is the third from Inachus. Leto, indeed, is in the time of Tityus, for "Leto he dragged, the glorious consort of Zeus"; and Tityus was contemporary with Tantalus. With reason, then, the Boeotian Pindar too writes: "And in time Apollo was born" — and no wonder, since he is found serving Admetus, together with Heracles, for a great year. And Zethus and Amphion, the inventors of music, lived about the age of Cadmus. And if anyone tells us that Phemonoe first delivered oracles to Acrisius, let him know that twenty-seven years after Phemonoe came Orpheus and Musaeus and Linus, the teacher of Heracles. And Homer and Hesiod are much younger than the Trojan matters; and after them, much younger still, are the lawgivers among the Greeks, Lycurgus and Solon, and the seven sages, and those about Pherecydes the Syrian and Pythagoras the great, who lived somewhere low down about the Olympiads, as we have shown. So Moses is proved to be older than most of the gods among the Greeks, and not only than the so-called sages and poets.

[127578] 21.108. And not he alone, but the Sibyl too is older than Orpheus; for there are several accounts both of her surname and of the oracles ascribed to her — that, being a Phrygian, she was called Artemis, and that she, coming to Delphi, sang: "O Delphians, servants of the far-shooting Apollo, I have come to deliver the mind of aegis-bearing Zeus, being wroth with my own brother Apollo." And there is another, the Erythraean, called Herophile; Heraclides of Pontus mentions these in his work On Oracles. I pass over the Egyptian and the Italian, who dwelt at the Carmalum in Rome, whose son was Evander, the founder of the shrine of Pan in Rome called the Lupercal.

[128245] 21.109. It is worthwhile here to inquire also into the times of the other prophets among the Hebrews after Moses. After the end of Moses' life, Joshua succeeds to the leadership of the people, making war for sixty-five years, and resting in the good land another twenty-five. But, as the book of Joshua contains, the man just named succeeded Moses for twenty-seven years. Then, the Hebrews having sinned, they are handed over to Chusachar, king of Mesopotamia, for eight years, as the book of Judges relates; and afterward, having besought God, they receive as leader Gothoniel, the younger brother of Caleb, of the tribe of Judah, who, having killed the king of Mesopotamia, ruled the people for fifty years in succession. And again, having sinned, they were handed over to Eglom, king of the Moabites, for eighteen years; and when they turned back, Aod led them again for eighty years, an ambidextrous man of the tribe of Ephraim; this is the man who slew Eglom.

[129211] 21.110. And when Aod had died, having sinned again, they were handed over to Jabim, king of Canaan, for twenty years. In his time Deborah prophesies, the wife of Lapidoth, of the tribe of Ephraim; and the high priest was Ozius, the son of Riesus. Under her leadership of the army, Barak, the son of Benner, of the tribe of Naphtali, having drawn up against Sisera, the commander-in-chief of Jabim, conquered; and from this Deborah ruled the people, judging, for forty years. And when she had died, the people, having sinned again, is handed over to the Midianites for seven years. After these, Gideon, of the tribe of Manasseh, the son of Joas, having gone out to war with three hundred men, and having destroyed a hundred and twenty thousand of them, ruled for forty years. After him his son Abimelech for three years. Him succeeds Bolea, son of Bedan, son of Charran, of the tribe of Ephraim, who ruled twenty-three years. After him, the people, having sinned again, is handed over to the Ammonites for eighteen years.

[130233] 21.111. And when they had repented, Jephthah the Gileadite, of the tribe of Manasseh, leads them, and ruled six years; after him ruled Abatthan of Bethlehem, of the tribe of Judah, seven years; then Hebron the Zebulonite, eight years; then Eglom of Ephraim, eight years. But some join Hebron's eight years to Abatthan's seven. And after this the people, having sinned again, comes under the foreign Philistines for forty years. And when they had turned back, Samson, of the tribe of Dan, leads them, having conquered the foreigners in war. He ruled for twenty years. And after him, there being no rule, Eli the priest judged the people for forty years. Him Samuel the prophet succeeds, with whom Saul reigned, holding rule for twenty-seven years. This Samuel also anointed David.

[131014] 21.112. And Samuel died two years before Saul, under the high priest Abimelech. He anointed Saul as king, who was the first to reign over Israel after the judges, of whom the whole number, down to Samuel, comes to four hundred and sixty-three years and seven months. Then, through the first book of Kingdoms, the years of Saul are twenty, since, being renewed, he reigned. And after the death of Saul, David, the son of Jesse, of the tribe of Judah, reigns the second time, in Hebron, for forty years, as the second book of Kingdoms contains; and the high priest was Abiathar, the son of Abimelech, of the kindred of Eli; and Gad and Nathan prophesy in his time. So from Joshua the son of Nun until David took over the kingdom there are, as some say, four hundred and fifty years; but, as the chronography here set forth shows, five hundred and twenty-three years and seven months are reckoned together, down to the death of David.

[131947] 21.113. And after these things Solomon, the son of David, reigned forty years. In his time Nathan continues prophesying, who also exhorted him concerning the building of the temple; likewise Achias of Shilom prophesies; and both kings, David and Solomon, were prophets. And Sadon the high priest was the first to perform priestly service in the temple which Solomon built, being the eighth from Aaron the first high priest. So from Moses to the age of Solomon there are, as some say, five hundred and ninety-five years; but, as others say, five hundred and seventy-six. And if one should reckon together with the four hundred and fifty years from Joshua to David the forty years of Moses' campaign and the other eighty years which Moses had lived before the exodus of the Hebrews from Egypt came about, and should add to these the forty years of the reign of David, he will bring the whole to six hundred and ten years.

[132868] 21.114. But our chronography proceeds more exactly, if to the five hundred and twenty-three years and seven months down to the death of David one should add the hundred and twenty years of Moses and the forty of Solomon; for the whole, down to the death of Solomon, will come to six hundred and eighty-three years and seven months. Hiram gives his own daughter to Solomon at the time when, after the capture of Troy, Menelaus came to Phoenicia, as Menander of Pergamum and Laetus say in their Phoenician histories. And after Solomon, Rehoboam his son reigns seventeen years, and the high priest was Abimelech, the son of Sadok. In his time, the kingdom being divided, Jeroboam, of the tribe of Ephraim, the servant of Solomon, reigns in Samaria; and there still prophesy Achias the Shilonite and Samaias the son of Ailam, and the man who came from Judah against Jeroboam and prophesied at the altar.

[133769] 21.115. After him Abium his son reigns three years, and likewise his son Asa forty-one; this man, in his old age, suffered from gout; and in his time Iu, the son of Ananias, prophesies. After him Jehoshaphat his son reigns twenty-five years; in his time prophesy Elijah the Tishbite and Michaias the son of Iebla and Abdias the son of Ananias. And in the time of Michaias there was also a false prophet, Sedekias the son of Chanaan. These are followed by the reign of Joram the son of Jehoshaphat, for eight years, in whose time Elijah prophesies, and after Elijah, Elisha the son of Saphat. In his time those in Samaria ate dove's dung and their own children. And the time of Jehoshaphat extends from the last things of the third book of Kingdoms to the fourth. And in the time of Joram, Elijah was taken up, and Elisha the son of Saphat began to prophesy for six years, being forty years old. Then Ochozias reigned one year, in whose time Elisha still prophesies, and with him Abdadonaeus.

[134762] 21.116. After him Gotholia, the mother of Ozias, reigns eight years, having killed the children of her own brother; for she was of the family of Ahab. But Josabaia, the sister of Ozias, stole away Joas, the son of Ozias, and afterward set the kingdom upon him. In the time of this Gotholia Elisha still prophesies, after whom reigns, as I said before, Joas, who was saved by Josabaia, the wife of Jodae the high priest; and the whole comes to forty years. So from Solomon to the death of Elisha the prophet there are, as some say, a hundred and five years; but, as others say, a hundred and two; but, as the chronography here set forth shows, from the reign of Solomon, a hundred and eighty-one years.

[135465] 21.117. From the Trojan matters to the birth of Homer is, according to Philochorus, a hundred and eighty years, after the Ionian colony. But Aristarchus, in his Notes on Archilochus, says he flourished about the Ionian colony, which took place a hundred and forty years after the Trojan matters. And Apollodorus says it was a hundred years after the Ionian colony, when Agesilaus the son of Doryssaeus reigned over the Spartans, so that Lycurgus the lawgiver, still a young man, overlapped with him. But Euthymenes, in his Chronicles, says he flourished together with Hesiod, in the time of Acastus, and was born in Chios about the two-hundredth year after the capture of Ilium. Of this opinion too is Archemachus in the third book of his Euboica; so that he and Hesiod are even younger than Elisha the prophet. And if anyone wishes to follow the grammarian Crates and says that Homer lived about the return of the Heraclidae, eighty years after the capture of Ilium, he will again be found later than Solomon, in whose time was the coming of Menelaus to Phoenicia, as has been said. And Eratosthenes sets the age of Homer after the hundredth year from the capture of Ilium. Indeed, Theopompus, in the forty-third book of his Philippica, relates that Homer was born five hundred years after those who marched against Ilium. And Euphorion, in his work On the Aleuadae, places him in the time of Gyges, who began to reign from the eighteenth Olympiad, and whom he says was the first to be called "tyrant." And Sosibius the Laconian, in his register of times, sets Homer in the eighth year of the reign of Charillus, the son of Polydectes. Now Charillus reigns sixty-four years, after whom his son Nicander reigns thirty-nine; and in the thirty-fourth year of his reign, he says, the first Olympiad was established; so that Homer is some ninety years before the establishment of the Olympic games.

[137361] 21.118. After Joas, Amasias his son succeeds to the kingdom for thirty-nine years; him Ozias likewise, his son, for fifty-two years, and this man died a leper; and in his time prophesy Amos and Isaiah his son, and Hosea the son of Beeri, and Jonah the son of Amathi, of Geth Chober, who preached to the Ninevites, the one who came forth from the whale. Then Jonathan, the son of Ozias, reigns sixteen years; in his time Isaiah still prophesies, and Hosea and Micah the Morasthite and Joel the son of Bathuel.

[137871] 21.119. Him succeeds his son Ahaz, for sixteen years; in whose fifteenth year Israel was led away to Babylon, and Salmanasar, the king of the Assyrians, removed those in Samaria to the Medes and to Babylon. Again, Ahaz is succeeded by Hosea for eight years, then Hezekiah for twenty-nine years. To this man, for his holiness, near the end of his life, God grants through Isaiah to live another fifteen years, by the going-back of the sun. Down to this time Isaiah and Hosea and Micah continue prophesying. And these are said to have lived after the age of Lycurgus the lawgiver of the Spartans; for Dieuchidas, in the fourth book of his Megarica, sets the flourishing of Lycurgus about the two hundred and ninetieth year after the capture of Ilium. And Isaiah, from the reign of Solomon, in whose time Menelaus was shown to have come to Phoenicia, in the three-hundredth year, is found still prophesying, and Micah with him, and Hosea, and Joel the son of Bathuel.

[138837] 21.120. After Hezekiah his son Manasseh reigns fifty-five years, then his son Amos two years, after whom Josiah his son, the most law-abiding, thirty-one years. This man set the limbs of men upon the limbs of the idols, as it is written in Leviticus. In his eighteenth year the Passover was kept, which had not been performed since Samuel, nor in the time between. Then too Chelkias the priest, the father of the prophet Jeremiah, having lighted upon the book of the Law laid away in the temple, read it and died. In his time prophesy Oldas and Sophonias and Jeremiah. And in the time of Jeremiah Ananias becomes a false prophet. This Josiah, having disregarded Jeremiah the prophet, was slain by Nechao, king of Egypt, at the river Euphrates, having gone to meet him as he set out against the Assyrians.

[139643] 21.121. Josiah is succeeded by Jechonias, also called Joachas, his son, for three months and ten days. Nechao, king of Egypt, having bound him, led him away to Egypt, setting up in his place as king his brother Joakim, on tribute of the land, for eleven years. After him his namesake Joakim reigns three months, then Sedekias eleven years. And down to this time Jeremiah continues prophesying; and there prophesy also Buzi and Urias the son of Samaeus, and Ambacum with him; and the line of the Hebrew kings comes to an end. So from the birth of Moses to this captivity there are, as some say, nine hundred and seventy-two years; but, according to the exact chronography, a thousand and eighty-five years, six months, ten days; and from the reign of David to the captivity that came about under the Chaldeans, four hundred and fifty-two years and six months; but, as our exactness of the times reckons it, four hundred and eighty-two years, six months, ten days.

[140607] 21.122. And in the twelfth year of the reign of Sedekias, Nebuchadnezzar, seventy years before the rule of the Persians, marched against the Phoenicians and the Jews, as Berossus says in his Chaldean histories. And Juba, writing about the Assyrians, confesses that he took the history from Berossus, bearing witness to the man's truth. Nebuchadnezzar, then, having blinded Sedekias, leads him away to Babylon and removes all the people (and the captivity lasts seventy years), except a few, who fled into Egypt. And in the time of Sedekias too there still prophesy Jeremiah and Ambacum; and in the fifth year of his reign Ezekiel prophesies in Babylon, after whom Naum the prophet, then Daniel; and again, after him, prophesy Aggaeus and Zacharias, in the time of Darius the First, for two years; after whom the Messenger among the Twelve.

[141448] 21.123. And after Aggaeus and Zacharias, Nehemiah, the chief cup-bearer of Artaxerxes, the son of Acheli the Israelite, builds the city of Jerusalem and repairs the temple. In this captivity are Esther and Mardochaeus, of whom a book is current, as also that of the Maccabees. During this captivity Misael, Ananias, and Azarias, unwilling to serve the image, are cast into a furnace of fire and saved by the appearance of an angel. Then Daniel, cast into a lions' den on account of the dragon, fed by the providence of God through Ambacum, is brought safe on the seventh day. Here too the sign of Jonah came about; and Tobias, through Raphael the angel, takes Sarah to wife, the demon of hers having killed her seven first suitors; and after the marriage of Tobias his father Tobit recovers his sight.

[142251] 21.124. Here Zorobabel, having conquered his rivals by wisdom, obtains from Darius, having bought it, the renewal of Jerusalem, and with Esdras returns to the land of his fathers; through him come about the redemption of the people, the recognition and renewal of the inspired oracles, the keeping of the saving Passover, and the dissolution of foreign marriages. Cyrus too had proclaimed beforehand the restoration of the Hebrews; and when the promise was fulfilled under Darius, the feast of the dedication is kept, as also at the time of the tabernacle. And the whole of the years, together with those of the captivity, down to the restoration of the people, comes, from the birth of Moses, to one thousand one hundred and fifty-five years, six months, ten days; and from the reign of David, as some say, five hundred and fifty-two years, but, more exactly, five hundred and seventy-two years, six months, ten days.

[143171] 21.125. From the captivity, then, that came about under Jeremiah the prophet, when it was carried to Babylon, were fulfilled the things spoken by Daniel the prophet, which run thus: "Seventy weeks have been cut short upon your people and upon the holy city, to finish sin, and to seal up sins, and to wipe out the iniquities, and to make atonement, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal vision and prophet, and to anoint the Holy of Holies. And you shall know and understand, that from the going forth of the word to answer and to build Jerusalem until Christ the leader are seven weeks and sixty-two weeks; and it shall return and the street and the wall be built, and the times shall be emptied. And after the sixty-two weeks the anointing shall be utterly destroyed, and there is no judgment for it; and the city and the holy place he shall destroy together with the leader who comes; they shall be cut off in a flood; and to the end of the war, cut short, with desolations. And he shall make firm a covenant for many for one week; and in the half of the week my sacrifice and libation shall be taken away; and upon the temple the abomination of the desolations, and until the consummation of time a consummation shall be given upon the desolation. And in the half of the week he shall cause to cease the incense of sacrifice and of the pinnacle of desolation, until the consummation and the haste of the order of desolation."

[144619] 21.126. That the temple, then, was built in seven weeks, this is plain; for it is written in Esdras. And so Christ became king of the Jews, the leader, in the fulfilment of the seven weeks, in Jerusalem; and in the sixty-two weeks all Judaea was at rest and was without wars; and our Lord Christ, the Holy of the holy, having come and fulfilled the vision and the prophet, was anointed in the flesh by the spirit of his Father, in these sixty-two weeks, as the prophet said. And in the one week, the half of which week Nero held when he was reigning, and in the holy city Jerusalem set up the abomination; and in the half of the week he himself was slain, and Otho and Galba and Vitellius; but Vespasian prevailed and tore down Jerusalem and laid waste the holy place. And that these things are so, it is plain to the one able to understand, as the prophet too has said.

[145491] 21.127. In the fulfilment of the eleventh year, then, at the beginning of the following one, when Joakim was reigning, the captivity to Babylon comes about under King Nebuchadnezzar, in his seventh year of reigning over the Assyrians, while Vaphres reigned over the Egyptians in his second year, and Philip was archon at Athens in the first year of the forty-eighth Olympiad; and the captivity remained for seventy years, ending in the second year of Darius the son of Hystaspes, who became king of the Persians and Assyrians and Egyptians, in whose time, as I said before, Aggaeus and Zacharias and the Messenger among the Twelve prophesy, and the high priest was Jesus the son of Josedek. And in the second year of the reign of Darius, whom Herodotus says broke the rule of the Magi, Zorobabel the son of Salathiel is sent to raise and adorn the temple in Jerusalem.

[146361] 21.128. The times of the Persians too, then, are reckoned together thus: Cyrus thirty years, Cambyses nineteen, Darius forty-six, Xerxes twenty-six, Artaxerxes forty-one, Darius eight, Artaxerxes forty-two, Ochus eight, Arses three. . . . The whole of the Persian period comes together to two hundred and thirty-five years. And Alexander the Macedonian, having overthrown this Darius, begins to reign in the years above set out. Likewise, then, the times of the Macedonian kings are brought down thus: Alexander eighteen years, Ptolemy the son of Lagus forty years, Ptolemy Philadelphus twenty-seven years, then Euergetes twenty-five years, then Philopator seventeen years, after whom Epiphanes twenty-four years; him Philometor succeeds and reigns thirty-five years, after whom Physcon twenty-nine years, then Lathurus thirty-six years, then the one surnamed Dionysus twenty-nine years.

[147250] 21.129. After all these Cleopatra reigned twenty-two years, after whom the kingdom of Cleopatra's children of eighteen days. The times of the Macedonian kings, then, come together to three hundred and twelve years and eighteen days. So those who prophesied in the time of Darius the son of Hystaspes, in the second year of his reign — Aggaeus and Zacharias and the Messenger among the Twelve, who prophesied in the first year of the forty-eighth Olympiad — are shown to be older than Pythagoras, who is placed about the sixty-second Olympiad, and than the oldest of the sages among the Greeks, Thales, who lived about the fiftieth Olympiad. And those reckoned with Thales among the sages were his contemporaries, as Andron says in his Tripod. For Heraclitus, being later than Pythagoras, mentions him in his treatise.

[148069] 21.130. Hence, beyond dispute, older than the age of the prophets just mentioned, together with the so-called seven sages, would be the first Olympiad, which is also shown to be later than the Trojan matters by four hundred and seven years. It is easy, then, to see that Solomon, who lived in the time of Menelaus (and Menelaus was in the time of the Trojan matters), is older by many years than the sages among the Greeks. And by how many years Moses again is earlier than Solomon, has been shown by us in what went before. And Alexander, surnamed Polyhistor, in his treatise On the Jews, recorded certain letters of Solomon to Vaphres the king of Egypt and to the king of the Tyrians of Phoenicia, and theirs to Solomon, by which it is shown that Vaphres sent him eighty thousand Egyptian men for the building of the temple, and the other an equal number, together with a Tyrian master-builder of a Jewish mother, of the tribe of David, named, as it is there written, Hyperon.

[149049] 21.131. Indeed, Onomacritus the Athenian, whose are said to be the poems ascribed to Orpheus, is found in the time of the rule of the Pisistratids, about the fiftieth Olympiad. And Orpheus, who sailed with Heracles, was the teacher of Musaeus. For Amphion precedes the Trojan matters by two generations; and Demodocus and Phemius, after the capture of Ilium (the one among the Phaeacians, the other among the suitors), were of good repute for their playing of the lyre. And the oracles ascribed to Musaeus they say are Onomacritus'; the Krater of Orpheus is Zopyrus' of Heraclea, and the Descent into Hades is Prodicus' of Samos. Ion of Chios, in his Triagmoi, relates that Pythagoras too referred some things to Orpheus. And Epigenes, in his work On the Poetry Ascribed to Orpheus, says that the Descent into Hades and the Sacred Discourse are by Cercops the Pythagorean, and the Peplos and the Physica by Brontinus. Indeed, some make Terpander archaic; Hellanicus, at any rate, relates that he lived in the time of Midas, while Phanias, setting Lesches the Lesbian before Terpander, makes Terpander younger than Archilochus, and says Lesches contended with Arctinus and conquered. And Xanthus the Lydian says Thasos was founded about the eighteenth Olympiad (but Dionysius says about the fifteenth), so that it is evident that Archilochus was already known after the twentieth Olympiad. He mentions, at any rate, the destruction of the Magnesians as recently happened. Simonides, then, is placed in the time of Archilochus; but Callinus is older by not much, for Archilochus mentions the Magnesians as destroyed, while Callinus mentions them as prosperous. And Eumelus the Corinthian, being older, is said to have overlapped Archias, the founder of Syracuse.

[150811] 21.132. And these things we have been led to say, because the poets of the Cycle especially are placed among the very ancient. And already among the Greeks too many oracle-mongers are said to have arisen, like the Bacides (one a Boeotian, the other an Arcadian), who foretold many things to many. And by the counsel of the Athenian Amphilytus, Pisistratus too established his tyranny, when the man had pointed out the moment for the attack. For let there be silence about Cometes the Cretan, Cinyras the Cypriot, Admetus the Thessalian, Aristaeus the Cyrenian, Amphiaraus the Athenian, Timoxenus the Corcyrean, Demaenetus the Phocaean, Epigenes the Thespian, Nicias the Carystian, Ariston the Thessalian, Dionysius the Carthaginian, Cleophon the Corinthian, and Hippo the daughter of Chiron, and Boeo and Manto, and the multitude of the Sibyls — the Samian, the Colophonian, the Cymaean, the Erythraean, Phyto, Taraxandra, the Macetian, the Thessalian, the Thesprotian — and Calchas again and Mopsus, who lived in the time of the Trojan matters; but Mopsus is older, as having sailed with the Argonauts.

[151916] 21.133. And they say that Battus the Cyrenian compiled the so-called Mantike of Mopsus; and Dorotheus, in the first book of his Pandect, relates that Mopsus understood the kingfisher and the crow. And Pythagoras the great too always attended to foreknowledge, and Abaris the Hyperborean and Aristeas of Proconnesus and Epimenides the Cretan, who came to Sparta, and Zoroaster the Mede and Empedocles of Acragas and Phormion the Laconian, indeed Polyaratus the Thasian and Empedotimus the Syracusan, and besides these, especially, Socrates the Athenian. "For there is for me," he says in the Theages, "beginning from childhood, by a divine lot, a daemonic sign that comes upon me; and this is a voice, which, when it comes, restrains me from what I am about to do, but never urges me on." And Execestus, the tyrant of the Phocians, wearing two enchanted rings, by the sound they made against each other perceived the right moments for his actions; yet he died, treacherously slain, even though the sound had given warning beforehand, as Aristotle says in his Constitution of the Phocians.

[153005] 21.134. But there were also, among the Egyptians, men who were once living and afterward became gods by human opinion: Hermes the Theban and Asclepius of Memphis; and again Tiresias and Manto at Thebes, as Euripides says; and Helenus too and Laocoon and Oenone, the daughter of Cebren, at Ilium. For Crenus too, one of the Heraclidae, is recorded as a notable seer, and another Iamus in Elis, from whom come the Iamidae, and Polyidus at Argos and at Megara, whom the tragedy mentions. Why should I reckon up for you Telemus, who, being a seer of the Cyclopes, prophesies to Polyphemus the things of the wandering of Odysseus; or Onomacritus at Athens; or Amphiaraus, who is recorded as being older by one generation than the capture of Ilium, having been among the seven who marched against Thebes; or Theoclymenus in Cephallenia, or Telmessus in Caria, or Galeus in Sicily? And there would be others besides these: Idmon, who was with the Argonauts; Phemonoe the Delphian; Mopsus the son of Apollo and Manto, in Pamphylia and Cilicia; Amphilochus the son of Amphiaraus, in Cilicia; Alcmaeon, among the Acarnanians; Anius, in Delos; and Aristander of Telmessus, who was with Alexander. And already Philochorus relates that Orpheus too became a seer, in the first book of his work On Divination.

[154301] 21.135. And Theopompus and Ephorus and Timaeus record a certain Orthagoras as a seer, as does Pythocles of Samos, in the fourth book of his Italica, Gaius Julius Nepos. But these are all thieves and robbers, as the Scripture says, having foretold most things from observation and from probabilities, like the physicians and seers who judge by physiognomy; while others were moved by demons, or disturbed by waters and incenses and a certain quality of air. But among the Hebrews the prophets prophesied by the power of God and his inspiration: before the Law, Adam, foretelling concerning the woman and concerning the naming of the animals; and Noah, proclaiming repentance; and Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, plainly showing forth not a few of the things to come and already present. And with the Law, Moses and Aaron, after whom prophesy Joshua the son of Nun, Samuel, Gad, Nathan, Achias, Samaias, Iu, Elijah, Michaias, Abdiu, Elisha, Abdadonai, Amos, Isaiah, Hosea, Jonah, Joel, Jeremiah, Sophonias, Buzi, Ezekiel, Urias, Ambacum, Naum, Daniel, Misael (the author of the syllogisms), Aggaeus, Zacharias, and the Messenger among the Twelve.

[155444] 21.136. And the prophets in all are thirty-five. And of women (for these too prophesied), Sarah and Rebecca and Mariam and Deborah and Olda. . . . Then, about the same times, John prophesies down to the saving baptism; and after the birth of Christ, Anna and Symeon; for Zacharias too, the father of John, is said in the Gospels to prophesy even before the child. Let us, then, from the beginning, from Moses, gather together the chronography according to the Greeks. From the birth of Moses to the exodus of the Jews out of Egypt are eighty years, and the other forty down to his death; the exodus takes place in the time of Inachus, before the Sothiac period, Moses having gone out of Egypt three hundred and forty-five years earlier. And from the leadership of Moses and Inachus to the flood of Deucalion — the second deluge, I mean — and to the conflagration of Phaethon, which fall in the time of Crotopus, forty generations are counted; but to a hundred years three generations are reckoned. And from the flood to the conflagration of Ida and the finding of iron and the Idaean Dactyls, seventy-three years, as Thrasyllus says. And from the conflagration of Ida to the rape of Ganymede, sixty-five years.

[156656] 21.137. From this to the expedition of Perseus, when Glaucus too established the Isthmian games in honour of Melicertes, fifteen years. From the expedition of Perseus to the founding of Ilium, thirty-four years. From this to the sailing of the Argo, sixty-four years. From this to Theseus and the Minotaur, thirty-two years; then to the seven against Thebes, ten years; to the contest at Olympia, which Heracles established in honour of Pelops, three years; and to the expedition of the Amazons against Athens and the rape of Helen by Theseus, nine years. From this to the deification of Heracles, eleven years; then to the rape of Helen by Alexander, four years; then to the capture of Troy, twenty years. And from the capture of Troy to the return of Aeneas and the founding of Lavinium, ten years; to the rule of Ascanius, eight years; and to the return of the Heraclidae, sixty-one years; and to the Olympiad of Iphitus, three hundred and thirty-eight years.

[157620] 21.138. And Eratosthenes records the times thus: from the capture of Troy to the return of the Heraclidae, eighty years; from this to the founding of Ionia, sixty years; the things next after these, to the guardianship of Lycurgus, a hundred and fifty-nine years; to the year preceding the first Olympiad, a hundred and eight years; from that Olympiad to the crossing of Xerxes, two hundred and ninety-seven years; from that to the beginning of the Peloponnesian War, forty-eight years; and to its end and the defeat of the Athenians, twenty-seven years; and to the battle at Leuctra, thirty-four years; after which, to the death of Philip, thirty-five years; and after these, to the passing of Alexander, twelve years. Again, from the first Olympiad some say that to the founding of Rome are reckoned twenty-four years. From this to the abolition of the kings, when there came to be consuls, two hundred and forty-three years; and from the abolition of the kings to the death of Alexander, a hundred and eighty-six years.

[158644] 21.139. From this to the victory of Augustus, when Antony slew himself in Alexandria, two hundred and ninety-four years, when Augustus was consul for the fourth time. From which time to the contest which Domitian established in Rome, a hundred and fourteen years; and from the first contest to the death of Commodus, a hundred and eleven years. And there are those who reckon together, from Cecrops to Alexander the Macedonian, one thousand eight hundred and twenty-eight years; from Demophon, one thousand two hundred and fifty; and from the capture of Troy to the return of the Heraclidae, a hundred and twenty years, or a hundred and eighty. From this to the archon Euaenetus, in whose time they say Alexander crossed into Asia, as Phanias says seven hundred and fifteen years, as Ephorus seven hundred and thirty-five, as Timaeus and Cleitarchus eight hundred and twenty, as Eratosthenes seven hundred and seventy; and as Duris, from the capture of Troy to the crossing of Alexander into Asia, a thousand years. From this to Euaenetus, the archon at Athens, in whose time Alexander dies, eleven years. From this to the rule of Germanicus Claudius Caesar, three hundred and sixty-five years; from which time the years down to the death of Commodus, however many are reckoned together, also become plain.

[159952] 21.140. And after the Greek matters, we must render an account also from the times among the barbarians, according to the greatest intervals. From Adam to the flood are reckoned together two thousand one hundred and forty-eight years, four days; from Shem to Abraham, one thousand two hundred and fifty years; from Isaac to the giving of the inheritance, six hundred and sixteen years. Then from the judges to Samuel, four hundred and sixty-three years, seven months. And after the judges, the years of the kings, five hundred and seventy-two years, six months, ten days. After which times, the years of the Persian kingdom, two hundred and thirty-five; then of the Macedonian, down to the slaying of Antony, three hundred and twelve years, eighteen days. After which time, the kingdom of the Romans, down to the death of Commodus, two hundred and twenty-two years. And again, from the seventy-year captivity and the restoration of the people to the land of their fathers, to the captivity under Vespasian, are reckoned together four hundred and ten years; and lastly, from Vespasian to the death of Commodus, are found a hundred and twenty-one years, six months, twenty-four days.

[161135] 21.141. And Demetrius says, in his work On the Kings in Judaea, that the tribe of Judah and Benjamin and Levi were not led captive by Sennacherim, but that from this captivity to the last, which Nebuchadnezzar made out of Jerusalem, are a hundred and twenty-eight years, six months. And from the time when the ten tribes became captive out of Samaria, down to Ptolemy the Fourth, five hundred and seventy-three years, nine months; and from the time out of Jerusalem, three hundred and thirty-eight years, three months. And Philo too himself recorded the kings of the Jews, at variance with Demetrius. And further, Eupolemus, in a similar work, says that the whole of the years from Adam to the fifth year of the reign of Demetrius, when Ptolemy was reigning the twelfth year over Egypt, come together to five thousand one hundred and forty-nine years. And from the time when Moses led the Jews out of Egypt to the aforesaid term, are reckoned together one thousand five hundred and eighty years. And from this time down to the consuls in Rome, Gnaeus Domitius and Asinius, are gathered together a hundred and twenty years.

[162259] 21.142. And Ephorus and many other historians say that there are seventy-five nations and tongues, having heard the voice of Moses, which says: "And all the souls from Jacob, those who went down to Egypt, were seventy-five." And according to the true account too the generic dialects appear to be seventy-two, as our Scriptures hand down; while the other many come about by the sharing of two or three or even more dialects. And a dialect is a manner of speech that shows the proper character of a place, or a manner of speech that shows the proper or common character of a nation. And the Greeks say that the dialects among them are five — the Attic, the Ionic, the Doric, the Aeolic, and fifth the Common — but that the tongues of the barbarians, being innumerable, are not called dialects but languages.

[163067] 21.143. And Plato assigns even to the gods a certain dialect, judging especially from dreams and oracles, and also from those possessed by demons, who utter not their own voice or dialect, but that of the demons that have entered them. And he thinks there are dialects even of irrational animals, which those of the same kind understand. When an elephant, for instance, fell into the mud and cried out, another that was present and saw what had happened turned back and, after no long while, brings with him a herd of elephants and saves the one that had fallen in. And they say that in Libya a scorpion, if it cannot reach to strike a man, goes off and returns with several others, and, fastening one to another like a chain, in this way contrives to get the start in carrying out the plot — the irrational animals surely not using some unseen nod, nor indicating to one another by gesture, but, I think, by their own dialect. And certain others say that if a fish drawn up escapes when the line has broken, no fish of the same kind will any longer be found in the same place that day. But the first and generic dialects, though barbarian, have their names by nature, since men too confess that the prayers spoken in the barbarian tongue are more powerful. And Plato, in the Cratylus, wishing to interpret "fire," says the name is barbarian; he testifies, at any rate, that the Phrygians so call it, with a small variation.

[164493] 21.144. And I think it no worse, in addition to these things, to set out also the times of the Roman kings, for the showing of the birth of the Saviour: Augustus forty-three years, Tiberius twenty-two years, Gaius four years, Claudius fourteen years, Nero fourteen years, Galba one year, Vespasian ten years, Titus three years, Domitian fifteen years, Nerva one year, Trajan nineteen years, Hadrian twenty-one years, Antoninus twenty-three years, and likewise again Antoninus and Commodus thirty-two years. The whole, from Augustus to the death of Commodus, is two hundred and twenty-two years; and from Adam to the death of Commodus, five thousand seven hundred and eighty-four years, two months, twelve days. Some, however, record the times of the Roman kings thus: Gaius Julius Caesar three years, four months, six days, after whom Augustus reigned forty-six years, four months, one day; then Tiberius twenty-six years, six months, nineteen days, whom Gaius Caesar succeeds, three years, ten months, eight days; him Claudius, thirteen years, eight months, twenty-eight days; Nero thirteen years, eight months, twenty-eight days; Galba seven months, six days; Otho five months, one day; Vitellius seven months, one day; Vespasian eleven years, eleven months, twenty-two days; Titus two years, two months; Domitian fifteen years, eight months, five days; Nerva one year, four months, ten days; Trajan nineteen years, seven months, fifteen days; Hadrian twenty years, ten months, twenty-eight days; Antoninus twenty-two years, three months, seven days; Marcus Aurelius Antoninus nineteen years, eleven days; Commodus twelve years, nine months, fourteen days. From Julius Caesar, then, to the death of Commodus there are two hundred and thirty-six years, six months. And all the years from Romulus, the founder of Rome, to the death of Commodus, are reckoned together as nine hundred and fifty-three years, six months.

[166412] 21.145. Our Lord was born in the twenty-eighth year, when the first census was ordered to be made under Augustus. And that this is true is written in the Gospel according to Luke thus: "And in the fifteenth year of Tiberius Caesar the word of the Lord came upon John the son of Zacharias." And again in the same Gospel: "And Jesus was coming to the baptism about thirty years of age." And that he had to preach for only one year, this too is written thus: "He has sent me to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord." This both the prophet said and the Gospel. The fifteen years of Tiberius, then, and the fifteen of Augustus — so are fulfilled the thirty years, down to the time when he suffered. And from the time he suffered to the destruction of Jerusalem there are forty-two years, three months; and from the destruction of Jerusalem to the death of Commodus, a hundred and twenty-two years, ten months, thirteen days. So from the time when the Lord was born to the death of Commodus, the whole is a hundred and ninety-four years, one month, thirteen days. And there are those who, more curiously, add to the birth of our Saviour not only the year but also the day, which, they say, was the twenty-fifth of Pachon, in the twenty-eighth year of Augustus.

[167672] 21.146. And those of the school of Basilides keep also the day of his baptism as a feast, passing the night beforehand in readings. And they say that the fifteenth year of Tiberius Caesar is the fifteenth of the month Tybi, but some again the eleventh of the same month. And, dealing exactly with his passion, some bring it, in the sixteenth year of Tiberius Caesar, on the twenty-fifth of Phamenoth, others on the twenty-fifth of Pharmuthi; and others say the Saviour suffered on the nineteenth of Pharmuthi. Indeed, some of them say he was born on the twenty-fourth or twenty-fifth of Pharmuthi. And these too must be rendered to the chronography — the days, I mean, at which Daniel hints, from the desolation of Jerusalem . . . the years of Vespasian, seven, eleven months. For the two years are added to the seventeen months and eight days of Otho and Galba and Vitellius, and so come to three years and six months, which is the half of the week, as Daniel the prophet has said. He said that two thousand three hundred days come about from the time the abomination was set up by Nero in the holy city until its destruction. For so the appended text shows: "Until when shall the vision stand — the sacrifice taken away, and the sin of desolation that is given, and the power and the holy place be trodden down together? And he said to him: Until evening and morning, two thousand three hundred days; and the holy place shall be cleansed." These two thousand three hundred days, then, come to six years, four months, of which the half Nero held while reigning, and it became the half of a week; and the other half Vespasian, together with Otho and Galba and Vitellius. And for this reason Daniel says: "Blessed is he who comes to the one thousand three hundred and thirty-five days." For down to these days was the war, and after these it ceased.

[169522] 21.147. And this number too is shown from the appended passage, which runs thus: "And from the time of the changing of the continual sacrifice, and the giving of the abomination of desolation, a thousand two hundred and ninety days. Blessed is he who endures and comes to the one thousand three hundred and thirty-five days." And Flavius Josephus the Jew, who composed the Jewish histories, bringing down the times, says that from Moses to David are five hundred and eighty-five years; from David to the second year of Vespasian, one thousand one hundred and seventy-nine. Then from this to the tenth year of Antoninus, seventy-seven years; so that from Moses to the tenth year of Antoninus the whole is one thousand eight hundred and thirty-three years. And others, reckoning down to the death of Commodus from Inachus and Moses, said the years come to one thousand eight hundred and forty-two; but others, one thousand and twenty-one. And in the Gospel according to Matthew the genealogy from Abraham is carried down to Mary the mother of the Lord; for, it says, from Abraham to David are fourteen generations, and from David to the removal to Babylon fourteen generations, and from the removal to Babylon to Christ likewise another fourteen generations — three mystical intervals, completed in six weeks.

[170831] 22.148. Let what has been thus variously recorded by many concerning the times, and set forth by us, so stand. And they say that the Scriptures, both those of the Law and the prophetic, were interpreted from the dialect of the Hebrews into the Greek tongue in the reign of Ptolemy the son of Lagus, or, as some say, of the one surnamed Philadelphus, who brought the greatest ambition to this task, Demetrius of Phalerum having dealt exactly with the matters of the interpretation. For while the Macedonians still held Asia, the king, being ambitious to adorn with all writings the library founded by him in Alexandria, requested the men of Jerusalem to interpret their prophecies into the Greek dialect.

[171536] 22.149. And they, as being still subject to the Macedonians, chose out from the most approved among them seventy elders, experienced in the Scriptures and skilled in the Greek dialect, and sent them to him, together with the divine books. And when each had interpreted each prophecy separately, by himself, all the interpretations, compared together, agreed both in their sense and in their words; for it was a purpose of God studied for Greek ears. Nor is it strange that, by the inspiration of God who gave the prophecy, the interpretation too should be wrought, as it were, a Greek prophecy, since in the captivity under Nebuchadnezzar too, when the Scriptures had been destroyed, in the times of Artaxerxes the king of the Persians, Esdras the Levite, the priest, becoming inspired, prophesied, renewing again all the ancient Scriptures.

[172379] 22.150. And Aristobulus, in the first book of his work addressed to Philometor, writes word for word: "And Plato too followed our legislation, and is plainly seen to have worked carefully through each of the things said in it. And before Demetrius it had been interpreted by others, before the conquest of the Persians by Alexander — both the things concerning the leading of the Hebrews, our fellow-citizens, out of Egypt, and the manifestation to them of all that had happened, and the mastery of the land, and the exposition of the whole legislation; so that it is quite plain that the aforesaid philosopher took much from it (for he became a man of much learning), just as Pythagoras too transferred many of our things into his own doctrine-making." And Numenius the Pythagorean philosopher writes outright: "For what is Plato but Moses speaking Attic?" This Moses was a theologian and prophet, and, as some say, an interpreter of sacred laws. His race and his deeds and his life the Scriptures themselves, worthy of trust, proclaim; yet we too must speak of them, as briefly as may be.

[173471] 23.151. Moses, then, being a Chaldean by descent, is born in Egypt, his forefathers having migrated from Babylon to Egypt on account of a long-lasting famine. Born in the seventh generation and reared royally, he met with such a circumstance as this. The Hebrews having increased to a great multitude in Egypt, the king of the country, fearing a plot from their number, ordered them to rear the females among the children born of the Hebrews (for a woman is weak for war), but to destroy the males, suspicious of a vigorous youth. The child being of noble birth, his parents reared him hidden three months in succession, natural affection conquering the tyrannical cruelty; but afterward, fearing they might perish together with the child, having made a kind of vessel from the native papyrus and placed the child in it, they expose him by the banks of the river, which was marshy; and the child's sister watched, standing at a distance, for what would come about.

[174437] 23.152. Here the daughter of the king, who for a long time had not conceived but desired children, comes on that day to the river to use it for bathing and sprinkling; and hearing the child wailing, she orders it to be brought to her, and, taking pity, sought a nurse. Then the child's sister, running up, said that she could present to her, if she wished, a Hebrew woman who had given birth not long before, to be a nurse; and when she had agreed and asked her, she brought the mother, who was to be the child's nurse, as though she were some other woman, for a fixed wage. Then the queen gives the child the name Moses, fitly, because she took it up out of the water (for the Egyptians call water mou), into which it had been exposed to die. For they call Moses one who has breathed out his life in the water.

[175250] 23.153. It is plain, then, that in the earlier time, when the child was circumcised, his parents gave him a name; and he was called Joacheim. And he had also a third name in heaven, after his assumption, as the initiates say, Melchi. And when he came of age, he was taught arithmetic and geometry, rhythm and harmony, and besides metric and music, by the most distinguished of the Egyptians, and further the philosophy through symbols, which they display in the hieroglyphic letters. And the rest of the cyclic education the Greeks taught in Egypt, as for a royal child, as Philo says in his Life of Moses; and he learned besides the letters of the Assyrians and the science of heavenly things both from the Chaldeans and from the Egyptians, whence in the Acts he is said to have been instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. And Eupolemus, in his work On the Kings in Judaea, says that Moses was the first wise man, and the first to hand down grammar to the Jews, and that the Phoenicians received it from the Jews, and the Greeks from the Phoenicians. And, having sprung up to the nature of men, he strained his understanding, zealously following his kindred and ancestral education, until he even struck and killed the Egyptian who had unjustly attacked the Hebrew.

[176526] 23.154. And the initiates say that he slew the Egyptian by a word alone, just as later Peter, in the Acts, is recorded as having killed by a word those who had embezzled the price of the land and lied. Artapanus, at any rate, in his work On the Jews, relates that Moses, having been shut up in prison by Chenephres the king of the Egyptians, for petitioning that the people be released from Egypt, when the prison was opened by night according to the will of God, came forth and, going to the palace, stood over the sleeping king and roused him; and the king, astonished at what had happened, ordered Moses to tell the name of the God who had sent him; and Moses, bending to his ear, told it; and the king, hearing it, fell speechless, but, held up by Moses, came to life again.

[177306] 23.155. Concerning the rearing of Moses, Ezekiel too, the poet of the Jewish tragedies, will sing in tune with us, in the drama entitled Exagoge, writing thus in the person of Moses:

[177490] "For seeing our race grown numerous enough, King Pharaoh devised much guile against us, torturing some mortals at the brick-making and the heavy buildings, and walling cities, for the sake of his own ill-fated ends. Then he proclaimed to us, the race of the Hebrews, to cast the males into the deep-flowing river. Here my mother who bore me hid me three months, as she said; but, not escaping notice, she put me secretly away, having wrapped a covering about me, by the river's edge, in the deep, shaggy marsh. And Mariam my sister kept watch nearby; and then the king's daughter came down with her maids, to brighten her young skin with bathing. And seeing me at once, and pitying me, she took me up, and knew that I was a Hebrew; and Mariam my sister, running up, says this to the princess: 'Do you wish that I find for you quickly a nurse for this child from among the Hebrews?' And she urged on the girl. And going, she told my mother, and quickly she was present, my mother herself, and took me in her arms. And the king's daughter said: 'Nurse this one, woman, and I will give you your wage.' And she named the name Moses, for the reason that she took me up from the watery river-bank. And when the time of infancy had passed for me, my mother brought me to the princess's halls, having told me everything in story and recounted to me my father's race and the gifts of God. And so, as long as we had the time of childhood, she promised everything by royal rearings and trainings, as though from her own womb. But when the full circle of days was at hand, I went out of the royal house."

[179084] 23.156. Then, having narrated the struggle of the Hebrew and the Egyptian, and the burial of the Egyptian in the sand, he says thus of the second fight: "'Why do you strike one weaker than yourself?' And he said: 'Who sent you here as a judge or overseer over us? Will you not kill me as you did the man yesterday?' And, afraid, I said: 'How did this become known?'" So he flees from there and tends sheep, being taught beforehand for leadership by the shepherd's craft. For shepherding is a preliminary exercise of kingship for the man who is to preside over the gentlest flock of men, just as hunting is for those naturally inclined to war. And from there God leads him to the command of the Hebrews.

[179788] 23.157. Then the Egyptians, who were often without understanding, are often admonished; and the Hebrews became spectators of the evils which others endured, learning thoroughly, without danger, the power of God. And further, the Egyptians, not accepting by hearing the effects of the power, the infants disbelieving through folly, then, as has been said, "the infants knew the deed when it was done"; and afterward, going out, the Hebrews carried off much spoil of the Egyptians and departed — not through love of money, as their accusers say (for God did not persuade them to covet others' things), but, first, receiving the necessary wage for what they had served the Egyptians during all that time; and then, in a manner, requiting and paying back the money-loving Egyptians by the carrying off of the spoil, just as those had paid back the Hebrews by their enslavement. So whether one should say this happened as in war — they thought it right to carry off the enemy's things by the law of the conquerors, as stronger over weaker (and the cause of the war was just: the Hebrews came as suppliants to the Egyptians on account of famine; but the Egyptians, having enslaved the strangers, forced them to serve them in the manner of captives, not even paying the wage) — or whether as in peace, they took the spoil as wage from the unwilling, who for a long time did not pay it but defrauded them.

[181187] 24.158. Moses, then, is to us prophetic, legislative, skilled in tactics, in generalship, in statesmanship, a philosopher. How he was prophetic will be told afterward, when we treat of prophecy. The tactical part would be a part of the generalship, and the generalship of the kingly part; and again the legislative part would be a part of the kingly, as also the judicial. And of the kingly part one portion is divine, that which is according to God and his holy Son, from whom both the goods that come from the earth and the external goods and perfect happiness are supplied; for, "Ask," it says, "for the great things, and the small shall be added to you." And a second kind of kingship, after the pure rational and divine administration, is that which uses for kingship the spirited part of the soul alone — the kind by which Heracles reigned over Argos and Alexander over the Macedonians. And a third is that which aims at the one thing, to conquer and subdue only (and to make the victory toward evil or toward good does not belong to such a one) — which the Persians, marching against Greece, used. For of the spirited part one element is merely contentious, having made its power for the sake of mastering itself; the other is honour-loving, when the soul uses the spirited part for the noble end.

[182493] 24.159. And fourth, the worst of all, is set down the kingship that is according to the desires, like that of Sardanapallus and of those who make their end in the desires, to gratify as much as possible. And of the kingly art — both that which conquers by virtue and that which conquers by force — the instrument is the tactical; but it is one for one nature and matter, another for another. In arms and the fighting animals, through living and lifeless things, the soul and mind are what marshal; but in the passions of the soul, over which we prevail by virtue, reasoning is the tactical part, setting its seal upon self-control and temperance together with holiness, and good knowledge with truth, referring its end to the reverence of God. For to those who so use virtue, prudence is the marshalling power: in things divine, wisdom; in things human, statesmanship; in all things together, kingship. A king, then, is one who rules according to laws, who has the science of ruling the willing — such as is the Lord, welcoming those who believe in him and through him. For God has handed over all things and subjected all things to Christ our king, that "in the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven and on earth and under the earth, and every tongue confess that the Lord Jesus Christ is to the glory of God the Father."

[183836] 24.160. And the conduct of a campaign is held in three forms: the safe, the hazardous, and the mixed of these; and each of these is composed of three: either by word, or by deeds, or by both of these together. And it will be possible to accomplish all these either by persuading, or by forcing, or by doing wrong in self-defence; among which are included either doing what is just, or lying, or telling the truth, or using some of these together at the same time. And all these, and how one must use each of them, the Greeks, having taken from Moses, have profited by. For the sake of a model I shall mention one or even two examples of generalship. Moses, having led out the people, suspecting that the Egyptians would pursue, left the short and direct road and turned toward the desert, and used the night for the most part of the journey. For there was another dispensation, according to which the Hebrews were being educated through much desert and long time, being accustomed, by sober endurance, to believing only that God is.

[184870] 24.161. The generalship of Moses, then, teaches that, before the dangers, one must perceive what is useful, and so set about it. Indeed, what he suspected came about; for the Egyptians pursued on horses and chariots, but perished quickly when the sea broke and flooded over them, horses and chariots together, so that not even a remnant of them was left. And after these things a pillar of fire following (for it led on before them) led the Hebrews by night through trackless places, exercising and training them, in toils and journeyings, toward manliness and toward endurance, that the things of the land too might appear good after the trial of what seemed terrible, the land into which he was conducting them out of the pathless region.

[185612] 24.162. Indeed, having routed the enemies who sat before the country, he killed them, attacking them from a desert and rough road (for such is the virtue of the general). For it was the work of experience and generalship to take the country of the enemy. Perceiving this, Miltiades, the general of the Athenians, who conquered the Persians in the battle at Marathon, imitated this manner: he led the Athenians by night, going through trackless places and eluding the barbarians who watched him. For Hippias, having revolted from the Athenians, brought the barbarians into Attica, and, having seized beforehand the opportune places, kept guard, because he had experience of the country. It was a task, then, to escape Hippias' notice; whence Miltiades, fittingly making use of a trackless way and the night, and attacking the Persians, whom Datis led, accomplished the victory in the contest with those whom he himself led.

[186536] 24.163. But for Thrasybulus too, when he was bringing back those who had been driven out from Phyle and wished to escape notice, a pillar became a guide, as he went through untrodden places. To Thrasybulus, by night, when the weather had become moonless and stormy, a fire was seen going before, which, having conducted them without stumbling along Munychia, vanished where now the altar of the Light-bearer is. Let our things, then, be made credible to the Greeks even from this, that it is possible for the almighty God to make, going before the Hebrews by night, a pillar of fire, which also led the way for them on the road. And it is said too in a certain oracle: "A pillar to the Thebans is Dionysus, bringer of much joy" — from the history among the Hebrews. But Euripides too, in the Antiope, says: "and within the chambers of the herdsmen, a pillar of the Euian god, crowned with ivy." And the pillar signifies the imagelessness of God; and the lighted pillar, besides signifying the imagelessness, shows the standing and abiding nature of God, and his unchangeable and figureless light.

[187634] 24.164. So, before the postures of statues were made exact, the ancients, setting up columns, worshipped these as images of God. So the author of the Phoronis writes: "Callithoe, key-bearer of the Olympian queen, Argive Hera, who first adorned with fillets and tassels the long column round the queen." But the author of the Europia too relates that the statue of Apollo at Delphi is a column, in these words: "that we might hang for the god a tithe and first-fruits from the most holy stalls and from the lofty column." Apollo, however, mystically understood by way of privation of the many, is the one God. But that fire which was like a pillar, and the fire that was in the bush, is a symbol of the holy light that passes over from earth and runs up again to heaven through the wood, through which the seeing intelligibly too has been granted to us.

[188488] 25.165. And Plato the philosopher, helped by the things of Moses concerning legislation, censured the polity of Minos and Lycurgus, as looking to courage alone, but praised, as more venerable, that which says some one thing and ever inclines toward one doctrine; for he says that it is more fitting, by strength and venerableness and prudence, that we should philosophize toward the dignity of heaven, using without change the same judgment about the same things. Does he not, then, interpret the things according to the Law, looking to one God and enjoining the doing of justice? And of the statesman he says there are two kinds, the one named "legal," the other "political" by the same name; and as "political" in the proper sense he hints at the Creator, in the book of that name, and those who look to him and live actively and justly, together with the contemplation, he names "political"; but the "political" called on a par with the "legal" he divides both into a worldly magnanimity and into a private arrangement, which they have named orderliness and harmony and temperance — when rulers are fitting to the ruled, and the ruled become obedient to the rulers, which the work according to Moses is earnest to bring about.

[189719] 25.166. And further, that the legal pertains to generation, but the political to friendship and concord — Plato, being helped, in the Laws set down the philosopher in the Epinomis, the man who knows the course of all generation through the wandering stars; and another philosopher, the Timaeus, who is astronomical and a contemplator of their motion and of their sympathy and fellowship with one another, he joins, in due order, to the Republic; and then . . . For the end, I think, both of the statesman and of the man who lives according to law is contemplation. It is necessary, then, to take part rightly in civic life, but best to philosophize. For the man who has mind would live having strained all that is his own toward knowledge, having set straight his life by good works, and dishonoured the contrary, and pursued the studies that contribute toward truth. And law is not the things customary (for neither are the things seen sight), nor is it every opinion (for not the worthless), but law is good opinion, and the good is the true, and the true is that which finds the being and attains it. "He who is has sent me," says Moses. By which some, following, of course, the good opinion, called law right reason, enjoining what is to be done and forbidding what is not to be done.

[191009] 26.167. Hence the law is rightly said to have been given through Moses, being a rule of just and unjust things. And this we may properly call an ordinance, the one handed down by God through Moses. For it has the leading toward the divine. And Paul too says: "The law was added for the sake of transgressions, until the seed should come to whom it was promised." Then, as if explaining further the meaning, he adds: "But before faith came we were kept guarded under the law, shut up" — by fear, that is, from sins — "toward the faith that was about to be revealed. So that the law became our schoolmaster toward Christ, that we might be justified by faith." And the legislator is one who assigns what is fitting to each part of the soul and to its works; and Moses, to speak briefly, was a living law, governed by the good Word.

[191839] 26.168. He administered, at any rate, a good polity; and this is the noble nourishment of men in fellowship. So he handled the judicial art, which is a science correcting the things sinned, for the sake of justice. And of the same row with it is the punitive, which is a science of the measure in punishments. And punishment, being just, is a correction of the soul. And, to speak generally, the whole conduct of Moses is educative of those able to become noble and good men, and a hunting of such men, which would be generalship. And the wisdom that uses, in due manner, those hunted by reason, would be the legislative; for to acquire and to use this belongs to the most kingly art. For the philosophers proclaim the wise man alone king, legislator, general, just, holy, dear to God. And if we should find these things about Moses, as is shown from the Scriptures themselves, we might declare, with very full conviction, that Moses was truly wise.

[192790] 26.169. As, then, we say that the shepherd's art is to take forethought for the sheep — "the good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep" — so we shall say that the legislative art is to bring about the virtue of men, rekindling the human good according to its power, being a thing that presides over and cares for the herd of men. And if the flock allegorized by the Lord is nothing other than a certain herd of men, the same will be both shepherd and good legislator of the one herd of the sheep that hear him — the one guardian, who seeks out and finds the lost by law and by reason, if indeed the law is spiritual and leads to happiness; for the man who has become spiritual by the Holy Spirit is spiritual. And this is the legislator in truth, who not only professes good and noble things but also knows them. And his law — the law of the one who has the knowledge — is the saving command; or rather, the law is the command of knowledge, for the Word of God is power and wisdom. And he himself again is the expounder of laws, through whom the law was given, the first expounder of the divine commands, the only-begotten Son who expounds the bosom of the Father.

[193961] 26.170. Then those who obey the law, by having some knowledge of it, can neither disbelieve nor be ignorant of the truth; but those who disbelieve, and have least of all wished to be among the works, are confessed, if any others, to be ignorant of the truth. What, then, is the unbelief of the Greeks? Is it not their unwillingness, somehow, to obey the truth which says that the law was given by God through Moses — when they themselves, out of their own, honour Moses? For they relate that Minos received his laws from Zeus every ninth year, going to the cave of Zeus; and Plato and Aristotle and Ephorus write that Lycurgus was educated in legislation by continually going to Delphi to Apollo; and Chamaeleon of Heraclea, in his work On Drunkenness, and Aristotle, in his Constitution of the Locrians, record that Zaleucus the Locrian received his laws from Athena. But those who, exalting the trustworthiness of the legislation among the Greeks, so far as they can, toward the divine, after the image of the prophecy according to Moses, are without sense, in that they do not at once confess both the truth and the archetype of the things recorded among them.

[195126] 27.171. Let no one, then, run down the law on account of the punishments, as though it were not noble and good. For the man who removes a disease of the body will be thought a benefactor, and shall not the man who tries to free the soul of injustice be all the more its guardian, by as much as the soul is more honourable than the body? But for the health of the body we submit to incisions and cauteries and the drinking of drugs, and the one who applies these is called a saviour and a physician — not out of any grudge or ill-will toward the patient, but as the reason of the art dictates — even cutting off certain parts, that the healthy may not be corrupted along with them; and no one would charge the physician's art with wickedness. And shall we not, for the soul's sake, likewise submit, whether it be banishment, or the paying of penalties, or bonds, if only one is ever to gain righteousness out of injustice? For the law, caring for its subjects, educates toward the reverence of God and dictates what is to be done, and keeps back each of the sins, imposing penalties on the moderate ones; but whenever it sees someone so disposed as to seem incurable, driving on to the extreme of injustice, then at last, caring for the others, that they may not be corrupted by him, as though cutting off a part of the whole body, it puts such a one to death in the most wholesome way.

[196513] 27.172. "And being judged by the Lord," says the Apostle, "we are disciplined, that we may not be condemned with the world." For the prophet said before: "Disciplining, the Lord disciplined me, but to death he did not hand me over." "For, in order to teach you his righteousness," it says, "he disciplined you and tested you and made you hunger and made you thirst in a desert land, that all his ordinances and judgments might be known in your heart, all that I command you today; and you shall know in your heart that, as a man might discipline his son, so the Lord our God will discipline you." And that the example brings to soberness, it says at once: "The cunning man, seeing the wicked man punished severely, is himself disciplined."

[197254] 27.173. For "the fear of the Lord is the offspring of wisdom." And it is the greatest and most perfect good, when one is able to bring someone over from acting badly to virtue and well-doing — which the law accomplishes. So that even when one falls into some incurable evil, having been seized by injustice and greed, he would be benefited by being put to death; for the law is a benefactor, able both to make the unjust just, if only they will hearken to it, and to free the others from present evils. For it promises immortality to those who have chosen to live temperately and justly. And to know the law belongs to a good understanding. And again: "Bad men do not understand the law, but those who seek the Lord will have understanding in every good thing." The administering providence must, then, be both sovereign and good. For by both the power administers salvation: the one bringing to soberness by punishment, as sovereign; the other showing kindness through well-doing, as benefactress. And it is possible not to be a son of disobedience, but to pass over from darkness to life, and, having set one's ear to wisdom, to be by law a servant of God — at the first a slave, then a faithful attendant, fearing the Lord God; and if one should advance, to be reckoned among the sons, and, when love covers a multitude of sins, having grown in love, to await the perfecting of the blessed hope, the man enrolled in the elect adoption that is called the friend of God, already singing the prayer and saying: "Let the Lord become to me a God."

[198801] 27.174. And the Apostle has shown the beneficence of the law, through the passage about the Jews, writing somewhat thus: "But if you are surnamed a Jew and rest upon the law and boast in God and know his will and approve the things that differ, being instructed out of the law, and have persuaded yourself that you are a guide of the blind, a light to those in darkness, an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of infants, having the form of knowledge and of the truth in the law." For it is confessed that the law can do these things, even if those who do not order their lives according to the law boast as though living in the law. "And blessed is the man who has found wisdom, and the mortal who has seen prudence; and from her mouth" — that is, of wisdom — "righteousness goes forth, and she bears law and mercy upon her tongue." For of one Lord, who is the power and wisdom of God, is the activity, both the law and the Gospel; and the fear which the law begot, this is merciful unto salvation. "And let not mercies and faith and truth fail you, but fasten them about your neck."

[199888] 27.175. And, like Paul, the prophecy reproaches the people as not understanding the law: "Destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way of peace they have not known; there is no fear of God before their eyes. Professing to be wise, they were made foolish." "And we know that the law is good, if one uses it lawfully; but those who wish to be teachers of the law," says the Apostle, "understand neither what they say nor concerning what they affirm; and the end of the commandment is love out of a pure heart and a good conscience and unfeigned faith."

[200449] 28.176. The philosophy according to Moses, then, is divided into four parts: into the historical and the properly so-called legislative, which would be the proper concerns of ethical treatment; the third into the part concerning sacred service, which already belongs to natural contemplation; and fourth, above all, the theological kind, the higher vision, which Plato says is of the truly great mysteries, and which Aristotle calls the kind that comes "after the natural things" (the metaphysical). And the dialectic according to Plato, as he says in the Statesman, is a certain science discovering the disclosure of the things that are; and it is to be acquired by the temperate man, not for the sake of saying or doing anything toward men, as the dialecticians now do who busy themselves about sophistical things, but for being able both to say what is pleasing to God and to do what is pleasing to him, the whole according to one's power.

[201393] 28.177. And the true dialectic, being mixed with the true philosophy, examining the things and testing the powers and authorities, ascends up to the essence most sovereign of all, and dares beyond, to the God of the universe, professing not experience of mortal things but knowledge of things divine and heavenly, with which there follows also the proper use of human things, both in words and in actions. With reason, then, the Scripture too, wishing us to become such dialecticians, exhorts thus: "Become approved bankers, rejecting some things, but holding fast the good." For this is in truth the dialectic — a prudence that divides about the objects of thought, and shows each of the things that are unmixed and pure in its underlying nature, or a power that divides about the genera of things, descending to the most particular, presenting each of the things that are pure, such as it is, to appear.

[202300] 28.178. Wherefore this alone leads by the hand to the true wisdom, which is a divine power, knowing the things that are as they are, having the perfect, freed from all passion — not without the Saviour, who, by the divine Word, has drawn off from the seeing part of our soul the misty ignorance poured over it by base conduct, and given back the best, "that we might know well both god and man." This is he who has in truth shown how one must know oneself; this is he who uncovers the Father of the universe to whomever he wishes, so far as human nature can hold it. "For no one knew the Son but the Father, nor the Father but the Son and he to whom the Son reveals him."

[202973] 28.179. With reason, then, the Apostle says that by revelation he came to know the mystery: "As I wrote before in brief, by which, when you read, you can perceive my understanding in the mystery of Christ." "By which you can," he said, since he knew that some had received milk only, and not yet solid food — and indeed not simply milk. And we must take the meaning of the law in three ways: either as showing forth a sign, or as confirming a commandment toward right conduct of life, or as prophesying as prophecy. And I know well that to discern and to tell such things belongs to men; for the whole of Scripture is not, for understanding, "one Myconos," as the proverb-makers say; but one must approach it as dialectically as possible, hunting for the sequence of the divine teaching.

[203762] 29.180. Hence most nobly the Egyptian priest in Plato: "O Solon, Solon," he said, "you Greeks are always children, having in your souls not a single ancient opinion through old hearing, and there is no aged Greek" — calling "aged," I think, those who know the more ancient things, that is, our things, just as, on the contrary, "young" those who know the newer things and the things practised by the Greeks, the things that happened yesterday and lately, but who record them as old and ancient. So he added: "learning grown grey with time," we using the metaphor in a certain barbarian way, unaffected and not over-precise. So the well-disposed approach the whole figure of the interpretation simply. And of the Greeks he says that their conceit differs little from children's stories; for we must not understand children's fables, nor yet the fables made for children; and he called the very fables "children," as if the reputed wise among the Greeks saw but little, hinting at "the grey learning," the truth most ancient among the barbarians; to which word he opposed "child's fable," refuting the fabulous character of the attempt of the newer men, as having, like children, nothing older — presenting both their fables and their discourses together as childish.

[205029] 29.181. Divinely, then, the power that speaks the visions to Hermas by revelation says that both the visions and the revelations are for the sake of the double-minded, who reason in their hearts whether these things are or are not. And likewise the demonstrations that come from the abundance of wide learning strengthen and make firm and ground the demonstrative arguments, as far as their minds, being still young, flutter. "A lamp, then, is a good commandment," according to the Scripture, "and the law is a light of the way; for education reproves the ways of life." "Law, the king of all, both mortals and immortals," says Pindar. And I understand by this the one who established the law; and the saying of Hesiod too I take to have been spoken of the God of all, even if it was said by the poet conjecturally and not comprehensibly: "This law the son of Cronus ordained for men: for fishes and beasts and winged birds, to devour one another, since there is no justice among them; but to men he gave justice, which is far the best."

[206068] 29.182. Whether, then, he means the law given together with generation, or the one given afterward — yet from God is both the law of nature and the law of learning, being one, as Plato too in the Statesman says there is one legislator, and in the Laws one who will understand the things of music, teaching by these that the Word is one and God is one. And Moses is plainly seen calling the Lord a covenant: "Behold," he says, "my covenant is with you"; since he had said before "covenant," . . . not to seek it in writing. For there is a covenant which God, the cause of the universe, establishes; and "God" is named from "establishing" (thesis) and ordering, the arrangement of the world. And in the Preaching of Peter you would find the Lord called both law and Word. But let this first Miscellany of gnostic notes according to the true philosophy be here circumscribed for us.