WORK: Stromata  (slug: clement-of-alexandria-stromata-694383)

CHAPTER: 07-book-7



[109023] 12.76. He fasts, then, both according to the Law, from base deeds, and according to the perfection of the Gospel, from wicked thoughts. To him the trials too are brought—not for his purification, but, as we said, for the benefit of his neighbours: if, having made trial of toils and pains, he has despised them and let them pass. And the same account holds of pleasure. For it is the greatest thing, having come into the experience of a thing, then to abstain from it. For what is great if a man controls himself in things he does not know? This man, having carried out the commandment that is according to the Gospel, makes that day a Lord's day, when he casts off a base notion and takes on a gnostic one, glorifying the resurrection of the Lord within himself. And further, when he receives the grasp of a scientific principle, he thinks that he sees the Lord, directing his eyes toward the unseen things; and even if he seems to see what he does not wish to see, he chastises the faculty of sight, when he becomes aware of himself taking pleasure in the application of the eyes—since he wishes to see and to hear only that which befits him. Indeed, contemplating the souls of the brethren, he beholds the beauty of the flesh too by the soul itself, that soul accustomed to look only on the noble apart from fleshly pleasure.

[110353] 12.77. And they are truly brothers, according to the chosen creation, and according to likeness of character, and according to the substance of their works—doing and thinking and speaking the same things, holy and noble works, which the Lord willed them, being elect, to hold in mind. For faith is in choosing the same things; knowledge, in having learned and thought the same; and hope, in longing for the same. And even if, for the necessity of life, he be occupied for a little while of the hour about his food, he thinks himself defrauded, distracted by the business. In this way he never even in a dream sees what does not befit the elect. Simply, "a stranger and a sojourner" in all this life is every such man—who, dwelling in a city, has despised the things of the city that are admired by others, and lives in the city as in a desert, that the place may not compel him, but that his deliberate choice may show him just. This gnostic, to speak briefly, fills up the absence of the apostle by living rightly, knowing exactly, benefiting the fit, "removing the mountains" of his neighbours and casting away the unevennesses of their souls. And yet each of us is his own vineyard and his own worker. And the man who, even while doing the best things, wishes to escape the notice of men—persuading the Lord and himself at once that he lives according to the commandments, choosing these things out of those by which he has come to believe (for "where a man's mind is," it is said, "there is his treasure too")—this man impoverishes himself, so as never to overlook a brother who has come into affliction, on account of his perfection in love, knowing especially that he himself will more easily bear his own want than his brother's.

[112091] 12.78. Indeed, he reckons that man's pain his own pain; and if, out of his own want, providing through well-doing, he suffers something hard, he is not vexed at it, but increases his benefaction yet more. For he has unmixed faith concerning these matters, praising the Gospel by works and contemplation. And so it is "not the praise from men, but from God" that he reaps, doing the very things the Lord taught. This man, distracted by his own hope, does not taste the noble things in the world, despising all things here—pitying those who after death are instructed through chastisement, confessing unwillingly; with a good conscience toward the departure, and ever ready, as "a sojourner and a stranger" to the things here, mindful only of his own inheritances, and counting all things here as alien. Not only does he marvel at the commandments of the Lord, but, so to speak, through knowledge itself he is a partaker of the divine will, being truly the household of the Lord and of the commandments, chosen out as just. And he is governing and kingly, as gnostic—looking down upon all the gold on the earth and beneath the earth, and upon a kingdom reaching from one end of the ocean to the other, so as to cling to the service of the Lord alone. Therefore, even eating and drinking and marrying—if reason should choose it—and even seeing dreams, he does and thinks the holy things; and in this way he is ever pure for prayer. And he prays in company with angels, as being already "equal to the angels," and is never outside the holy guard; and even if he prays alone, he has the choir of the saints standing with him. He knows a twofold faith: the one, the activity of the believer; the other, the worthy pre-eminence of the one believed in—since righteousness too is twofold.

[113872] 12.79. The one is through love, the other through fear. It is said, accordingly: "The fear of the Lord, pure, abiding for ever and ever." For those who turn from fear toward faith and righteousness abide for ever. Fear, indeed, works abstinence from evils; but love, building up toward the voluntary, urges toward well-doing, that a man may hear from the Lord: "No longer do I call you servants, but friends," and may now approach the prayers with confidence. And the very form of the prayer is thanksgiving—both for the things gone before, and for things present, and for things to come, as already present through faith. And before this comes the having received knowledge. And further, he asks so to live the appointed life in the flesh as a gnostic, as though without flesh, and to obtain the best things, but to flee the worse. He asks also for relief concerning the things in which we have sinned, and for conversion unto recognition; so swiftly following the one who calls him at the departure, as the other calls, going forward, so to speak, by reason of his good conscience, hastening to give thanks even there, having come to be with Christ. Having shown himself worthy through purity, he holds, by a kind of fusion, the power of God which is supplied through Christ. For he does not wish to be warm by participation in warmth, nor luminous by participation in fire, but to be wholly light. This man knows exactly the saying: "Unless you hate father and mother, and besides also your own life, and unless you bear the sign..." For he has hated the fleshly attachments that hold so much of the charm of pleasure, and he despises all things that are proper to the begetting and nourishment of the flesh; and he rises up against the bodily soul as well, putting a bit upon the irrational spirit when it grows unbridled, because "the flesh lusts against the spirit." But "to bear the sign" is "to carry death about," renouncing "all things" while still living, since the love of the one who sowed the flesh is not equal to that of the one who created the soul unto knowledge.

[115955] 12.80. This man, having come into a disposition of well-doing, benefits others more swiftly than he speaks nobly—praying that the sins of the brethren may be shared by him, unto the confession and conversion of his kinsmen, and eager to share his own goods with those dearest to him; and they in turn are thus his friends. Increasing, then, the seeds laid up within him according to the husbandry the Lord commanded, he remains free from sin, and becomes self-controlled, and passes his life with those like him in spirit, among the choirs of the saints, even while still held upon earth. This man, through the whole day and night, speaking and doing the charges of the Lord, rejoices exceedingly—not only when he has risen in the morning and at midday, but also when walking and lying down, when putting on his clothes and putting them off. And he teaches his son, if he have a son by birth, being inseparable from the commandment and the hope, giving thanks ever to God, like those creatures of praise allegorized by Isaiah, patient toward every trial. "The Lord," he says, "gave; the Lord has taken away." For such was Job too, who, even when his outward goods were taken away together with the health of his body, laid all aside beforehand through his love toward the Lord. "For he was," it is said, "just, holy, abstaining from all wickedness." And "holy" signifies the things just toward God according to the whole dispensation, which, knowing them, he was a gnostic. For one must neither, if the things be good, cling fast to them, being human things, nor again, if evil, be set against them; but be above both—treading the one underfoot, and passing the other on to those in need. And the gnostic is safe in accommodation, lest the accommodation should escape him and become a settled disposition.

[117762] 13.81. He never remembers those who have sinned against him, but forgives. Therefore too he justly prays, saying, "Forgive us; for we too forgive." For this also is one of the things God wills: to desire nothing, to hate no one. For all men are the work of one will. And does not our Saviour, willing the gnostic to be "perfect as the heavenly Father"—that is, as himself—who says, "Come, children, hear from me the fear of the Lord," will that this man should no longer be in need of help through angels, but should receive, having become worthy of himself, and should have the guard from himself through obedience? Such a man demands from the Lord, and does not merely ask. And in the matter of needy brethren, the gnostic will not ask for an abundance of money for himself for distribution, but will pray that the supply of what they need may come to them. For thus the gnostic both gives his prayer to those in need, and provides what comes through prayer, at once without their knowing and without ostentation.

[118779] 13.82. They say in the traditions that Matthias the apostle said at each point: "If the neighbour of an elect man sins, the elect man has sinned; for if he had borne himself as the Word dictates, the neighbour too would have stood in such awe of his life as not to sin." What, then, should we say concerning the gnostic himself? "Or do you not know," says the Apostle, "that you are a temple of God?" The gnostic, then, is divine and already holy, God-bearing and borne by God. Indeed, Scripture, showing that to sin is alien, sells off those who fall away to men of another race; and saying, "Do not look with desire upon another's wife," it plainly calls sin alien and contrary to the nature of the temple of God. And a temple there is, the great one, like the Church, and the small, like the man who preserves the seed of Abraham. Therefore he who has God resting in him will not desire anything else. Indeed, leaving behind all that is in the way and despising all the matter that distracts him, he cuts through heaven by knowledge, and, passing through the spiritual substances and every principality and authority, he lays hold of the highest thrones, pressing on toward that alone which alone he has known. Having mingled, then, the serpent with the dove, he lives at once perfectly and with a good conscience, having tempered faith with hope toward the awaiting of the future. For he is aware of the gift he has received, having become worthy to attain it, and, transferred from slavery into adoption, he performs the things that follow upon knowledge ("having known God—or rather having been known by him"), displaying his activities in a manner worthy of the grace. For the works follow upon knowledge as the shadow upon the body.

[120521] 13.83. On no account, then, is he reasonably disturbed by anything that happens, nor does he suspect anything of the things that come about in the dispensation for our profit, nor is he ashamed to die, having a good conscience to be seen by the authorities, since he has cleansed away, so to speak, all the stains of his soul—he who knows very well that things will be better for him after his departure. Whence he never prefers the pleasant and the profitable to the dispensation, training himself through the commandments, that he may become both well-pleasing to the Lord in all things and praiseworthy toward the world, since all things rest upon the one almighty God. "To his own," it is said, "the Son of God came, and his own received him not." Therefore, in the use of worldly things, he not only gives thanks and marvels at the creation, but, using them as is fitting, he is praised—since his end is brought, through gnostic activity according to the commandments, into contemplation. From here already, reaping through knowledge the provisions for the journey of contemplation, and having received with high-mindedness the greatness of the knowledge, he advances to the holy requital of the translation. For he has heard the psalm that says: "Go round about Zion and encompass her; recount in her towers." For it hints, I think, that those who have received the Word loftily will be lofty as towers, and will stand firm both in faith and in knowledge.

[121984] 14.84. And let these things, by way of seed, be said as briefly as may be concerning the gnostic, to the Greeks. But it must be understood that, even if the believer should set right one of these things, or even a second, yet not all together, nor indeed with the highest knowledge, as the gnostic does. And concerning that freedom from passion, so to speak, which belongs to the gnostic—according to which the perfecting of the believer, advancing through love "to a perfect man, to the measure of stature," arrives at being made like to God, having become truly "equal to the angels"—many other testimonies from Scripture come to mind to be set forth; but I think it better to defer such ambition on account of the length of the discourse, leaving it to those who are willing to toil and to work further at the doctrines by selection from the Scriptures. But of one I shall make mention as briefly as may be, so as not to leave the place without note. For the divine Apostle says in the former Epistle to the Corinthians: "Dares any of you, having a matter against another, go to law before the unjust, and not before the saints? Or do you not know that the saints shall judge the world?"—and what follows. The passage being very large, using the relevant apostolic phrases, very briefly and in a cursory way, as it were paraphrasing the saying, we shall set forth the meaning of the Apostle's words, according to which he sketches the perfection of the gnostic. For he sets the gnostic alone not merely in the position of being wronged rather than wronging, but teaches him also to bear no malice, not permitting him even to pray against the one who wronged him; for he knows that the Lord too plainly charged us to "pray for our enemies." For "to go to law before the unjust," he says of the one who has been wronged, means nothing but to seem to wish to render back, and to be willing to wrong in return as a second thing, which is alike to wrong oneself as well.

[123954] 14.85. And the willing of certain men "to go to law before the saints" shows those who ask, by prayer, that their wronging may be requited upon those who wronged them—and that the latter are better than the former, but not yet free from passion, unless, having become wholly without malice according to the teaching of the Lord, they pray even for their enemies. It is good, then, that they should partake also of a good mind out of repentance unto faith. For even if the truth seems to gain enemies in those who provoke it, yet it is not itself at enmity with anyone. For "God makes his sun to shine upon the just and the unjust," and indeed sent the Lord himself upon just and unjust; and the man who forces himself toward being made like to God, through much absence of malice "forgiving seventy times seven" (signifying, as it were, through the whole of life and through the whole worldly circuit, reckoned in sevens), deals kindly with everyone, even if someone wrongs the gnostic throughout all this time he lives in the flesh. For the diligent man does not think fit to commit merely the judgement of those who have wronged him to others, but wishes the just man to ask of those judges the remission of sins for those who have offended against him—and reasonably; if indeed it is only the outward thing and that which concerns the body, even if it goes as far as death, in which those who set out to wrong him have the advantage—none of which is proper to the gnostic. And how could a man judge the apostate angels, having himself become an apostate from that absence of malice which is according to the Gospel? "Why," he says, "are you not rather wronged? Why are you not rather defrauded? But you wrong and defraud"—praying, that is, against those who offend through ignorance—"and you defraud," as far as in you lies, those against whom you pray, of the love and goodness of God. "And this, your brethren"—not those according to faith only, but the proselytes too, he means. For even if the one now at enmity will afterwards believe...

[126001] 14.86. ...we do not yet know. From which it is plainly gathered that, even if they are not all our brethren, yet they ought, in our judgement, to be our brethren—and indeed that all men, being the work of one God and clothed with one image upon one substance, even if some happen to be more fouled than others, the man of knowledge alone recognizes; and he worships also the activity of the creatures, through which, again, he worships the will of God. "Or do you not know that the unjust shall not inherit the kingdom of God?" He wrongs, then, who wrongs in return, whether in deed or in word or in the very thought of willing it—which thought the Gospel circumscribes after the tutelage of the Law. "And such were some of you"—of such a kind, that is, as those still happen to be whom you yourselves do not pardon. "But you were washed"—not simply as the rest, but with knowledge you scoured off the passions of the soul, toward being made like, as far as may be, to the goodness of the providence of God, both through patience of evil and through absence of malice, shining, like the sun, "upon just and unjust" with the kindliness of word and deed. Whether, then, the gnostic shall gain this through greatness of mind, or through imitation of the better; and the third cause is the "Forgive, and it shall be forgiven you," the commandment, as it were, forcing toward salvation through excess of goodness. "But you were sanctified." For to the one who has come to this settled disposition it belongs to be holy, falling in no way whatever into any of the passions.

[127570] 14.87. But as to one already without flesh and become holy above this earth. Therefore, "you were justified," he says, "by the name of the Lord"; you were made, so to speak, by him to be just, as he is; and "by the Holy Spirit" you were, as far as may be in your power, fused into one. For surely it is not the case that "all things are lawful for me, but I shall not be brought under the power" of anything—he says—so as to do or think or speak anything contrary to the Gospel? "But meats for the belly, and the belly for meats"—which "God will bring to nothing"—that is, those who reckon and live in this way, as though they had come into being for the sake of eating, and not rather eating in order that they may live, as a consequence, but as their primary aim attending upon knowledge. And does he not say that such men are, as it were, the flesh of the holy body? And the Church of the Lord is allegorized as a body, the spiritual and holy choir; and of these, those who have only called upon the name, but do not live according to reason, are flesh. "But this body" is spiritual—that is, the holy Church—which "must in no way and by no means be made akin to fornication," nor to the apostasy from the Gospel toward the heathen life.

[128811] 14.88. For he plays the fornicator against the Church and against "his own body" who conducts himself in the Church after the heathen manner—whether in deed, or in word, or in the very thought. "He who is joined to this harlot"—the activity contrary to the covenant—becomes another body, not holy, "into one flesh" and a heathen life and another hope. "But he who is joined to the Lord is one spirit"—a spiritual body, the race distinct from that union. This man is wholly a son, a holy man, free from passion, gnostic, perfect, formed by the teaching of the Lord, that he may, in deed and word and in the very spirit, drawing near to the Lord, receive that abode which is owed to the man thus brought to manhood. The hint is enough for those who have ears. For one must not roll out the mystery, but indicate only so much as serves for recollection to those who have partaken of knowledge—who will also understand how it has been said by the Lord: "Become perfect as your Father," perfectly forgiving sins, bearing no malice, and passing their lives in the settled disposition of freedom from passion. For as we speak of a perfect physician and a perfect philosopher, so too, I think, of a perfect gnostic; yet none of these things, great though it be, is taken up into likeness to God. For we do not, like the Stoics, most impiously say that the virtue of man and of God is the same. Surely, then, ought we to become perfect as the Father wills? For it is impossible and out of all reach for anyone to become perfect as God is; but the Father wills us, living according to the obedience of the Gospel, to become perfect blamelessly. If, then, the saying being spoken by way of ellipsis, we supply the missing part toward the filling-out of the passage—left to be grasped by those able to understand—we shall both recognize the will of God, and shall conduct ourselves, in a manner worthy of the commandment, at once devoutly and high-mindedly.

[130758] 15.89. And since it is fitting to make a defence against the charges brought against us by Greeks and Jews, and since in some of the perplexities the heresies concerning the true teaching join in, like those mentioned before, it would be well, first to clear away the obstacles, and then, well prepared for the solutions of the perplexities, to proceed to the next Book of the Miscellanies. First, then, they bring against us this very thing, saying that one ought not to believe, because of the discord of the heresies—for with whom is the truth, when different men hold different doctrines? To these we say that both among you Jews and among the most approved of the philosophers of the Greeks there have arisen very many sects, and yet you surely do not say that, on account of the discord of your sects with one another, one ought to shrink from philosophizing or from Judaizing. And further, that heresies would be sown beside the truth—just as "the tares" beside the wheat—was foretold prophetically by the Lord, and it is impossible that what was foretold should not come to pass; and the cause of this is that blame follows upon every noble thing.

[131915] 15.90. Surely, then, even if a man should transgress agreements and pass over the confession made to us, are we, on account of the one who has belied his confession, to keep away from the truth ourselves? Rather, just as the fair-minded man must speak truth and annul nothing of what he has promised, even if some others transgress agreements, so too it befits us in no way to transgress the rule of the Church—and especially the confession concerning the greatest things, which we keep, while they transgress it. We must therefore believe those who hold firmly to the truth. And it is possible already, using this defence broadly, to say to them that physicians too, holding contrary opinions according to their own schools, treat their patients equally in practice. Surely, then, a man sick in body and needing treatment does not refuse to admit a physician on account of the schools in medicine; nor, then, would the one diseased in soul and full of idols, for the sake of being healed and turned to God, ever plead the heresies as a pretext. Indeed it is said, "the heresies are for the sake of the approved." By "the approved" it means either those who come to faith with more discernment, approaching the Lord's teaching after the manner of approved money-changers, distinguishing the genuine coin of the Lord from the counterfeit; or those who have already become approved in the very faith, both in life and in knowledge.

[133346] 15.91. For this very reason, then, we need more care and forethought in the examination of how one ought exactly to live, and what the truly existing godliness is. For it is plain that, the truth being difficult and hard to work out, the inquiries arose on this account—from which spring the self-loving and glory-loving heresies, of men who have not truly learned or received, but have taken to themselves a mere opinion of knowledge. With greater care, then, must the truth that truly is be searched out—which alone is concerned with the God who truly is. And upon toil there follows sweet discovery and remembrance. We must, then, strip for the toil of discovery on account of the heresies, but must not utterly stand off. For if fruit lies before us, one part true and ripe, the other made of wax as like as possible, we must not abstain from both on account of the resemblance, but discern the true from the apparent both by the comprehending contemplation and by the most sovereign reasoning. And just as, of roads, one being the kingly highway, and many others—some leading to a precipice, some to a rushing river or a sea sheer-deep—a man would not shrink from travelling on account of the discord, but would use the safe and kingly and public way; so, when different men say different things about truth, we must not stand off, but must hunt more carefully for the most exact knowledge concerning it. Since even in cultivated vegetables weeds spring up together—do the husbandmen then abstain from the care of the garden? Having, then, many starting-points by nature toward examining the things said and discovering the consistency of the truth, we ought to do so. Therefore too we are reasonably judged, when we do not assent to those we ought to obey, when we do not distinguish the contentious and unseemly and unnatural and false from the true and consistent and seemly and natural—these being the starting-points which we ought to use toward the recognition of the truth that truly is.

[135347] 15.92. Vain, then, is this pretext of the Greeks. For to those who will, it shall be possible even to find the truth; but for those who put forward irrational excuses, the judgement is without excuse. For do they do away with demonstration, or do they grant that there is such a thing? I think all would agree, except those who do away with the senses. And demonstration existing, it is necessary to descend into the inquiries, and through the very Scriptures to learn demonstratively how the heresies went astray, and how in the truth alone and in the ancient Church there is both the most exact knowledge and the truly best school of thought. But of those who turn aside from the truth, some try to deceive only themselves, others their neighbours as well. Those, then, who are called wise in their own conceit—who think they have found the truth, having no true demonstration whatever—deceive themselves, thinking they have come to rest; and of these there is no small multitude, who turn aside from the inquiries on account of the refutations, and flee even from the teachings on account of the condemnation. But the others, those who deceive those that approach, are exceedingly crafty: who, even while themselves aware that they know nothing, nevertheless darken the truth with plausible arguments. And the nature of plausible arguments is, I think, one thing, and that of true ones another. And we know that the name of "heresies" must be spoken by way of contrast to the truth; from which the sophists, tearing off certain parts to the ruin of men, and burying them in the human arts they have devised for themselves, boast that they preside over a school rather than over a Church.

[137039] 16.93. But those ready to toil over the noblest things will not stop seeking the truth before they take the demonstration from the Scriptures themselves. Now there are certain criteria common to all men, like the sense-organs; but the others belong to those who have willed and trained themselves in the truth—the criteria, wrought through mind and reasoning, of words true and false. And the greatest thing is to lay aside opinion, taking one's stand midway between exact knowledge and rash conceit of wisdom, and to know that he who hopes for the eternal rest knows also that the entrance to it is toilsome and "narrow." And he who has once been told the good news and "has seen the salvation," at whatever hour he recognizes it, let him not "turn back, like Lot's wife," nor turn to the former life that clings to the things of sense, nor run back to the heresies; for they contend in a manner, not knowing the God who is. For "he who loves father or mother more than me"—the true Father and Teacher of the truth, who regenerates and refashions and nurses the chosen soul—"is not worthy of me," he says, worthy of being a son of God and a disciple of God, and at once a friend and a kinsman. "For no one who looks back, and lays his hand upon the plough, is fit for the kingdom of God." But, as it seems, to the many it still appears even now that Mary is a woman in childbed by reason of the birth of the child, though she is not in childbed; for some say that, after giving birth, when examined by the midwife, she was found a virgin.

[138580] 16.94. And such, for us, are the scriptures of the Lord—bringing forth the truth and remaining virgins, with the hiding of the mysteries of the truth. "She has brought forth, and has not brought forth," says the Scripture, as having conceived of herself, not from union. Therefore the Scriptures have conceived for the gnostics; but the heresies, not having learned them, are dismissed as not having conceived. And though all men have the same judgement, some, following the reason that chooses, make their acts of faith; but others, having given themselves over to pleasures, force the Scripture toward their desires. And there is need, I think, for the lover of truth of a certain vigour of soul; for those who set their hands to the greatest matters must of necessity err most greatly, unless they have received from the truth itself the rule of the truth. Such men, accordingly, as having fallen from the right road, in most particulars also go astray, reasonably—through not having a criterion of true and false, exactly trained to choose what is needful. For if they had acquired it, they would obey the divine Scriptures.

[139710] 16.95. As, then, if a man should become a beast out of a man, like those drugged by Circe, so the one who has kicked against the tradition of the Church and leaped away into the opinions of human heresies has destroyed his being a man of God and his remaining faithful to the Lord. But he who has run back from this deceit, having heard the Scriptures and committed his own life to the truth, is made, as it were, a god out of a man. For we have the beginning of the teaching—the Lord, leading the way of knowledge from the beginning to the end through the prophets and through the Gospel and through the blessed apostles, "in many ways and many parts." And if anyone should suppose that the beginning needs something else, then it would no longer be truly preserved as a beginning. He, then, who of himself is faithful to the Lord's Scripture and voice is reasonably trustworthy, as being worked through the Lord toward the benefit of men. Indeed, we use it as a criterion toward the discovery of things; but everything judged is still untrustworthy until it has been judged—so that what needs judgement is not a beginning. Reasonably, then, having grasped by faith the indemonstrable beginning, and having received in abundance the demonstrations concerning the beginning from the beginning itself, we are trained by the voice of the Lord toward the recognition of the truth. For we would not give heed to men who simply make pronouncements, against whom it is equally open to pronounce in turn. And if it is not enough simply to state one's opinion, but the thing said must be confirmed, we do not wait for the testimony from men, but confirm the matter in question by the voice of the Lord, which is more to be trusted than all demonstrations—or rather, which alone is demonstration. According to this knowledge, those who have only tasted the Scriptures are faithful; but those who have advanced further are exact judges of the truth—the gnostics. Since even in the affairs of life the craftsmen have something more than the laymen, and shape the better thing beyond the common conceptions.

[141807] 16.96. So, then, we too, demonstrating perfectly concerning the Scriptures from the Scriptures themselves, are persuaded out of faith demonstratively. And even if those who pursue the heresies dare to make use of the prophetic Scriptures—first, they do not use all; then, they use them imperfectly, nor as the body and texture of the prophecy dictate, but choosing out the things said ambiguously and transferring them to their own opinions, culling a few phrases here and there, not considering what is signified by them, but using the bare wording. For in nearly all the texts they bring forward you would find them clinging to the names only, altering the things signified, neither knowing them as they are spoken, nor using them as they are by nature, in the very selections they adduce. But the truth is not found in transposing the things signified (for so they will overturn all true teaching), but in considering what is wholly proper and fitting to the Lord and the almighty God, and in confirming each of the things demonstrated according to the Scriptures, again from the like Scriptures themselves. Neither, then, are they willing to turn back toward the truth, being ashamed to lay down the advantage of their self-love; nor have they any way to arrange their own opinions, forcing the Scriptures. Having anticipated us by bringing forth false doctrines to men, they fight openly with nearly all the Scriptures, and being always refuted by us who contradict them, even now they continue—partly not admitting some of the prophetic Scriptures, and partly slandering us, as though we, being of another nature, were unable to understand the things proper to those Scriptures—and sometimes, when their own doctrines are refuted, they deny them, ashamed to confess openly the things they boast of teaching in private.

[143633] 16.97. For thus one may see throughout all the heresies, going over the wickedness of their doctrines. For whenever they are overturned by us, who show them plainly opposing the Scriptures, one or other of two things may be seen happening among the leaders of the doctrine: for they despise either the consistency of their own doctrines, or the prophecy itself—or rather, their own hope—and choose in each case what seems to them more evident than what was spoken by the Lord through the prophets, and witnessed and confirmed by the Gospel, and besides by the apostles. Seeing, then, that the danger for them is not about a single doctrine, but about preserving the heresies—not about finding the truth (for they despised, as cheap, the things that lie open and ready among us); and being eager to overstep the common ground of the faith, they have stepped outside the truth. For not having learned the mysteries of the knowledge that is of the Church, nor made room for the greatness of the truth, having shrunk through sloth from going down to the depth of things, reading superficially they dismissed the Scriptures.

[144754] 16.98. Lifted up, then, by conceit of wisdom, they pass their lives in contention, having shown themselves to be more concerned for seeming than for philosophizing. Accordingly, laying down for themselves no necessary principles of things, and being moved by human opinions, then necessarily working out for themselves a conclusion that follows upon them, they brawl, on account of the refutations, against those who handle the true philosophy; and they endure all things, and, as they say, "move every cable," even though they are about to be impious through their unbelief toward the Scriptures, rather than change—out of love of glory for their heresy, and for the much-talked-of first seat in their assemblies, for the sake of which they embrace also that banqueting first couch of the love that is falsely named. But among us the recognition of the truth furnishes faith to those not yet faithful out of those already faithful—faith which is established, so to speak, as the very substance of demonstration. But, as it seems, every heresy has ears that do not hear the things profitable, but are open only to the things toward pleasure. Since indeed even one of them might be healed, if only he would consent to be persuaded by the truth. There is a threefold treatment of conceit, as of every passion: the learning of the cause, and of how it may be removed, and, third, the training of the soul and the habituation toward being able to follow the things rightly judged.

[146232] 16.99. For just as an eye troubled, so too the soul, fouled by doctrines contrary to nature, is unable to discern exactly the light of the truth, but overlooks even the things at its feet. They say that in turbid water even eels are caught, being blinded. And just as wicked children shut out the tutor, so these men keep the prophecies out of their own Church, suspicious of them on account of refutation and admonition. Indeed, they patch together very many falsehoods and fabrications, that they may seem with good reason not to admit the Scriptures. In this way, then, they are not devout, being displeased with the divine commandments—that is, with the Holy Spirit. And just as almonds are called empty, not those in which there is nothing, but those in which what is within is useless, so we say that the heretics are empty of the counsels of God and of the traditions of Christ—being bitter in truth, like the wild almond, as the begetters of doctrines, except for so much as, through the evidence of the truths, they have been unable to lay aside and hide.

[147298] 16.100. As, then, in war the soldier must not leave the post which the general appointed to him, so too one must not leave the post which the Word gave—the Word whom we have received as ruler of knowledge and of life. But the many have not even examined this: whether one ought to follow anyone, and whom this is, and how. For of what kind the Word is, of such kind it befits the believer's life also to be, so as to be able "to follow God," who from the beginning brings all things "to a straight end." But whenever a man transgresses the Word, and through this God, if indeed through some impression suddenly falling upon him he has grown weak, he must make the rational impressions ready to hand; but if, overcome by the habit that has previously held him, he has become (as Scripture says) "common," the habit must be made to cease utterly, and the soul must be trained to contradict it. And if doctrines at war with one another seem to draw certain men, these must be taken out of the way, and one must go to the "peacemakers" among doctrines, who lull with chants of the divine Scriptures the timid among the inexperienced, making the truth plain through the consistency of the covenants. But, as it seems, we incline rather toward the things of reputation, even if they happen to be contrary, than toward the truth; for it is austere and grave. And there being three dispositions of the soul—ignorance, conceit, and knowledge—those in ignorance are the heathen, those in knowledge the true Church, and those in conceit those who follow the heresies.

[148856] 16.101. Nothing, indeed, is clearer to see than that those who know affirm with confidence about the things they know, while those who merely opine do so about the things they opine—at least so far as concerns affirming without demonstration. They despise one another, then, and laugh at one another; and it comes about that the same intelligence is among some most honoured, and among others convicted of madness. And yet we have learned that pleasure is one thing, which must be assigned to the heathen; that contention is another, which must be allotted to the heresies; that joy is another, which must be made proper to the Church; and that gladness is another, which must be rendered to the gnostic according to the truth. And just as, if a man attend to Ischomachus, he will make him a husbandman, and Lampis a shipmaster, and Charidemus a general, and Simon a horseman, and Perdix a huckster, and Crobylus a cook, and Archelaus a dancer, and Homer a poet, and Pyrrho a wrangler, and Demosthenes an orator, and Chrysippus a logician, and Aristotle a natural philosopher, and Plato a philosopher; so the man who is obedient to the Lord, and has followed the prophecy given through him, is perfectly perfected after the image of his Teacher, a god walking about in the flesh. They fall away, then, from this height who do not follow God wherever he leads; and he leads according to "the God-inspired Scriptures." For though the things men do be ten thousand in number, there are nearly two starting-points of all sin: ignorance and weakness—both of which are in our power, since we neither wish to learn nor again to master desire. And of these, through the one men judge not nobly, and through the other they have not the strength to follow the things rightly judged. For neither would a man, deceived in his judgement, be able to do well, even if he be wholly able to do the things known; nor would one with strength to judge what is fitting show himself blameless in his deeds, being weak in action.

[150864] 16.102. Accordingly, two kinds of training are handed down, suited to each of the two sins: to the one, knowledge and the clear demonstration of the testimony from the Scriptures; to the other, the discipline that is according to reason, trained up by faith and fear. And both increase together unto perfect love. For the end of the gnostic, here at least, is, I think, twofold: in some cases the scientific contemplation, in others the action. May it be, then, that these heretics too, having learned from these notes, may be brought to soberness and turn to the almighty God. But if, like "the deaf serpents," they "give no ear to the new-spoken but most ancient song," then at least let them be instructed by God, enduring the fatherly admonitions before the judgement, until, put to shame, they repent—and not, bearing themselves by harsh disobedience into the final judgement, cast themselves there. For there are also certain partial chastisements, which they call punishments, into which many of us, of those of the Lord's people who have come into transgression, slip and fall; but, as children by the teacher or the father, so we are chastised by providence. For God does not take vengeance—since vengeance is a returning of evil for evil—but he chastises for the profit, both in common and in private, of those chastised.

[152197] 16.103. These things, then, I have set forth, wishing to turn the lovers of learning away from the readiness to fall into the heresies; and longing to make those of the prevailing—whether one must call it ignorance, or stupidity, or ill condition, or whatever it should be named—cease, and trying to win over and to bring to the truth those at least who are not altogether incurable, I have used these arguments. For there are some who do not even endure at the first to hear those who exhort them toward the truth; and indeed they attempt to talk nonsense, pouring out blasphemous words against the truth, conceding to themselves that they know the greatest of beings, though they have not learned, not inquired, not toiled, not found the consistency. These a man might pity, or hate, for such perversity. But if anyone happens to be curable, able to bear, like fire or iron, the frankness of the truth that cuts away and burns out their false opinions, let him hold out the ears of his soul. And this will be, if they do not, hastening to be slothful, thrust away the truth, or, grasping after reputation, force themselves to innovate. For they are slothful who, when it is possible to provide from the Scriptures themselves the demonstrations proper to the divine Scriptures, choose instead what comes to hand and joins with their pleasures; and they desire reputation, as many as willingly play the sophist, with other tamperings, against the things akin to the God-inspired words handed down by the blessed apostles and teachers, setting human teachings against the divine tradition for the sake of establishing their heresy. For what argument, in truth, was left over for Marcion, say, or Prodicus and the like, who did not walk the right road, among men so great—I mean according to the knowledge that is of the Church? For they did not surpass in wisdom the men before them, so as to find out something besides the things truly said by those men; rather, it would have been enough for them, if they could but learn the things handed down before.

[154252] 16.104. The gnostic alone, then, for us, having grown old in the very Scriptures, preserving the apostolic and ecclesiastical right division of the doctrines, lives most rightly according to the Gospel, finding out, sent back by the Lord to the Law and the prophets, whatever demonstrations he may seek. For the gnostic's life, I think, is nothing else but deeds and words that follow the tradition of the Lord. But "knowledge is not in all." "For I would not have you ignorant, brethren," says the Apostle, "that all were under the cloud, and all partook of spiritual food and drink"—plainly establishing that not all who heard the Word had received the greatness of the knowledge in deed and word. Therefore he added: "But not in all of them was he well pleased." Who is this? The one who said: "Why do you call me Lord, and do not the will of my Father?"—that is, the teaching of the Saviour, which is our spiritual food and a drink that knows no thirst, "the water" of gnostic "life." "Yes," they say, "knowledge is said to puff up." To these we reply: perhaps the knowledge that seems such is said to puff up, if one should take the phrase to mean to be inflated. But if—what is more—the Apostle's voice signifies thinking greatly and truly, then the difficulty is solved; and, following the Scriptures, let us confirm what was said.

[155592] 16.105. "Wisdom," says Solomon, "has puffed up her children." For surely the Lord did not produce conceit in the youths by his teaching, but the being confident upon the truth; and he prepares one to be high-minded in the knowledge handed down through the Scriptures, and to be contemptuous of the things that drag down into sin—which is what the word "puffed up" signifies, namely, that wisdom has implanted greatness of mind in the children who learn, through the things she teaches. Indeed the Apostle says: "And I shall know, not the word of those who are puffed up, but the power"—that is, if you understand the Scriptures high-mindedly (which is to understand them truly, and nothing is greater than truth). For here is the power of the children of wisdom who have been puffed up. As though to say: I shall know whether you justly think greatly of your knowledge. For "known," according to David, "is God in Judaea"—that is, among the Israelites according to recognition. For "Judaea" is interpreted "confession." Reasonably, then, it has been said by the Apostle: "The 'You shall not commit adultery, you shall not steal, you shall not covet,' and any other commandment, is summed up in this word: You shall love your neighbour as yourself." For one must never, as those who pursue the heresies do, commit adultery against the truth, nor steal the rule of the Church, gratifying one's own desires and loves of glory unto the deceit of one's neighbours—whom, more than anything, while they love us, it befits us to teach to cling to the truth itself. For it has been said plainly: "Declare among the nations his doings," that they may not be judged, but may be converted—those who have heard beforehand. But as many as "deal deceitfully with their tongues," they have their penalties written.

[157392] 17.106. Those, then, who touch upon impious words, and who lead others on as well, not using the divine words well but with error, neither enter themselves into the kingdom of heaven, nor allow those whom they have deceived to attain the truth. But, not having the key of the entrance themselves, but a false one, and, as the common phrase is, a counterfeit key—through which they do not throw open the outer court, as we enter through the tradition of the Lord, but, having cut a side-door and dug secretly through the little wall of the Church, overstepping the truth—they set themselves up as initiators of the soul of the impious. For that they made these human gatherings later than the Catholic Church there is no need of many words. For the teaching of the Lord at his coming, beginning from Augustus and Tiberius Caesar, is completed in the middle of the times of Augustus; and that of his apostles, down to the ministry of Paul, is completed under Nero; while it was lower down, about the times of Hadrian the king, that those who devised the heresies arose, and they continued down to the age of Antoninus the elder—such as Basilides, even though he inscribes Glaucias as his teacher, the interpreter of Peter (as they themselves boast). Likewise they say that Valentinus heard Theudas; and this man had been an acquaintance of Paul.

[158737] 17.107. For Marcion, being of the same age as these, associated with younger men as an old man with juniors; and after him Simon, for a little while, gave ear to Peter when he was preaching. These things being so, it is plain that, in comparison with the most ancient and most true Church, these later heresies, and those still later in time, were newly coined and adulterated. From what has been said, then, it is, I think, manifest that the true Church is one—the one that is truly ancient—into which are enrolled those who are just according to purpose. For there being one God and one Lord, on this account too that which is supremely honourable is praised in respect of its being alone, as being an imitation of the one Beginning. The one Church, then, is allotted to the nature of the One—the Church which they force to cut up into many heresies. Both in substance, then, and in conception, and in beginning, and in pre-eminence, we say that the ancient and Catholic Church is alone—gathering, "into the unity of one faith," that which is according to the proper covenants, or rather according to the one covenant in different times, by the will of one God through one Lord, those already ordained—whom God foreordained, having known before the foundation of the world that they would be just. But also the pre-eminence of the Church, just as the beginning of its constitution, is according to the Monad, surpassing all other things and having nothing like or equal to itself.

[160221] 17.108. These things, then, also for later. But of the heresies, some are named from a name, like that from Valentinus and Marcion and Basilides—even though they boast of bringing forward the opinion of Matthias; for the teaching of all the apostles was one, just as the tradition was also one. Others are named from a place, like the Peratici; others from a nation, like that of the Phrygians; others from an activity, like that of the Encratites; others from peculiar doctrines, like that of the Docetae and that of the Haematites; others from suppositions and from the men they have honoured, like the Cainists and those called Ophites; and others from the lawless things they practised and dared, like those of the Simonians who are called Entychites.

[160978] 18.109. Having, then, pointed out a small opening "to those who love the contemplation of the truth," from the law concerning sacrifices, regarding both the common Jews and the heresies—as unclean, being mystically distinguished from the divine Church, by the law of clean and unclean animals—let us bring the discourse to a close. For the Scripture hands down as clean and acceptable to God those of the sacrificial animals that part the hoof and chew the cud, as figuring that the just make their journey toward the Father and toward the Son through faith (for this is the steadfastness of the cleft-footed)—those who "meditate on the oracles of God night and day," and ruminate them in the receptacle of the soul that holds learning. Which gnostic exercise the law allegorizes as the cud-chewing of the clean animal. But those that have neither of these, or one without the other, it sets apart as unclean. Accordingly, the things that chew the cud but do not part the hoof hint at the many Jews, who have the oracles of God upon their lips, but do not have faith, and the foundation that conveys, through the Son, to the Father, leaning upon the truth. Whence the race of such cattle is also slippery, as not being cloven-footed nor leaning upon the double support of faith. "For no one," it is said, "knows the Father except the Son, and he to whom the Son shall reveal him." And, again, unclean in like manner are those that part the hoof but do not chew the cud. For these signify the heretics, who have set foot upon the name of Father and Son, but are too weak to work fine and to grind smooth the exact clearness of the oracles, and besides who pursue the works of righteousness more grossly, not more exactly—if indeed they pursue them at all.

[162734] 18.110. To certain such the Lord says: "Why do you call me 'Lord, Lord,' and do not the things I say?" And altogether unclean are those that neither part the hoof nor chew the cud. "But you, O Megarians," says Theognis, "are neither third nor fourth nor twelfth, neither in account nor in number," but rather "like the chaff which the wind drives away from the face of the earth," and "like a drop from a bucket." Now that these things have been brought to an end for us, and the ethical division has been sketched as in summary, having sown in here and there—scattered and dispersed, as we promised—the live coals of the doctrines of true knowledge, so that it may not be easy for the chance uninitiated reader to find out the holy traditions, let us pass on to our promise.

[163511] 18.111. The Miscellanies are somewhat like, not those parks set in order with trees planted in rows for the pleasure of the eye, but rather like some shady and thick-grown hill planted with cypresses and plane-trees, with laurel and ivy, and at the same time with apple-trees and olives and figs—the planting deliberately mingled of fruit-bearing and unfruitful trees together, on account of those who dare to filch and steal the ripe fruit; the writing willing to lie hid. From which the husbandman, transplanting and re-grafting, will set in order a fair park and a delightful grove. The Miscellanies, then, aim neither at arrangement nor at style, since indeed on purpose both the diction is not such as the Greeks would have it, and the sowing-in of the doctrines has been made secretly and not according to the plain truth—preparing the readers, if any chance to be such, to be lovers of toil and discoverers. For many and various are the baits, by reason of the differences among the fish. And now, after this seventh Book of our Miscellanies, we shall make the discourse of what follows from another beginning.