WORK: Stromata  (slug: clement-of-alexandria-stromata-694383)

CHAPTER: 02-book-2



[109538] 19.102. And it seems to me that Hippodamus the Pythagorean writes most nobly: "Of friendships, the one is from the knowledge of the gods, the one from the giving of men, the one from the pleasure of animals." So the one is the friendship of a philosopher, the one of a man, the one of an animal. For in truth man, doing good, is an image of God, in which he is himself also benefited; for as the pilot at once saves and is saved, so for this reason, when one happens to be asking, one does not say to the giver, "You have given well," but "You have received well." So the giver receives, and the receiver gives. "And the just pity and have mercy; and the kind will be inhabitants of the earth, and the harmless will be left upon it; but the lawless will be utterly destroyed from it." And it seems to me that Homer, foretelling the faithful man, said: "Give to a friend." One must share with a friend, that he may remain still more a friend; and one must aid an enemy, that he may not remain an enemy; for by aid goodwill is bound and enmity dissolved. But if eagerness is set forth, "it is acceptable according to what one has, not according to what one has not." "For it is not that to others there be relief and to you affliction, but out of equality in the present time," and the rest. "He scattered, he gave to the poor; his righteousness abides forever," says the Scripture. For by the "according to the image and likeness," as we said before too, what is according to the body is not meant — for it is not lawful for a mortal to be made like to the immortal — but what is according to mind and reasoning, upon which the Lord fittingly seals the likeness both toward doing good and toward ruling; for rulings are set right not by the qualities of bodies, but by the judgments of the mind. For "by the counsels of holy men cities are well governed, and a house well ordered."

[111420] 20.103. And steadfastness too itself forces its way toward the divine likeness, reaping, through endurance, impassivity — if anyone has ringing in his ears the things recorded about those around Ananias, of whom one was Daniel the prophet, filled with divine faith. Daniel dwelt in Babylon, just as Lot in Sodom, and Abraham, who a little after became the friend of God, in the land of the Chaldeans. The king of the Babylonians, then, brought down Daniel into a pit full of beasts, but the king of all, the faithful Lord, brought him up unharmed. This endurance the gnostic, as gnostic, will gain; he will bless when tested, like the noble Job; he will pray, like Jonah, when swallowed by the whale;

[112122] 20.104. and faith will restore him, prophesying to the Ninevites; and if he be shut up with lions, he will tame the beasts; and if he be cast into fire, he will be bedewed and not be burned up. He will witness by night, he will witness by day; in word, in life, in manner he will witness; being a housemate of the Lord, a familiar and a table-companion according to the spirit, he will remain pure in the flesh, pure in the heart, sanctified in the word. "To this man," it says, "the world is crucified, and he himself to the world." This man, bearing about the cross of the Saviour, follows the Lord "in the track, as of a god," having become a holy one of the holy.

[112791] 20.105. The divine law, then, making mention of every virtue, anoints man especially toward self-control, laying this down as the foundation of the virtues; and indeed it educates us beforehand toward the gaining of self-control by the use of the animals, forbidding us to partake of all that are by nature fat, like the race of swine, which happens to be very full-fleshed; for such use is supplied to those given to luxury. It is said, at any rate, that one of the philosophers, etymologizing, said the sow (hys) is "for sacrifice" (thyein), as fit only for slaughter and killing; for soul has been given to this animal for nothing else than that its flesh might be plump. Likewise it forbade partaking of the fishes, restraining our desires of those that have neither fins nor scales; for these differ from the other fishes in plumpness and fatness.

[113645] 20.106. From this, I think, the one who found the rites too forbids touching not only certain animals, but there are also parts even of the sacrificed victims which he excludes from use, for reasons which the initiates know. If, then, one must master the belly and the parts below the belly, it is plain that from above we have received from the Lord, through the law, to cut out desire. And this would come about perfectly, if we should, without dissembling, condemn the fuel of desire — pleasure, I mean. And they say that the notion of it is a smooth and gentle motion with a certain perception. Enslaved to this, they say, Menelaus, after the capture of Ilium, having set out to kill Helen as having become the cause of so many evils, yet was not able to do it, overcome by her beauty, through which he came to the recollection of pleasure.

[114491] 20.107. Whence, mocking, the tragic poets cried out reproachfully at him: "But you, when you saw the breast, casting away the sword, received a kiss, fawning on the traitorous bitch." And again: "Are swords, then, made dull by beauty?" But I welcome Antisthenes, who says: "Aphrodite I would even shoot down, if I caught her, because she has corrupted many noble and good women of ours." And he calls love a vice of nature; "and the wretched, being weaker than it, call the disease a god." For it is shown by these things that the more unlearned are overcome, through ignorance, by pleasure, which one must not welcome, even if it be called a god — that is, even if it happens to have been given from God toward the need of begetting children. And Xenophon too, plainly calling pleasure a vice, says: "O wretched one, what good do you know, or what noble thing do you regard? You who do not even await the desire of pleasant things, eating before you are hungry, drinking before you are thirsty; and, that you may eat pleasantly, contriving cooks; and, that you may drink pleasantly, preparing costly wines, and in summer running about seeking snow; and, that you may sleep pleasantly, preparing not only soft couches but also stools for the couches."

[115744] 20.108. Whence, as Ariston said, against the whole tetrachord — pleasure, grief, fear, desire — there is need of much exercise and battle: "For these, these go within the entrails and disturb the heart of men." For even of those who are thought grave, pleasure makes the spirits "waxen," according to Plato, because "each pleasure and grief nails the soul to the body" of the man who does not separate and cross himself off from the passions. "He who has lost his own soul," says the Lord, "will save it" — either giving it over recklessly for the Saviour, as he himself has done for us, or releasing it from fellowship with the accustomed life. For if you should wish to release and remove and separate (for this is what the cross signifies) the soul from the delight and pleasure that is in this life, you will have it found and at rest in the expected hope.

[116606] 20.109. And this would be the practice of death, if, with the appetites measured according to nature alone, defining nothing beyond the things according to nature toward the more or contrary to nature — where the sinful springs up — we should wish to be content. One must, then, put on the whole armour of God, that we may be able to stand against the methods of the devil, "since the weapons of our warfare are not fleshly, but powerful with God for the pulling down of strongholds, casting down reasonings and every high thing that lifts itself up against the knowledge of God, and taking captive every thought into the obedience of Christ," says the divine Apostle. There is need of a man who will use, without marvelling and without confusion, the things from which the passions are set in motion — such as wealth and poverty, glory and ill repute, health and disease, life and death, toil and pleasure. For that we may use indifferently the indifferent things, we have need of much discrimination, as having been beforehand harmed by much weakness, and beforehand distorted by bad upbringing and nourishment together with ignorance.

[117745] 20.110. The simple account, then, of our philosophy says that all the passions are imprints upon the soft and yielding soul, and, as it were, seals impressed by the spiritual powers, against which is our wrestling. For it is the work, I think, of the maleficent powers to try to effect, at each turn, something of their own state, toward overcoming and making their own those who have renounced them. And it follows fittingly that some are thrown down; but those who handle the contest in more athletic fashion, having contended in the all-in struggle and advanced even to the crown, the aforesaid powers, in much gore, then give out, marvelling at the victors. For of the things that move, some are moved by impulse and impression, as the animals, and some by transference, as the lifeless things. And they say that of the lifeless things too the plants are moved by transference toward growth, if one will grant the plants to be lifeless.

[118687] 20.111. Of state, then, are the stones; of nature, the plants; and of impulse and impression, and again of the two aforesaid, the irrational animals too partake. But the rational power, being proper to the human soul, ought not to be impelled in the same way as the irrational animals, but to discern the impressions and not to be carried away together with them. The powers, then, of which we have spoken, hold out beauties and reputations and adulteries and pleasures and certain such alluring impressions to the easily-led souls, just as those who drive cattle shake green boughs before them; then, having over-reached those unable to discern the true from the false pleasure, and the perishable and outrageous from the holy beauty, they lead them away, having enslaved them. And each deceit, continually pressing upon the soul, imprints in it its image; and so the soul, unawares, bears about the image of the passion, the cause arising both from the bait and from our assent.

[119669] 20.112. Those about Basilides are wont to call the passions "appendages," and to say that these are certain spirits existing in essence, appended to the rational soul according to a certain original disturbance and confusion; and that other bastard and heterogeneous natures of spirits grow upon these — such as of wolf, ape, lion, goat — whose properties, appearing about the soul, they say make the desires of the soul like to the animals. For of whatever properties they bear, the works of these they imitate; and they not only become akin to the impulses and impressions of the irrational animals, but they emulate even the motions and beauties of plants, because they bear the properties of plants too appended,

[120387] 20.113. and further the properties of state too, such as the hardness of adamant. But against this doctrine we shall discourse later, when we treat of the soul; now only this must be noted, that the Basilidean man preserves the image of a certain Trojan horse, according to the poetic myth, having enfolded in one body an army of so many different spirits. Indeed, Isidore himself, the son of Basilides, perceiving the doctrine in his work On the Adventitious Soul, as though accusing himself, writes word for word thus: "For if you give anyone a conviction that the soul is not single-part, but that the passions of the worse come about by the violence of the appendages, the base among men will have no ordinary pretext to say: 'I was forced, I was carried off, I acted unwillingly, I worked without wishing it' — they themselves having led the desire of the evils, and not having fought with the violences of the appendages."

[121317] 20.114. "But one must, having become superior by the reasoning part, appear to master the lesser creation in us." For he too supposes two souls in us, like the Pythagoreans, about whom we shall consider later. But Valentinus too, writing to certain ones, says in these very words concerning the appendages: "There is one good, whose frank manifestation is through the Son, and through him alone the heart can become pure, every wicked spirit being thrust out of the heart. For the many spirits dwelling in it do not allow it to be pure, but each of them accomplishes its own works, outraging it in many ways with desires not fitting. And it seems to me that the heart suffers something like the inn; for that too is bored through and dug up, and often filled with dung by men who lodge in it licentiously and take no forethought for the place, as being another's. In this way the heart too, so long as it has no forethought, is unclean, being a dwelling of many demons; but when the only good Father visits it, it is sanctified and shines with light; and so blessed is the man who has such a heart, for he will see God."

[122439] 20.115. What, then, is the cause of such a soul's not being provided for from the beginning, let them tell us. For either it is not worthy (and how, then, does the providence approach it, as though from repentance?); or it happens to be a nature saved, as he himself wishes, and then it must from the beginning, being provided for through kinship, give no entrance to the unclean spirits, unless it be forced and convicted of weakness. For if he grants that, having repented, it chooses the better things, this is what he will say unwillingly, the very thing which the truth among us dogmatizes — that salvation comes from an obedient change, and not from nature. For as the exhalations both from the earth and from marshes are constituted into mists and cloudy gatherings, so the risings of the fleshly desires bring an ill state upon the soul, scattering the images of pleasure before the soul.

[123337] 20.116. They darken, at any rate, the intellectual light, the soul drawing on the risings from desire and thickening the gatherings of the passions by the continuance of pleasures. But a lump of gold is not lifted from the earth, but, being boiled down, is filtered; then, having become pure, it is called gold — earth cleansed. "For ask, and it will be given you," is said to those able of themselves to choose the noblest things. And how we say that the activities of the devil and the unclean spirits sow themselves into the soul of the sinner, I need not many words to present, having set out as witness the apostolic Barnabas (and he was of the seventy and a fellow-worker of Paul), saying somewhat thus, word for word: "Before we believed in God, the dwelling-place of our heart was corruptible and weak, truly a temple built by hand; for it was full of idolatry and was a house of demons, through the doing of all that was contrary to God."

[124286] 20.117. He says, then, that the sinners accomplish the activities corresponding to the demons, but does not say that the spirits themselves dwell in the soul of the unbeliever. For this reason he adds: "Take heed, that the temple of the Lord be built gloriously. How? Learn. Having received the forgiveness of sins, and having hoped upon the name, let us become new, again created from the beginning." For not the demons are driven out of us, but the sins, he says, are forgiven, which we accomplished, like them, before believing. With reason, then, he set over against this what follows: "Wherefore in our dwelling-place God truly dwells in us. How? His word of faith, his calling of the promise, the wisdom of the ordinances, the commandments of the teaching." I know that I met with a certain heresy, and the one who presided over it asserted, through the use of pleasure, that one must fight pleasure by pleasure — this noble gnostic (for he asserted himself to be a gnostic too) deserting to pleasure through a pretended fight; since, he said, it was no great thing to abstain from pleasure for one who had not tried it, but, being in it, not to be mastered; whence one must exercise through it within it.

[125499] 20.118. But the wretch, over-reaching himself by the pleasure-loving art, escaped his own notice. To this opinion, evidently, Aristippus of Cyrene too inclined, the sophist who boasted of the truth. Reproached, at any rate, for continually consorting with the Corinthian courtesan, he said: "For I have Lais, and am not had by her." And such too are those who assert themselves to follow Nicolaus, bringing forward a saying of the man, by perversion, that one must abuse the flesh. But the noble man showed that one must cut short both the pleasures and the desires, and by this exercise wither away the impulses and assaults of the flesh. But they, poured out unto pleasure like goats, outraging the body as it were, give themselves to soft living, not knowing that the body wastes away, being by nature in flux, while their soul is buried in the mire of vice — pursuing the doctrine of pleasure itself, and not that of an apostolic man. For in what do these differ from Sardanapallus, whose life the epigram shows: "These I have, all that I ate and outraged and the pleasant things I suffered with love; but those many and blessed things are left behind. For I too am ashes, who reigned over great Ninus." For in general the passion of pleasure is not necessary, but a consequence of certain natural needs — hunger, thirst, cold, marriage.

[126842] 20.119. If, then, without it one could drink, or take nourishment, or beget children, it would be shown that there is no other need of it. For pleasure is neither an activity nor a disposition, nor any part of us, but came into life for the sake of service, as they say salt does for the sake of the digesting of food. And pleasure, having thrown off the rein and mastered the house, begets the first desire, which is an irrational longing and appetite for what is pleasing to it — which persuaded even Epicurus to set pleasure as the end of the philosopher. He deifies, at any rate, "the stable condition of the flesh and the trustworthy hope concerning it." For what else is luxury but pleasure-loving daintiness and a superfluous excess toward soft living of men given over to it? Plainly Diogenes writes in a certain tragedy: "Those who, in the unmanly and beslimed luxury, stuffed in heart with pleasures, are unwilling to toil even a little." And the things upon these, as many as are shamefully said, yet worthily of the pleasure-lovers.

[127888] 20.120. Wherefore it seems to me that the divine law necessarily hangs fear over us, that, by caution and attention, the philosopher may gain and keep freedom from anxiety, remaining unstumbling and sinless in all things. For peace and freedom are not otherwise won than through the unceasing and unresting counter-struggle against our passions . . . For these antagonists are stout and Olympic, sharper, so to speak, than wasps — and especially pleasure, which not only by day but also by night, in the very dreams, plots and bites alluringly with sorcery. How, then, are the Greeks any longer just in running down the law, when they themselves too teach the enslaving of pleasure by fear? Socrates, at any rate, commands to guard against the things that persuade us to eat when not hungry and to drink when not thirsty, and the glances and kisses of the beautiful, as fit to inject a venom worse than that of scorpions and spiders.

[128823] 20.121. And Antisthenes too chooses rather to go mad than to feel pleasure; and Crates the Theban says: "But of these be master by a soul exulting in character, neither enslaved by gold nor by love that melts with longing, nor if there be any companion of outrage." And in sum he adds: "Unenslaved and unfulled by slavish pleasure, they love the immortal kingdom and freedom." The same man writes elsewhere outright that the poultice for the uncontrollable impulse toward the things of love is hunger, and, if not, a noose. And to Zeno the Stoic the comic poets bear witness of his teaching, though deriding it, somewhat thus: "For this man philosophizes a new philosophy: he teaches hunger and gets disciples; one loaf, dried figs for relish, and water to drink upon them."

[129599] 20.122. All these, then, are not ashamed plainly to confess the benefit that comes from caution. But the true and not irrational wisdom, trusting not in bare oracles and divinations, but in shelters that cannot be wounded and in effective mysteries, the divine commandments, . . . practising itself by joint-exercise and joint-training, receives a divine power according to the part of it that is inspired by the Word. So already they write of the aegis of the poetic Zeus that it is terrible, "about which on all sides Fear is wreathed; in it is Strife, in it Valour, in it chilling Pursuit; and in it the Gorgon head of the dread monster, terrible and grim, the portent of aegis-bearing Zeus."

[130296] 20.123. To those able rightly to discern the saving thing, I do not know if anything will appear dearer than the gravity of the law and its daughter, caution. But when it is said to sing "too high a pitch" — as the Lord too sang to certain ones, that none of those who emulate him might sing out of pitch and off the string — I understand it thus: not as too high a pitch, but to those unwilling to take up the divine yoke it is too high a pitch. For to the slack and weak the moderate seems too high, and to the unjust the fitting seems extremely just. For all whom pardon enters in because of their friendly disposition toward sins, these suppose the truth to be harshness, and the austerity severity, and the man who neither sins with them nor is dragged down with them, merciless.

[131082] 20.124. Well, then, does the tragedy write concerning Hades: "And to what a god you will come, as to a Love that knew neither fairness nor grace, but cherished only bare justice." For even if you are not yet able to do the things commanded by the law, yet, perceiving that the noblest examples lie before us in it, we can nourish and increase the love of freedom; and here too we would be benefited, more eagerly, according to our power, in some things calling ourselves on, in some imitating, in some too being put to shame. For neither were the just men of old, who lived according to the law, "from oak of olden tale or from rock"; but by their willing to philosophize genuinely, bearing themselves whole, they offered themselves up to God, and it was reckoned unto faith.

[131859] 20.125. Most nobly Zeno said of the Indians that he would rather see one Indian roasted than learn all the demonstrations about pain. But to us there are ungrudging springs of witnesses, beheld every day before our eyes, roasted, impaled, having their heads cut off. All these the fear from the law, having schooled them toward Christ, trained to display their caution even through bloods. "God stood in the assembly of gods, and in the midst he will judge gods." Who are these? Those superior to pleasure, those who surpass the passions, those who know each thing they do, the gnostics, those greater than the world. And again, "I said, you are gods, and all sons of the Most High." To whom does the Lord speak? To those who decline, so far as may be, all that is human. And the Apostle says: "For you are no longer in the flesh, but in the spirit." And again he says: "Being in the flesh, we war not according to the flesh; for flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, nor does corruption inherit incorruption; but behold, you die as men" — the Spirit has said this, convicting us.

[132954] 20.126. One must, then, train oneself toward caution about the things that fall under the passions, banishing, as the true philosophers do, the foods that lead to passion, and the slack relaxation at the bed, and luxury and the passions toward luxury, . . . a heavy contest to others, but to us no longer; for self-control is the greatest gift of God. For he himself has said, "I will not loose you, nor will I forsake you," having judged us worthy on account of our genuine choice. So, when we try to approach cautiously, the good yoke of the Lord will receive us, "from faith to faith," one charioteer driving each of us, according to advance, toward salvation, that the fitting fruit of happiness may result. And, according to Hippocrates of Cos, exercise is not only of the body, but also of the soul: "health is freedom from sluggishness in toils, freedom from satiety in food."

[133839] 21.127. But Epicurus, setting the happiness equal to the gods in the not being hungry nor thirsty nor cold, uttered, speaking impiously, "In these things I would fight even with father Zeus" — dogmatizing a blessed victory of dung-eating pigs, and not of rational and philosophic beings. For of those who begin from pleasure . . . are the Cyrenaics and Epicurus; for these say outright that the end is to live pleasantly, and that pleasure alone is the perfect good. And Epicurus says that the removal of pain too is pleasure; and he says that to be chosen is what first, of itself, draws toward itself, being plainly in motion. And Dinomachus and Calliphon said the end is to do all that depends on oneself for the sake of attaining and obtaining pleasure; and Hieronymus the Peripatetic said the end is to live without disturbance, but the final good is happiness alone. And Diodorus likewise, being of the same school, declares the end to be to live without disturbance and nobly.

[134824] 21.128. Epicurus, then, and the Cyrenaics say the first thing proper is pleasure; for virtue, they say, came in for the sake of pleasure and produced pleasure. But according to those about Calliphon, virtue entered in for the sake of pleasure, but afterward, in time, having beheld the beauty about it, presented itself as of equal honour with the beginning — that is, with pleasure. But those about Aristotle render the end to be living according to virtue, but say that neither happiness nor the end is present to everyone who has virtue; for the wise man, when tortured and falling into unwished-for fortunes, and on account of these willingly wishing to escape from life, is neither blessed nor happy. For virtue too needs some time; for it does not result in one day, and it is constituted in a perfect being, since, as they say, a child is never happy; and the perfect time would be the human life. Happiness, then, is filled up out of the threefold kind of goods. So neither the poor, nor the obscure, nor the sickly, nor, if anyone be a slave, is happy, according to them. . . .

[135912] 21.129. Again, Zeno the Stoic holds the end to be living according to virtue; Cleanthes, living in agreement with nature; and Diogenes held the end to lie in good reasoning, which he took to lie in the choosing of the things according to nature. And Antipater, his pupil, supposes the end to lie in continually and inviolably choosing the things according to nature and rejecting the things contrary to nature. And Archedemus again thus expounded the end to be, living, choosing the greatest and most authoritative things according to nature, which it is not possible to overstep. Besides these, Panaetius declared the end to be living according to the occasions given us from nature. And above all, Posidonius declared the end to be living, contemplating the truth and order of the universe, and helping to constitute it so far as possible, being led in nothing by the irrational part of the soul. And some of the younger Stoics rendered it thus: that the end is to live in keeping with the constitution of man. Why should I reckon up Ariston for you? He said the end is indifference; but the indifferent simply leaves the indifferent. Or should I bring into the midst the things of Herillus? He sets the end to be living according to knowledge. For some hold that the younger ones from the Academy render the end to be the secure withholding of judgment toward the impressions. Indeed, Lyco the Peripatetic said the true joy of the soul is the end, as Leucimus said the joy over noble things. And Critolaus, himself too a Peripatetic, said it is the perfection of a life flowing well according to nature, indicating the threefold perfection filled up out of the three kinds.

[137590] 21.130. We must not, then, stop, contenting ourselves with these things, but must be as ambitious as possible to set out also the things dogmatized by the natural philosophers about the matter before us. For they say that Anaxagoras of Clazomenae said that the end of life is contemplation and the freedom that comes from it; and Heraclitus of Ephesus, well-pleasing. And Heraclides of Pontus relates that Pythagoras handed down that the science of the perfection of the numbers of the soul is happiness. But the Abderites too teach that there is an end: Democritus, in his work On the End, cheerfulness, which he also called "well-being" (and he often adds: "For delight and lack of delight are the boundary of things at their height"); and Hecataeus, self-sufficiency; and Apollodotus of Cyzicus, leading of the soul, as Nausiphanes, freedom from astonishment — for this, he said, was called by Democritus "freedom from amazement." Further, besides these, Diotimus declared the all-completeness of goods, which is named "well-being," to be the end. Again, Antisthenes said freedom from conceit; and those called Annicereans, from the Cyrenaic succession, set down no defined end of the whole life, but said that of each action the proper end is the pleasure that results from the action. These Cyrenaics reject Epicurus' definition of pleasure — that is, the removal of pain — calling it the condition of a corpse; for we rejoice not only over pleasures, but also over companionships and ambitions. But Epicurus thinks that all joy of the soul comes about upon the flesh as primarily affected.

[139187] 21.131. And Metrodorus, in his work On the fact that the cause in ourselves toward happiness is greater than that from things, says: "What good of the soul is there other than the stable condition of the flesh and the trustworthy hope concerning it?"

[139439] 22.131. Indeed, Plato the philosopher says the end is twofold: the one participable and primary, existing in the very forms — which he also names "the Good"; and the one participating in that and receiving the likeness from it, which comes about among men who lay claim to virtue and the true philosophy. Wherefore Cleanthes too, in the second book On Pleasure, says that Socrates taught at every turn that the same man is both just and happy, and cursed the first man who divided the just from the advantageous, as having done an impious thing; for in truth impious are those who separate the advantageous from the just that is according to law. And Plato himself says that happiness is "to have the daimon well" (eu ton daimona echein), and that the governing part of our soul is called daimon, and that happiness is the most perfect and fullest good. And sometimes he calls it a life that is in agreement and harmony, and sometimes the most perfect according to virtue; and this he sets in the knowledge of the Good and in the being made like to God — declaring the likeness to be to become just and holy with prudence. For is it not so that some of our own people take it that man received the "according to the image" straightway at his generation, but is to receive the "according to the likeness" later, at his perfecting?

[140770] 22.132. So Plato, teaching that this likeness will come to the virtuous man with humility, somewhere interprets that saying: "Everyone who humbles himself shall be exalted." He says, at any rate, in the Laws: "God, then, as the ancient saying too has it, holding the beginning and the middle and the end of all things, brings them to fulfilment by a straight course, going round according to nature; and upon him there ever follows Justice, the avenger of those who fall short of the divine law." You see how he too brings caution toward the divine law? So he adds: "To which the man who is to be happy clings and follows, humble and adorned." Then, having joined the things that follow upon these, and having admonished by fear, he adds: "What action, then, is dear to and follows God? One, and having one ancient saying: that the like is dear to the like, being measured; but the unmeasured is dear neither to one another nor to the measured. The man, then, who is to become dear to God must of necessity become, so far as possible, such a one himself."

[141827] 22.133. And according to this account the temperate man among us is dear to God, for he is like; and the man not temperate is unlike and different. Having said that this doctrine is ancient, he hinted at the teaching that came to him from the law. And in the Theaetetus, having granted that the evils about mortal nature and this place go round of necessity, he adds: "Wherefore one must try to flee from here to there as quickly as possible; and the flight is likeness to God so far as possible; and the likeness is to become just and holy with prudence." And Speusippus, the nephew of Plato, says that happiness is a perfect state in those who are according to nature, or a state of goods, of which condition all men have appetite, but the good aim at freedom from disturbance. And the virtues would be productive of happiness. And Xenocrates of Calchedon renders happiness the possession of one's own virtue and of the power that serves it. Then, as that in which it comes to be, he plainly says the soul; as that by which, the virtues; as that out of which, as of parts, the noble actions and the earnest states and dispositions and motions and relations; and as those without which it is not, the bodily and external things. For Polemo, the pupil of Xenocrates, plainly wishes happiness to be self-sufficiency in all goods, or in the most and greatest. He dogmatizes, at any rate, that without virtue happiness can never exist, but that, apart from the bodily and external things, virtue is self-sufficient toward happiness.

[143358] 22.134. And let these things be so; but the refutations of the opinions stated will be set down in due time. For us ourselves it is set forth to come to an endless end, obeying the commandments — that is, God — and having lived according to them blamelessly and with knowledge, through the knowledge of the divine will. And the likeness, so far as possible, to right reason is the end; and the restoration, through the Son, to the perfect adoption, which ever glorifies the Father through the great High Priest, who deigned to call us brothers and joint-heirs. And the Apostle, briefly describing the end in the Epistle to the Romans, says: "But now, freed from sin and enslaved to God, you have your fruit unto sanctification, and the end eternal life." And, knowing hope to be twofold — the one expected, the other received back — he teaches that the restoration of hope is already the end; "for endurance," he says, "works proof, and proof hope; and hope does not put to shame, because the love of God is poured out in our hearts through the Holy Spirit given to us." On account of which love is also the restoration to the hope, which he elsewhere says is laid up for us as a rest.

[144545] 22.135. The like you would find in Ezekiel too, running thus: "The soul that sins, it shall die. And a man who becomes just and does judgment and righteousness, who has not eaten upon the mountains, and has not lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, and has not defiled his neighbour's wife, and has not approached a woman in the separation of her uncleanness" (for he does not wish the sowing of man to be outraged), "and, it says, has not oppressed a man, will restore the debtor's pledge, will not seize plunder, will give his bread to the hungry, and will clothe the naked, will not give his money at interest, and will take no excess, will turn his hand from injustice, will do true judgment between a man and his neighbour, will walk in my ordinances and has kept my ordinances to do truth — he is just, he shall surely live, says the Lord Adonai." And Isaiah, exhorting the believer toward gravity of life, but the gnostic toward attention, presenting that the virtue of man and of God is not the same, says thus: "Seek the Lord, and in finding him call upon him; and when he draws near to you, let the impious leave his ways, and the lawless man his ways, and let him turn to the Lord, and he will obtain mercy,"

[145784] 22.136. "for your thoughts are far from my thought." We, then, according to the noble Apostle, await from faith the hope of righteousness. "For in Christ neither circumcision avails anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith working through love." "And we desire each of you to show the same diligence toward the full assurance of hope," down to "having become, according to the order of Melchizedek, a high priest forever." The like to Paul the all-virtuous Wisdom too says: "But he who hears me will dwell upon hope, trusting"; for the restoration of hope is called, by the same name, "hope"; wherefore to the word "will dwell" it most nobly added "trusting," showing that such a one is at rest, having received back the hope which he hoped; wherefore it adds: "and he will be at ease, without fear, from every evil." And plainly the Apostle, in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, says outright: "Become imitators of me, as I also am of Christ" — that that might come about: "if you are mine, and I am Christ's, then become imitators of Christ, and Christ of God." The being made like to God, then, so far as was possible — to become just and holy with prudence — he lays down as the aim of faith, and as the end the restoration of the promise that is upon faith. From these, then, gush the springs of those who dogmatized about the end, which we have spoken of before. But enough of these.

[147178] 23.137. Since marriage seems to fall under pleasure and desire, we must treat of this too. Marriage, then, is the first union of man and woman according to law, for the sowing of legitimate children. So the comic poet Menander says: "For the begetting of legitimate children I give you my own daughter." And we inquire whether one should marry, which is one of the things named as somehow "in relation to something." For who should marry, and being in what condition, and whom, and being in what condition? For neither should everyone marry, nor at all times; but there is a time in which it is fitting, and a person to whom it befits, and an age up to which. So neither should everyone marry every woman, nor at all times, nor at all, nor without restraint, but the man in a certain condition, and such a woman as he ought, and when he ought, and for the sake of children, and one in all respects like-minded, and not loving the husband by force or necessity.

[148140] 23.138. Whence Abraham says concerning his wife, pretending her to be his sister: "She is my sister by my father, but not by my mother; and she became my wife also" — teaching that those of the same mother must not be taken in marriage. Let us run over the history in brief. Plato sets marriage among the external goods, providing for the immortality of our race and a kind of continuance, as it were, handed down like a torch through children's children. But Democritus declines marriage and the begetting of children, on account of the many unpleasantnesses from them and the distractions from more necessary things. And Epicurus too is ranged with him, and all who set the good in pleasure and freedom from disturbance, and further in freedom from grief. Further, according to those from the Stoa, marriage and child-rearing are indifferent, but according to those from the Peripatos a good. In sum, these, having brought their doctrines as far as the tongue, were enslaved to pleasures — some using concubines, some courtesans, and most of them boys. And that wise tetrad in the garden, with the courtesan, gloried in pleasure by their works.

[149288] 23.139. So they would not escape the Buzygian curse, all who, not approving certain things as advantageous to themselves, enjoin upon others to do these, or, again, the contrary. This the Scripture has shown briefly, saying: "What you hate, you shall not do to another." But those who approve marriage say: Nature has made us well-fitted for marriage, as is plain from the constitution of the bodies, both of the males and of the females; and they continually cry out the "Increase and multiply." And even if these things are so, yet let it seem shameful to them that man, fashioned by God, should be more incontinent than the irrational animals, which do not mingle with many and without restraint, but with one and of their own kind — such as the wild pigeons and the ring-doves and the race of turtle-doves and the like. Further, they say, the childless man falls short of the perfection according to nature, as not having set in his own place a successor of his own; for the perfect man is one who has made from himself the like, or rather, when he sees that one too having done the same — that is, when he has set the begotten into the same nature as the begetter.

[150459] 23.140. One must, then, by all means marry, both for the sake of the fatherland, and for the succession of children, and for the completing of the world, so far as in us lies. Since the poets too pity a certain marriage that is half-finished and childless, but bless the one with both parents flourishing. And the bodily diseases especially show marriage to be necessary; for the care of the wife and the intensity of her staying-by seem to surpass the perseverances of the other kindred and friends, by as much as she chooses to differ in sympathy and to attend most of all; and in truth, according to the Scripture, she is a necessary helper.

[151105] 23.141. So the comic poet Menander, having run down marriage, but setting against it also the useful things, answers the one who said: "I am ill-disposed toward the matter." "B: For you take it the wrong way." Then he adds: "You see in it the troublesome things and those that will grieve you, but you do not look upon the goods," and the rest. And marriage helps also in the case of those advanced in time, presenting the wife who cares, and rearing the children from her as nurses of old age. "And children, to a man who has died, are tokens of fame; like corks they hold up the net, saving the spun line of flax from the deep," according to the tragic Sophocles. And the lawgivers do not allow those who have not married to seek the greatest offices. So the lawgiver of the Spartans set a penalty not only for celibacy, but for bad marriage and late marriage and solitary living. And the noble Plato commands that the man who has not married pay the maintenance of a wife to the public treasury, and render the fitting expenses to the magistrates. For if men who do not marry will not beget children, they will, so far as in them lies, make a scarcity of men, and dissolve both the cities and the world that is from them.

[152331] 23.142. And such a thing is impious, of men dissolving the divine generation. And it is, besides, unmanly and weak to flee the common life with wife and children. For of that whose loss is an evil, the possession is altogether a good; and so it is with the rest too. But indeed the loss of children is among the greatest evils, they say. The possession of children, then, is a good. And if this, then marriage too. "And without a father," he says, "there could never be a child, and without a mother not even the conception of a child."

[152869] 23.143. And marriage makes a father, as a man makes a mother. So Homer too sets it as the greatest prayer, "a husband and a house" — but not simply, but "with noble like-mindedness"; for the marriage of others is of one mind toward soft living, but that of those who philosophize leads to the concord according to reason — the marriage that bids the women adorn not their form but their character, and does not enjoin the men to use their wives as mistresses, having made the outrage of bodies their aim, but to win marriage as a help in the whole of life and the best temperance. For of wheat, I think, and of barley too, cast down at their proper seasons, more precious is the man who is sown, for whom all things grow; and those seeds the husbandmen cast down sober. Everything filthy and defiled in conduct, then, must be purified away from marriage, that we be not reproached with the union of the irrational animals as agreeing more with nature than human wedlock, according to the agreed definition.

[153877] 23.144. Some of them, at any rate, having mounted at the season commanded, straightway depart, leaving the creation to the administration. And by the tragic poets Polyxena, though she is being slaughtered, is recorded — even dying, yet to have taken much forethought to fall decently, "hiding what must be hidden from the eyes of males." And for her too the calamity was a marriage. To fall under, then, and to yield to the passions is the utmost slavery, just as, indeed, to master these is the only freedom. So the divine Scripture says that those who transgress the commandments are "sold to strangers" — that is, to sins unsuited to nature — until, turning back, they repent.

[154558] 23.145. Marriage, then, must be kept pure, like some sacred image, from the things that defile it — by those who rise from sleep with the Lord, and go to sleep with thanksgiving and prayer, "both when you lie down and when the holy light comes," calling the Lord to witness throughout the whole of our life — having gained godliness in the soul, and bringing temperance even to the body. For it is in truth dear to God to lead orderliness by the hand from the tongue to the works; and the way to shamelessness is shameful speech, and the end of both is shameful deed. And that the Scripture counsels marrying, and never permits departing from the wedlock, it plainly legislates: "You shall not put away your wife, except for the matter of fornication"; and it reckons it adultery to marry again while either of the separated is living.

[155395] 23.146. And it shows a woman unsuspected of slander by her not adorning herself, nor decking herself beyond what is fitting, but devoting herself earnestly to prayers and supplications; guarding against the many goings-out of the house, and shutting herself off so far as possible from the sight of those to whom she does not belong, holding housekeeping more important than untimely chatter. "And he who takes a divorced woman commits adultery," it says; "for if anyone puts away his wife, he makes her commit adultery" — that is, he forces her to be adulterated. And not only the man who puts her away becomes the cause of this, but also the man who takes her in, furnishing the woman an occasion of sinning; for if he did not receive her, she would turn back to her husband.

[156174] 23.147. What, then, does the law do? For the checking of the proneness of the passions, it commands the adulteress, when convicted of this, to be put to death; and if she be a priest's daughter, it commands her to be given over to fire. And the adulterer too is stoned, but not in the same place, that not even their death be common. The law does not, then, fight with the Gospel, but agrees with it. For how should it not, the supplier of both being one, the Lord? For she who has played the harlot lives indeed to sin, but has died to the commandments; while she who has repented, as though reborn through the turning of her life, has a regeneration of life, the old harlot having died, and the woman born according to repentance having come again into life. The Spirit bears witness to what has been said, through Ezekiel, saying: "I do not wish the death of the sinner, so much as his turning back." So they are stoned, as having died, through hardness of heart, to the law which they did not obey; but for the priest's daughter the punishment is intensified, because "to whom more was given, of him will also more be required." Let this second Miscellany too be here circumscribed for us, on account of the length and multitude of the chapters.