WORK: Stromata  (slug: clement-of-alexandria-stromata-694383)

CHAPTER: 03-book-3



[109500] 18.108. After which creation, by virtue of housekeeping and faith in Christ, she is a helper; and still more plainly he says: "To those who have married I command—not I, but the Lord—that a wife should not be separated from her husband (but if she is separated, let her remain unmarried or be reconciled to her husband), and that a husband should not put away his wife. But to the rest I say—I, not the Lord: if any brother..."—down to—"but now they are holy." What do those say to these things who run down the law and marriage, as if it were permitted only according to the law, and not also according to the new covenant? What can those say to these ordinances who loathe sowing and generation? Since indeed he legislates that the bishop who presides well over his house should lead the Church, and he establishes the household of the Lord by the wedlock of one wife.

[110372] 18.109. "All things, then, are pure to the pure," he says; "but to the defiled and unbelieving nothing is pure, but both their mind and their conscience are defiled." And concerning pleasure that is contrary to the rule, "Do not be deceived," he says: "neither fornicators nor idolaters nor adulterers nor effeminate nor sodomites nor covetous nor thieves, no drunkards, no revilers, no robbers, shall inherit the kingdom of God. And such were some of us, but we were washed"—we who had been in these things. But others, washing into this lewdness, baptize from prudence into fornication, laying down as doctrine the gratifying of pleasures and passions, teaching men to become incontinent instead of prudent, and resting their hope on the shamelessness of the genitals; making their pupils outcasts of the kingdom of God, and not enrolled, having undertaken, under the name of falsely-called knowledge, the journey into the outer darkness. "Finally, brothers, whatever things are true, whatever dignified, whatever just, whatever pure, whatever lovely, whatever of good report; if there be any virtue and if any praise, think on these things. The things you have both learned and received and heard and seen in me, these do; and the God of peace shall be with you."

[111640] 18.110. And Peter in his epistle says the like: "So that your faith and hope are toward God, having purified your souls in obedience to the truth, as children of obedience, not conformed to the former desires in your ignorance, but as He who called you is holy, be you also yourselves holy in all your conduct; because it is written, 'You shall be holy, for I am holy.'" But indeed the controversy with the falsely-named pretenders to knowledge, having become necessary, has led us beyond what is needful and stretched out our discourse to a great length. Wherefore this is where the third of our notebooks of gnostic memoranda concerning the true philosophy, the Stromateus, comes to its end.