WORK: Stromata  (slug: clement-of-alexandria-stromata-694383)

CHAPTER: 06-book-6



[108836] 12.101. This, then, was the laughter of Sarah, when the birth of a son was announced to her, not disbelieving the angel, I think, but ashamed of that intercourse, through which she was about to become the mother of a son. And was it not from then that Abraham, when he was in danger before the king of Egypt on account of Sarah's beauty, properly called her sister and of the same father, but not yet of the same mother? To those, then, who have repented of sins, and have not firmly believed, God grants their requests through their prayers; but to those who live sinlessly and gnostically, he gives upon their merely thinking. For instance, to Anna, upon her merely thinking of the child, was granted the conception of Samuel. "Ask," says the Scripture, "and I will do; think, and I will give." For we have received that God is the knower of hearts, not conjecturing, as we men do, from the movement of the soul, nor again from the result (for it is ridiculous so to think); nor, as the architect, when the work was made, praised it, so did God, having so made the light, then, having seen it, say it was good; but he, even before making it, knowing what it would be, praised this; and "it came to be" by the power of him who makes it good from above, through the beginningless purpose, the thing that should be good in actuality. For instance, he said beforehand that the thing to come should already be good, the phrase, by the inversion of order, hiding the truth.

[110307] 12.102. The gnostic, then, prays even in thought every hour, being made familiar with God through love. And first he will ask remission of sins; and after the no longer sinning, the being able yet to do good and to understand the whole creation and dispensation of the Lord, that so, being pure in heart, he may be initiated, through the recognition that is through the Son of God, into the blessed vision face to face — having hearkened to the Scripture that says, "Fasting with prayer is good." And fastings show forth abstentions from all evils whatsoever, both in deed and in word and in the very thought. As it seems, then, righteousness is four-square, equal and like on every side — in word, in deed, in abstention from evils, in beneficence, in gnostic perfection, in no way at all limping, lest it appear unjust and unequal. As, then, one is just, this man is altogether faithful too; but as faithful, he is not yet also just — I mean the righteousness that is by advance and perfection, according to which the gnostic is called just.

[111352] 12.103. For instance, to Abraham, having become faithful, it was reckoned for righteousness, when he had advanced to the greater and more perfect thing than faith. For not he who only abstains from the evil deed is just, unless he work besides both the doing good and the knowing on what account some things are to be abstained from and others done. "Through the weapons of righteousness on the right hand and on the left," says the apostle, the just man is conveyed to the highest inheritance, hedged about by the one and working by the other. For the mere shelter of the whole armour and the abstention from sins is not sufficient for perfection, unless it take besides the work of righteousness, the working unto beneficence. Then the ambidextrous and gnostic among us is revealed in righteousness, glorified already even here, as Moses was in his face — which, in what went before, we said is the characteristic property of the just soul. For as the styptic of the dye, abiding in the wool, gives it its peculiarity and its difference from the rest of the wool, so too in the case of the soul the labour has passed by, but the noble remains; and the sweet is left behind, but the shameful is wiped off. For these are the characteristic qualities of either soul, by which the one is known as glorified, the other as condemned.

[112683] 12.104. Yes, and as upon Moses, from his righteous doing and his continual converse with the God who spoke to him, a certain glorified tint settled upon his face, so too upon the just soul a certain divine power of goodness, in respect of oversight and of prophecy and of governing energy, drawing near, as it were the radiance of an intellectual light, like the warmth of the sun, leaves its mark — a manifest seal of righteousness, a light united to the soul through undivided love, the soul being borne of God. Here the likeness to the saving God springs up to the gnostic, in so far as is lawful for human nature, he becoming perfect "as the Father," it says, "in the heavens." It is he who said, "Little children, yet a little while I am with you"; since God too, not in respect of his being good by nature, in this remains blessed and incorruptible, neither having troubles nor giving them to another; but working good in his own way, being God truly and the good Father, being and becoming in unceasing beneficences, he abides inviolably in the sameness of goodness. For what profit is there of a good thing that does not work nor do good?

[113831] 13.105. He, then, who has first moderated his passions and trained himself toward impassibility, and grown into the beneficence of gnostic perfection, is equal to the angels here; and being already luminous, and shining as the sun by reason of his good-doing, he hastens, through just knowledge, by love of God, to the holy abode, like the apostles — who became apostles not because they were elect by any peculiar excellence of nature (since Judas too was chosen with them), but because they were such as could become apostles, being chosen by him who foresees even the ends. For instance, Matthias, who was not chosen with them, having shown himself worthy to become an apostle, is set in the room of Judas.

[114542] 13.106. It is possible, then, even now for those who have trained themselves in the Lord's commandments, having lived perfectly and gnostically according to the Gospel, to be enrolled in the election of the apostles. Such a one is truly an elder of the church and a true deacon of the will of God, if he do and teach the things of the Lord — not ordained by men, nor counted just because he is an elder, but enrolled in the presbytery because he is just; and even if here on earth he be not honoured with the first seat, he shall sit on the four-and-twenty thrones, judging the people, as John says in the Revelation. For one in truth is the saving covenant, reaching from the foundation of the world to us, supposed to be different in the giving according to different generations and times. For it follows that there is one unchangeable gift of salvation, from one God through one Lord, benefiting in many ways; for which cause the middle wall is taken away that divides the Greek from the Jew, into a peculiar people.

[115564] 13.107. And so both come into the unity of the faith, and the election out of both is one. And of the elect, it says, the more elect are those who, by the perfect knowledge, are culled out of the church itself and honoured with the most magnificent glory, judges and governors alike, of Jews and of Greeks, the four-and-twenty, the grace being doubled. Since the advances here in the church, of bishops, elders, deacons, are imitations, I think, of angelic glory, and of that dispensation which the Scriptures say awaits those who, following in the footsteps of the apostles, have lived in perfection of righteousness according to the Gospel. These, caught up in clouds, the apostle writes, shall first minister, then be enrolled in the presbytery by advance of glory (for glory differs from glory), until they grow into perfect manhood.

[116403] 14.108. Such men, according to David, shall rest in the holy mountain of God, the highest church, in which are gathered the philosophers of God, the true Israelites, the pure in heart, in whom is no guile — who have not remained in the hebdomad of rest, but have looked over, by the good-doing of divine likeness, into the inheritance of the beneficence of the ogdoad, giving themselves to the pure beholding of insatiable contemplation. "There are also other sheep," says the Lord, "which are not of this fold" — held worthy of another fold and abode, in proportion to the faith. "But my sheep hear my voice," understanding gnostically the commandments; and this is to receive them high-mindedly and worthily, together with the recompense and the joint sequence of the works. So that, when we hear "Your faith has saved you," we do not take him to say that those who have in any way believed shall be saved, unless the works too follow. For instance, he spoke this voice to Jews only, who had lived lawfully and blamelessly, to whom faith in the Lord alone was lacking.

[117475] 14.109. Such a one, then, could not be faithful with intemperance; but even if he should not go out from the flesh, he must put off his passions, that he may be able to come into his own abode. And it is more to know than to believe, as indeed it is more, after being saved, to be held worthy of the highest honour. The believer, then, through much instruction having put off the passions, passes over to the abode better than the former, bearing as his greatest chastisement the peculiar mark of repentance for what he sinned after the baptism. For he is grieved yet the more, either at not yet, or at not at all, attaining what he sees others have partaken of. And besides, he is ashamed of his stumblings, which indeed are the greatest chastisements to the believer. For good is the righteousness of God, and just is his goodness. And even if the punishments cease somewhere, upon the paying out of the requital and the cleansing of each, those found worthy of the other fold have a great abiding grief — the grief at not being together with those glorified for righteousness.

[118556] 14.110. For instance, Solomon, calling the gnostic wise, says this concerning those who marvel at the dignity of the abode: "For they shall see the end of the wise, and shall not understand what the Lord purposed concerning him, and for what he secured him; and over his glory they shall say, 'This was he whom we once had for a laughing-stock and for a byword of reproach, we the foolish; we reckoned his life madness and his end dishonourable. How was he counted among the sons of God, and is his lot among the saints?'" Not only the believer, then, but the Gentile too is judged most justly. For since God knew, being foreknower, that this man would not believe, none the less, that he might receive the perfection that lay within his own reach, he gave him philosophy, but before faith; and he gave the sun and the moon and the stars for worship, which God made for the Gentiles, says the law, that they might not, becoming utterly godless, be utterly destroyed. But those who, even in this commandment, became thankless, giving heed to carved images, are judged, unless they repent — some because, being able, they were not willing to believe in God, others because, willing, they did not work it out to become faithful;

[119783] 14.111. yes, and those too who, from the worship of the stars, did not run back up to the maker of them. For this was the way given to the Gentiles, to look up to God through the worship of the stars. But those who would not abide upon these stars given to them, but fell away even from these to stones and wood, "were reckoned as chaff," it says, "and as a drop from a bucket" — superfluous unto salvation, those cast off from the body. As, then, the merely saving is of the middle things, but the rightly and fittingly is a setting-right, so too every act of the gnostic is a setting-right, but of the merely faithful a middle act, not yet performed according to reason, nor yet set right according to attention; but every act of the Gentile, on the contrary, is sinful. For not the merely faring well, but the making one's acts toward a certain aim and the working with reason, the Scriptures set forth as fitting.

[120702] 14.112. As, then, lyres are not to be handled by those inexperienced in lyre-playing, nor flutes by those inexperienced in flute-playing, so neither are affairs to be handled by those who have not received knowledge and do not know how to use them throughout their whole life. The contest for freedom, then, is contended not only in wars by the athletes of war, but also in symposia and on the bed and in the law-courts by those anointed with the Word, ashamed to become captives of pleasure: "Never will I exchange virtue for unjust gain." And unjust gain outright is pleasure and grief, longing and fear, and, in a word, the passions of the soul, whose present delight is grievous for the time to come. "For what profit, if you gain the world," it says, "but lose your soul?" It is plain, then, that those who do not accomplish the noble deeds do not even know what is profitable to themselves. And if this be so, neither are they able rightly to pray and to receive from God the good things, being ignorant of the truly good things; nor, if they received them, would they perceive the gift, nor would they enjoy worthily that which they did not know, both from inexperience of the using well of what is given, and from the great unlearning, not yet having known how the divine gifts are to be used. And unlearning is the cause of ignorance.

[122047] 14.113. And it seems to me to be the boast of a boastful soul, yet a soul of good conscience, to declare to the things that befall by circumstance: "Against these let them contrive what they will; for the good is with me, and the just shall be my ally, and I shall never be caught doing noble deeds." And this good conscience preserves both holiness toward God and righteousness toward men, keeping the soul pure with august thoughts and pure words and just deeds. Thus, having received the Lord's power, the soul practises to be God, holding that nothing else is evil except ignorance and the working that is not according to right reason, and ever giving thanks for all things to God, through just hearing and divine reading, through true inquiry, through holy offering, through blessed prayer; praising, hymning, blessing, singing. Such a soul is never at any season separated from God. With reason, then, it was said, "And those who trust in him shall understand truth, and the faithful in love shall abide with him." You see what things wisdom discourses concerning the gnostics.

[123133] 14.114. Proportionately, then, the abodes too are various according to the worth of those who have believed. For instance, Solomon: "For there shall be given him the choice grace of faith, and a lot in the temple of the Lord, more pleasing." For the comparative shows the things that lie beneath in the temple of God, which is the whole church; and leaves us to conceive also the superlative, where the Lord is. And these three elect abodes the numbers in the Gospel hint at — the thirty and the sixty and the hundred. And the perfect inheritance belongs to those who come to perfect manhood, according to the image of the Lord; but the likeness is not, as some hold, that according to the human shape (for godless is this notion), nor again that according to virtue, which is toward the first cause (for impious too is this rendering, of those who expect the same virtue to belong to man and to God the Almighty); "you supposed," it says, "lawlessness, that I shall be like you." But "it is enough for the disciple to become as the teacher," says the teacher. According to the likeness of God, then, he who has been ranked into adoption and friendship of God comes to be, by the joint inheritance, of the lords and gods, if, as the Lord himself taught, he be perfected according to the Gospel.

[124429] 15.115. The gnostic, then, takes the closer likeness — the mind of the teacher; which the teacher, conceiving, both enjoined and counselled upon the prudent and temperate, understanding it as the teacher willed, and having taken up privately the magnificent conception — having taught worthily upon the housetops those able to be built up loftily, and having begun the working of the things said according to the example of his manner of life. For he enjoined things possible; and the kingly and Christian man must in truth be ruling and leading, since we have been appointed to be lords not over the wild beasts without only, but also over the savage passions within ourselves. By attention, then, as it seems, to the evil and the good life the gnostic is saved, understanding and working more than the scribes and Pharisees. "Bend the bow, and prosper, and reign," David writes, "for the sake of truth and meekness and righteousness, and your right hand shall guide you wonderfully" — that is, the Lord. "Who, then, is wise and shall understand these things? Prudent, and shall know them? For straight are the ways of the Lord," says the prophet, showing that the gnostic alone is able to understand and make plain the things said hiddenly by the Spirit. "And he that is prudent shall keep silence at that season," says the Scripture — plainly, from declaring them to the unworthy; for the Lord says, "He that has ears to hear, let him hear," saying that the hearing and understanding belong not to all.

[125936] 15.116. For instance, David writes, "Dark water in the clouds of the airs"; "from the brightness before him the clouds passed through, hail and coals of fire" — teaching that the holy words are hidden. And he shows that to the gnostics they are sent down from God transparent and far-shining, like harmless hail; but dark to the many, like coals quenched out of fire, which, unless one kindle and rekindle them, will not flame nor give light. "The Lord, then," it says, "gives me a tongue of discipline, to know in season when it is needful to speak a word" — not in martyrdom only, but also that by question and answer; "and the discipline of the Lord opens my mouth." It belongs to the gnostic, then, both to know how to use the word, and when, and how, and to whom.

[126706] 15.117. And already the apostle too, saying "after the elements of the world and not after Christ," delivers the Greek teaching to be elementary, but that according to Christ perfect, as we showed before. For instance, the wild olive is grafted into the fatness of the olive, and indeed grows of the same kind with the cultivated olives; for the thing implanted uses the tree in which it is planted instead of earth; and all the plants together have sprung up from a divine command. Wherefore, even if the wild olive be a wild thing, yet it crowns the Olympic victors; and the elm, leading the vine up to a height, teaches it to bear good fruit. And we see now the wild trees drawing more nourishment to themselves through their not being able to digest. The wild, then, are less digestive than the cultivated, and the cause of their being wild is the lack of digestive power.

[127584] 15.118. The grafted olive, then, takes more nourishment, by reason of the wild thing being implanted; but, being of this kind, it is accustomed to digest the nourishment, being made like to the fatness of the cultivated. So too the philosopher, likened to the wild olive, having much that is undigested, by reason of being inquisitive and easy to follow up and craving the fatness of the truth — if he take besides the divine power through faith, planted in the kindly and cultivated knowledge, like the wild olive grafted into the truly noble and merciful Word, both digests the nourishment delivered and becomes a good olive. For the grafting makes the worthless noble, and forces the unfruitful to become fruitful, by the husbandman's art and the gnostic science.

[128352] 15.119. They say, then, that the grafting comes about in four ways: one, by which the thing grafted must be fitted between the wood and the bark, as the unlearned of the Gentiles are catechized, receiving the word on the surface; another, when, having split the wood, they thrust into it the noble shoot, which happens in the case of those who have philosophized — for, their doctrines being cleft, the recognition of truth comes about in them; thus too, the old Scripture being opened to the Jews, the new and noble shoot of the olive is grafted in. The third grafting touches the wild and the heretics, who are brought over to the truth by force; for, having shaved off each side with a sharp knife to a wedge, until they bare the pith, but do not wound it, they bind them to one another. And a fourth manner of grafting is that called inoculation; for from a noble stem an eye is taken off, with the bark around it cut round about, about a hand's-breadth in length; then the stem is shaved off, at an eye equal to the cut round about, and so the eye is set in, bound about with cords and smeared with clay, the eye being kept unhurt and undefiled. This is a kind of gnostic teaching, able to look through into things; and indeed this kind is most useful even in the case of cultivated trees.

[129648] 15.120. And the grafting spoken of by the apostle, into the good olive, may be into Christ himself, the savage and unbelieving nature being planted into Christ — that is, into those who believe in Christ; but it is better that the faith of each be grafted into the very soul. For the Holy Spirit too is somehow thus transplanted, distributed according to the circumscription of each without circumscription. And concerning knowledge Solomon, discoursing, says this: "Bright and unfading is wisdom, and easily beheld by those who love her; she anticipates those who desire her, to be known beforehand. He who rises early to her shall not labour; for to have thought about her is the perfection of prudence, and he who has watched for her sake shall quickly be free of care; for she goes about seeking those worthy of her" (for knowledge is not for all), "and in their paths she shows herself to them graciously." And the paths are the conduct of life and the manifold variety according to the covenants. For instance, he adds:

[130675] 15.121. "and in every thought she meets them," being beheld variously — through every kind of education, plainly. Then he adds, setting forth the perfecting love, by a syllogistic argument and true premises, most demonstrative and true, bringing on somewhat thus the conclusion: "For her most true beginning is the craving of education" (that is, of knowledge), "and the care of education is love, and love is the keeping of her laws, and the giving heed to her laws is the confirmation of incorruption, and incorruption makes one near to God. The craving of wisdom, then, leads up to a kingdom." For he teaches, I think, that true education is a craving of knowledge, and the practice of education is established through love of knowledge. And love is the keeping of the commandments that lead up to knowledge, and the keeping of them is the confirmation of the commandments, through which incorruption comes about; and incorruption makes one near to God. If, then, love of knowledge makes incorruptible and leads up the kingly man near to God the King, one must seek knowledge unto discovery. And inquiry is an impulse toward apprehension, finding out, by certain signs, the thing that lies before it; and discovery is the end and rest of inquiry, having come to be in apprehension — which is knowledge. And this is properly discovery, being the apprehension of inquiry. And a sign they say is the leading or accompanying or following.

[132114] 15.122. Of the inquiry, then, concerning God, the discovery is the teaching that comes through the Son; and a sign that our Saviour himself is that very Son of God are the prophecies that went before his coming, proclaiming him, and the testimonies concerning him that accompanied his sensible birth, and besides these the powers proclaimed and openly shown after his ascension. A proof, then, that the truth is among us, is the very fact that the Son of God himself taught. For if in every inquiry these universals are found, person and thing, the truly real truth is shown to be among us alone, since the person of the truth that is shown is the Son of God, and the thing is the power of faith, which abounds over everyone whatsoever that opposes, even over the whole world standing in array. But since this has been confessed to be confirmed by everlasting deeds and words, and is already manifest, everyone worthy of chastisement, not of contradiction, who thinks there is no providence and is truly godless — but it lies before us, by doing what and living in what manner we may come to the recognition of God the Almighty, and how, honouring the divine, we may become causes of salvation to ourselves; having learned and known, not from the sophists, but from God himself, the thing well-pleasing to him, we set our hand to do the just and holy thing. And our being saved is well-pleasing to him; and salvation comes about through good-doing and through knowledge, of both of which the Lord is teacher.

[133624] 15.123. If, then, even according to Plato it is only possible to learn the true thing either from God or from the offspring of God, with reason, culling our testimonies from the divine oracles, we boast to be taught the truth through the Son of God, prophesied first and afterward made plain; and the things that help toward the discovery of the truth are not themselves to be rejected. Philosophy, at any rate, proclaiming providence, and the recompense of the happy life and the chastisement of the unhappy, theologizes in a comprehensive way, but no longer keeps the things to exactness and in particular. For neither concerning the Son of God nor concerning the dispensation according to providence does it treat as we do; for it did not know the worship that is according to God. Wherefore the heresies of the barbarian philosophy, even if they speak of one God and hymn Christ, speak comprehensively, not to the truth; for they both invent another God and receive Christ not as the prophecies deliver him. But their false doctrines are nothing against us, so long as they oppose the conduct according to the truth.

[134746] 15.124. For instance, Paul circumcised Timothy on account of those who believed from among the Jews, that the catechumens from the law should not fall away from the faith while he was dissolving the things assumed too fleshly out of the law, knowing exactly that circumcision does not justify; for he confessed to become all things to all men, by accommodation preserving the authoritative doctrines, that he might gain all. And Daniel bore the collar before the king of the Persians, not overlooking the affliction of the people. Liars, then, in truth are not those who accommodate themselves through the dispensation of salvation, nor those who err about some particular matter, but those who fall away in the most authoritative things and reject the Lord as far as in them lies, robbing the Lord of his true teaching, those who do not speak and deliver the Scriptures worthily of God and the Lord. For a deposit rendered to God is the understanding and joint training, according to the Lord's teaching through his apostles, of the godly tradition; "and what you hear in the ear" (hiddenly, that is, and in a mystery; for such things are allegorized as being spoken into the ear), "preach upon the housetops," it says — receiving them high-mindedly and delivering them loftily, and making the Scriptures plain according to the rule of truth. For neither the prophecy nor the Saviour himself uttered the divine mysteries simply so, as to be easily caught by the chance comer, but discoursed in parables.

[136252] 15.125. The apostles, at any rate, say of the Lord that he spoke all things in parables, and without a parable spoke he nothing to them. And if all things came to be through him, and without him not one thing came to be, then prophecy and the law too came to be through him, and were spoken in parables through him. "But all things are right before those who understand," says the Scripture — that is, before all those who, receiving the interpretation of the Scriptures made plain by him according to the ecclesiastical rule, preserve it. And the ecclesiastical rule is the concord and the symphony of the law and the prophets with the covenant delivered at the Lord's coming. Knowledge, then, is followed by prudence, and temperance by prudence. For let it be said that prudence is a divine knowledge, and exists in those made gods; but temperance is mortal, and exists in men who philosophize, but are not yet wise. For instance, if virtue is divine, the knowledge of it is divine too; but temperance is, as it were, an imperfect prudence, craving prudence, and working laboriously and not contemplatively — as righteousness too, being human, is a common thing, and has subsided below holiness, which is the divine righteousness. For to the perfect man righteousness is not in civil contracts nor in the prohibition of the law, but from his own proper doing and from the love toward God.

[137644] 15.126. For many causes, then, the Scriptures hide the sense: first, that we may be inquirers and ever wakeful to the discovery of the saving words; next, because it was not fitting for all to understand, lest they be harmed by taking otherwise the things spoken savingly by the Holy Spirit. Wherefore the holy mysteries of the prophecies, kept for the elect of men and for those approved from faith unto knowledge, are veiled in the parables. For the character of the Scriptures is parabolic, since the Lord too, not being of the world, came among men as one of the world. For he wore all virtue, and was about to lead up the man bred together with the world, through knowledge, to the things of mind and authoritative, from world to world. Wherefore too he used the metaphorical Scripture; for such is the parable, a discourse, from something not the chief thing, but like to the chief thing, leading the understanding one to the true and chief thing — or, as some say, a phrasing that sets forth, through other things, with energy, the things properly said.

[138706] 15.127. And by now too the whole dispensation prophesied concerning the Lord seems, in truth, a parable to those who have not known the truth, when one says, and others hear, that the Son of God, of him who made all things, having taken flesh and been carried in a virgin's womb (in respect of which his sensible little body has come to be), and consequently, in respect of his having become this, having suffered and risen — to the Jews a stumbling-block, to the Greeks foolishness, as the apostle says. But the Scriptures, opened, and showing to those who have ears the very truth, namely what the flesh suffered which the Lord took up, proclaim the power and wisdom of God. And above all, the parabolic kind of Scripture, being most ancient, as we set forth, with reason abounded especially among the prophets, that so the Holy Spirit might show that the philosophers among the Greeks and the wise men among the other barbarians had been ignorant of the coming of the Lord that should be, and of the mystic teaching that should be delivered by him. With reason, then, the prophecy, proclaiming the Lord — that it might not seem, by speaking against the suppositions of the many, to blaspheme to some — shaped the things signified by voices able to lead also to other thoughts. For instance, all the prophets who foretold the coming of the Lord, and with it the holy mysteries, were persecuted and slain, as the Lord himself too, making plain their Scriptures, and his acquaintance who proclaimed the word, likewise after him hazarded their life.

[140256] 15.128. Whence Peter too, in the Preaching, speaking of the apostles, says: "But we, having unrolled the books of the prophets which we had, some through parables, some through riddles, and some authoritatively and in so many words naming Christ Jesus, found both his coming and his death and the cross and all the other chastisements which the Jews wrought against him, and his rising and his ascension into the heavens before Jerusalem was founded — even as all these things were written, what he must suffer, and what shall be after him. Having recognized these things, then, we believed in God through the things written concerning him." And a little after he adds again, setting forth that the prophecies came about by divine providence, thus: "For we knew that God truly ordained them, and we say nothing apart from Scripture."

[141091] 15.129. And the dialect of the Hebrews has, then, some other peculiarities too, as each of the rest, containing a certain principle that shows forth a national character. For they define a dialect as a speech wrought out by a national character. But it is not by those dialects that the prophecy is made known. For among the Greeks the so-called changes of figure make their concealments on purpose, after the image of the prophecies among us — being referred . . . except that it is shown to be a voluntary turning-aside from the straight, made in metrical or extemporaneous phrasing. For a figure is a phrasing transferred from its proper to its improper sense, for the sake of construction and for the usefulness of the phrasing in the discourse. But the prophecy does not at all pursue the figures of speech for the beauty of the phrasing; rather, because the truth is not for all, it is concealed in many ways, raising the light only upon those initiated unto knowledge, those who seek the truth through love.

[142107] 15.130. There is said, then, to be a kind of prophecy, the proverb, according to the barbarian philosophy; and the parable too is so called, and the riddle besides these. But also it is called wisdom, and, as something different from it, education; and again "words of prudence" and "turnings of words" and "true righteousness"; and again "teaching of how to set straight a judgement," and "cunning" coming to the guileless by education, and "perception" and "thought" coming to the newly catechized. "He who has heard these prophets," it says, "being wise, shall be the wiser, and the intelligent shall acquire governance, and shall understand a parable and a dark saying, and the sayings of the wise, and riddles." And if it came about that the Greek dialects were named from Hellen the son of Zeus, surnamed of Deucalion, it is easy to see, from the times which we set forth above, by how many generations the dialects current among the Greeks are later than the Hebrew tongue.

[143089] 15.131. And as the Scripture goes forward, marking the aforesaid figures used by the prophet at each section, we shall set them forth, showing, with art, the gnostic conduct according to the rule of truth. For did not, in the vision, the power, appearing to Hermas in the figure of the church, give the book to be transcribed, which she willed to be announced to the elect? And this he transcribed letter by letter, he says, not finding how to complete the syllables. And it showed, then, that the Scripture is plain to all, taken according to the bare reading, and that this is the faith, holding the order of the elements; wherefore too the reading "to the letter" is allegorized. But the gnostic unfolding of the Scriptures, when the faith has already advanced, we take to be likened to the reading according to the syllables. But Isaiah the prophet too is bidden to take a new book and write certain things, the Spirit prophesying that the holy knowledge, through the interpretation of the Scriptures, would later be — being, up to that season, unwritten, because not yet known; for it had been spoken from the beginning only to those who understand. For instance, when the Saviour had taught the apostles, the tradition, unwritten of the written, is now delivered even to us, written on new hearts according to the renewing of the book, by the power of God.

[144453] 15.132. So the most learned of the Greeks consecrate to Hermes, whom indeed they say is the Word, on account of the interpretation, the fruit of the pomegranate; for the Word holds much within. With reason, then, Joshua the son of Nun saw Moses, when he was taken up, double — the one with angels, the other deemed worthy of burial upon the mountains, about the ravines. And Joshua saw this sight below, lifted up in spirit, together with Caleb. But both did not behold alike; for the one came down the more quickly, drawing much weight with him; but the other, having come down after, recounted the glory he had beheld, being able to look through more than the other, as being also purer — the history showing, I think, that knowledge is not for all, since some look upon the body of the Scriptures, the words and the names, as the body of Moses; while others look through to the meanings and the things shown forth by the names, inquiring after the Moses who was with angels. For instance, of those who called upon the Lord himself, the most said, "Son of David, have mercy on me," but few knew him as Son of God, like Peter, whom he blessed, because flesh and blood revealed not the truth to him, but his Father in heaven — showing that the gnostic recognizes the Son of the Almighty, not through his flesh that was conceived, but through the very power of the Father. Not only, then, to those who chance simply upon it is the acquiring of the truth difficult, but even to those whose own the science is — to these too the contemplation is not given all at once, the history about Moses teaches, until, accustomed to look back, as the Hebrews looked at the glory of Moses, and the saints of Israel at the visions of angels, so too we may be able to look at the flashings of the truth.

[146242] 16.133. And let the Decalogue, by the way, be set forth for us as an example for gnostic clearness. And that the decad is holy, it is superfluous now to say. And if the tables that were written are a work of God, they will be found showing forth the natural creation; for "the finger of God" is understood as the power of God, by which the creation of heaven and earth is perfected, of both of which the tables are to be understood as symbols. For the writing and shaping of God, laid up in the table, is the creation of the world. And the Decalogue, after a heavenly image, contains sun and moon, stars, clouds, light, wind, water, air, darkness, fire. This is the natural decalogue of heaven. And the image of earth contains men, cattle, creeping things, beasts, and of the things in the water, fishes and sea-monsters; and again, of the winged things likewise, both the flesh-eating and those that use mild food; and of plants likewise the fruit-bearing and the unfruitful. This is the natural decalogue of earth. And the ark that contained these would be the knowledge of things divine and human, and wisdom. And perhaps these two tables might be the prophecy of two covenants.

[147425] 16.134. They were renewed, then, mystically, ignorance and sin at the same time abounding. Twice over, as it seems, the commandments are written for two spirits — the ruling and the subject — since the flesh lusts against the spirit and the spirit against the flesh. And there is also a certain decad about the man himself: the five senses, and the faculty of speech, and the faculty of generation, and this eighth, the spiritual one in respect of the moulding; the ninth, the ruling part of the soul; and the tenth, the characteristic property of the Holy Spirit that comes through faith. And besides these, the legislation appears to enjoin upon ten parts of man: the sight and the hearing and the smell, the touch and the taste, and the organs that minister to these, being twofold — hands and feet. For this is the moulding of man.

[148262] 16.135. And the soul is brought in besides, and the ruling part is brought in besides, by which we reason, not begotten by the casting down of the seed; so that even without this the number ten is made up, through which the whole working of man is accomplished. For in order man, immediately upon coming to be, takes the beginning of life from the passible parts. The reasoning, then, and ruling part we say is the cause of the constitution of the living creature, and also of the irrational part being ensouled and being a portion of it. For instance, the vital power, in which is contained the nutritive and the growth-giving and, in general, the moving — this the fleshly spirit has obtained, being quick-moving, and going everywhere through the senses and the rest of the body, and feeling first through the body; but the ruling part has the deliberative power, about which are inquiry and learning and knowledge. But the reference of all is ranked into one — the ruling part; and through that man lives and lives in a certain manner.

[149302] 16.136. Through the bodily spirit, then, man perceives, desires, takes pleasure, is angered, is nourished, grows; and indeed too through this he goes to the actions according to thought and reasoning; and when the ruling part masters the desires, it reigns. The "you shall not desire," then, says, "You shall not be a slave to the fleshly spirit, but shall rule over it"; since the flesh lusts against the spirit and rises up to act disorderly, against nature, and the spirit prevails against the flesh, unto the conduct of man according to nature. And was not man, then, with reason said to have come to be after the image of God — not as to the shape of the constitution, but since God by the Word creates all things, and the man who has become gnostic accomplishes the noble deeds by the rational part? With reason, then, the two tables are said to show forth the commandments given to the two spirits — that delivered to the moulded part, and that to the ruling part, before the law — said elsewhere; and the movements of the senses are both stamped in respect of thought and made manifest in respect of the working from the body; for from both is the apprehension.

[150473] 16.137. And again, as sense is to the sensible, so is intellection to the intelligible. And the actions too are twofold — some according to thought, some according to working. And the first commandment of the Decalogue sets forth that there is one only God Almighty, who led the people out of Egypt through the wilderness to the fatherland, that they might apprehend his power, as they were able, through the divine workings, and stand apart from the idolatry of begotten things, having all their hope upon the God who truly is. And the second word showed that one must not take, nor bring, the great might of God (which is the name; for this alone they had room to learn, as still now the many do) — that one must not bring the calling upon it to begotten and vain things, which the craftsmen among men have made, among which the Existent is not ranked; for in unbegotten sameness the Existent is alone, himself only. And the third word is that which shows that the world came to be by God, and that he gave us rest, a seventh day, on account of the suffering in life; for God is unwearied and impassible and unneedy, but we who bear flesh have need of rest.

[151634] 16.138. The seventh day, then, is proclaimed a rest, by abstention from evils preparing the primal day, our true rest — which indeed is the first true birth of light, in which all things are beheld together and all things inherited. From this day the first wisdom and knowledge is shed upon us; for the light of truth is true light, shadowless, the Spirit of the Lord partitioned without partition unto those sanctified through faith, holding the rank of a lamp unto the recognition of the things that are. Following it, then, throughout our whole life, we are made impassible; and this is to be at rest. Wherefore Solomon too says that wisdom came to be before heaven and earth and all the things that are, with the Almighty, the participation in which (the participation according to power, I mean, not according to substance) teaches one to be apprehensively a knower of things divine and human. And being come to this point, these things too must be recalled, by the way, since the discourse came in about the hebdomad and the ogdoad. For the ogdoad runs the risk of being properly the hebdomad, and the hebdomad a hexad, as touching the apparent; and the one is properly the sabbath, but the hebdomad a worker. For the cosmogony is completed in six days, and the movement of the sun from turning to turning is accomplished in six months, in which now the plants shed their leaves, now bud forth, and the seeds come to their perfection.

[153076] 16.139. And they say too that the embryo is completed to exactness in the sixth month — that is, in a hundred and eighty days and two and a half over — as Polybus the physician records in his work On Eight-months' Children, and Aristotle the philosopher in his work On Nature. And the Pythagoreans, hence, I think, from the becoming of the world according to the prophet, hold the number six perfect, and call it "midway-straight," and "marriage," because it is in the middle of the straight number — that is, of the ten and the two; for it appears equidistant from both. And as marriage begets from male and female, so the six is begotten from the odd, three, said to be a male number, and the even, two, held to be female; for twice three is six. So many, again, are the most generic movements, by which all becoming is borne — up, down, to the right, to the left, forward, backward.

[153963] 16.140. With reason, then, they reckon the number seven motherless and childless, interpreting the sabbath and allegorizing the kind of rest, according to which men neither marry nor are given in marriage any longer; for neither, taken from any number to any other, does seven come about, nor, taken to any other, does it produce another of those within the decad. And the ogdoad they call a cube, counting in, with the seven planets, the fixed sphere, through which the great year comes about, as it were a certain period of the recompense of the things promised. For instance, the Lord, having ascended the mountain fourth, becomes sixth, and is surrounded with spiritual light, having laid bare the power from himself, so far as it was possible for those chosen to see to behold it, proclaimed by a seventh, the voice, to be the Son of God — that some might be at rest, persuaded concerning him, and he, through the birth which the hexad showed forth, being the notable letter, might appear an ogdoad, God in a little body showing forth the power, numbered as a man, but hidden as to who he was. For in the order of the numbers the six too is counted in, but the sequence of the letters knows the notable letter that is not written.

[155200] 16.141. Here, according to the numbers themselves, each unit is preserved in its order into the hebdomad and ogdoad; but according to the number of the letters, the zeta becomes sixth, and the eta seventh. But, the notable letter having crept in, I know not how, into the writing, if we follow thus, the hebdomad becomes sixth and the ogdoad seventh. Wherefore too on the sixth man is said to have been made, who, having become faithful to the notable letter, straightway receives the rest of the Lord's inheritance. Such a thing too does the sixth hour of the saving dispensation show forth, in which man was perfected. Yes, and of the eight the middle terms become seven, and of the seven the intervals appear to be six. For that is another account, when the hebdomad glorifies the ogdoad, and "the heavens declare to the heavens the glory of God." The sensible types of these are the vowel letters among us. So too the Lord himself is called Alpha and Omega, beginning and end, "through whom all things came to be, and without whom not one thing came to be." Not, then, as some suppose, has God, by his rest, ceased from making; for, being good, if he should ever cease from doing good, he would cease too from being God — which it is not lawful even to say.

[156463] 16.142. But to have ceased is to have ordered that the order of the things made be preserved inviolably for all time, and that each of the creatures has ceased from the old disorder; for the creations according to the different days had received, by a greatest sequence, as it were the honour from the earlier, all the things made being to have order, created together with the thought, but not being of equal honour. Nor would the becoming of each have been shown by a voice, the creation having been said to be made all at once; for it was needful to name something first too. Wherefore the first things were prophesied, out of which the second, all things together coming to be from one substance by one power; for one, I think, is the will of God in one sameness. And how could the creation come to be in time, when time too came to be along with the things that are? And by now too in hebdomads the whole world is wheeled round, of all the things quickened and that grow.

[157441] 16.143. For seven are the first-born rulers of the angels, who have the greatest power; and seven too the wandering stars, the men of the sciences say, that accomplish the management of the earth, by whom the Chaldeans think, by sympathy, all the things of mortal life come to be — wherefore they promise too to say certain things about the future. And of the fixed stars, seven are the Pleiades, and seven-starred the Bears, by which husbandry and navigation are brought to their end; and the moon takes its changes of figure through seven days. In the first hebdomad, then, it becomes half; in the second, full; in the third, from the waning, again half; and in the fourth it vanishes. But it too, as Seleucus the mathematician records, changes its figure seven times. For out of lightless it becomes crescent, then half, then gibbous and full, and at the waning again gibbous, and likewise half, and crescent.

[158355] 16.144. "With seven-toned lyre we shall sing new hymns," a poet of no mean note writes, teaching too that the old lyre was seven-noted. And seven too are the organs of the senses set about our face — two of the eyes, two of the channels of hearing, two of the nostrils, and the seventh that of the mouth. And that the changes of the ages come about by hebdomads, the elegies of Solon make plain, somewhat thus: "A boy, while still a child, ungrown, having grown the hedge of his teeth, casts the first within seven years; and when God has completed the second seven years, he shows forth the tokens of coming youth; in the third, while his limbs are growing, his chin is downed, his skin changing its bloom; and in the fourth, every man is greatest in strength, which men hold for the tokens of manhood; in the fifth, it is time for a man to be mindful of marriage, and to seek a generation of children thereafter; in the sixth, the mind of a man is fitted in all things, and he no longer wishes to do vain deeds; and in the seventh, he is greatest in mind and tongue, and in the eighth — fourteen years in both; in the ninth, he is still able, but his body and strength are more moderate toward great virtue; and in the tenth, when God has completed seven years, he would not be untimely in having his portion of death."

[159678] 16.145. Again, in diseases the seventh and the fourteenth day are critical, in which nature contends against the causes of disease. And ten thousand such things, hallowing the number, Hermippus of Berytus sets down in his work On the Hebdomad. And plainly the blessed David delivers the mystic discourse about hebdomad and ogdoad to those who know, singing somewhat thus: "Our years were studied as a spider. The days of our years among them are seventy years; but if in strength, eighty years." . . . And that we may be taught the world to be begotten, and not suppose that God makes in time, the prophecy adds: "This is the book of the becoming, and of the things in them, when it came to be; in the day in which God made the heaven and the earth." For the "when it came to be" shows an indefinite and timeless bringing-forth; and the "in the day in which God made" — that is, in and through which he made all things, and without which not one thing came to be — shows the working through the Son, of whom David says, "This is the day which the Lord made; let us be glad and rejoice in it" — that is, let us feast on the divine banquet delivered through the knowledge that is through him. For "day" is called the Word that lights the hidden things, and through whom each of the creatures passed into light and becoming. And in sum the Decalogue, through the letter iota, shows forth the blessed name, setting forth Jesus, who is the Word.

[161120] 16.146. And the fifth word in order is about the honour of father and mother. And it plainly calls God Father and Lord. Wherefore too it proclaims those who have recognized him sons, and gods. The Lord, then, and Father is the Creator of all; and the mother is not, as some hold, the substance out of which we came to be, nor, as others have rendered it, the church, but the divine knowledge and wisdom — as Solomon says, calling wisdom the "mother of the just." And it is to be chosen for its own sake. And all that is noble and august is known from God through the Son. Upon this follows the word about adultery. And it is adultery if one, leaving the ecclesiastical and true knowledge and the grasp concerning God, comes over to a false opinion that is not fitting — either making a god of some begotten thing, or making an idol of some non-existent thing, into a transgression, or rather a going-out of knowledge. And the false opinion is foreign to the gnostic, as the true is his own and his consort.

[162128] 16.147. Wherefore too the noble apostle calls idolatry one of the kinds of fornication, following the prophet who says: "It committed adultery with the wood and the stone; to the wood it said, 'You are my father,' and to the stone, 'You begot me.'" Then the word about murder follows. And murder is a violent taking-away. He, then, who wishes to take away the true word about God and his everlastingness, that he may rank in the falsehood — saying either that the whole is without providence, or that the world is unbegotten, or anything against the sure things of the true teaching . . . is most pernicious. And after this is the word about theft. As, then, he who steals the things of others, greatly doing wrong, with reason falls into the evils he deserves, so he who appropriates to himself the divine works, by the art either of moulding or of painting, and says that he is the maker of the animals and plants — likewise too those who counterfeit the true philosophy — are thieves. And whether one be a husbandman or a father of a child, he is a minister of the casting down of seeds; but God, furnishing the increase and perfecting of all things, brings the things that come to be into the state according to nature.

[163353] 16.148. But the most, together with the philosophers, attribute the increases and turnings to the stars, by the chief account, robbing, as far as in them lies, the Father of all of his unwearied power. And the elements and the stars — that is, the governing powers — were appointed to accomplish the things suited to the dispensation, and they themselves obey and are led by the things set over them, wherever the word of the Lord leads, since the divine power is by nature wont to work all things hiddenly. He, then, who says that he has devised or made something of the things that tend to the creation, shall undergo correction for his impious daring. And the tenth is the word about all desires. As, then, he who desires the things that are not fitting is corrected, in the same way it is not permitted to desire false things, nor to suppose that of the things in becoming the ensouled are able of themselves, while the soulless absolutely are not able, to save or to harm; and if one say that the antidote is not able to heal nor the hemlock to destroy, he is unawares quibbling. For none of these things works without him who uses the herb and the drug, as neither does the axe work without him who cuts, nor the saw without him who saws. As, then, they do not work of themselves, but have certain natural qualities that contribute, by the working of the craftsman, to the proper work, so too by the universal providence of God the effective working is distributed, through the things more immediately moved, by descent, into the particular things.

[164909] 17.149. But, as it seems, the philosophers of the Greeks, naming God, do not know him, since they do not worship God as God. And the things they philosophize among themselves, according to Empedocles, "having passed through the tongue of many mouths in vain, are poured out, since they saw little of the whole." For as the light from the sun is by art conducted, through a glass vessel full of water, into fire, so too philosophy, having taken the spark from the divine Scripture, is faintly seen among a few. Yes, and as all living creatures breathe the same air, but some in one way, some in another, and to a different end, so too the more part pursue the truth — or rather the discourse about the truth. For they say nothing about God, but, referring their own passions to God, expound them. For their life has become a seeking of the plausible, not of the true; and truth is not taught from imitation, but from learning. For it is not that we may seem to be good that we believe in Christ — just as neither do we pass into the sun for the sake of merely appearing, being in the sun, but here for the sake of being warmed; but there, for the sake of being noble and good, we force our way to be Christians, since most of all the kingdom is of those who force their way, who, out of inquiry and learning and perfect joint training, reap the becoming a king.

[166271] 17.150. He, then, who imitates the seeming, beguiles the preconception too. But when one, having taken a kindling of a matter, kindles this within in the soul by longing and learning, he sets all things in motion thereupon, to come to the recognition of it. For what one does not lay hold of, neither does he long for, nor embrace the benefit from it. The gnostic, then, afterward, at the end of his right-doings, imitates the Lord, so far as is attainable by men, having taken a certain Lordly quality unto the likeness of God. But those who do not know knowledge are not able even to canon out the truth. To partake, then, of the gnostic theorems is not possible, unless we empty ourselves of the former thoughts. For simply thus truth is said commonly of everything of mind and of sense. For instance, it is possible to behold the truth of painting too, as against the vulgar, and the dignity of music as against the wanton. And of philosophy too, then, there is a certain truth as against the other philosophers, and a true beauty as against the adulterated. We must not, then, busy ourselves about the partial truths, of which the truth is predicated, but about the truth itself, not seeking to learn names; for the matter of God is not one, but ten thousand; and it makes a difference to seek God or the things about God. And, to speak generally, about each thing one must distinguish the substance from the accidents.

[167697] 17.151. And it is enough for me to say that the Lord is God of all. And I say "of all" downright, with nothing left over by way of exception. Since, then, there are two kinds of truth — the names and the things — some speak of the names, those who busy themselves about the beauties of words, the philosophers among the Greeks; but the things are with us, the barbarians. For instance, the Lord did not without cause will to use a lowly form of body, that no one, praising the comeliness and marvelling at the beauty, should stand apart from the things said, and, cleaving to the things left behind, be cut off from the things of mind. We must not, then, dwell upon the phrasing, but upon the things signified. To those, then, who lay hold of the phrasing, and are not moved toward knowledge, the word is not believed; since the crows too imitate human voices, having no conception of the thing they say; but intellectual apprehension holds of faith. So too Homer said "father of men and of gods," not knowing who the Father is and how the Father.

[168746] 17.152. And as to him who has hands belongs by nature the taking, and to him who has sound eyes the seeing of light, so to him who has received faith it is proper by nature to partake of knowledge, if he would work in besides and build up besides gold, silver, precious stones upon the foundation laid down. He does not, then, promise to be willing to partake, but begins; nor to be about to, but it is fitting for him to be kingly and luminous and gnostic, and not in name, but in deed, to be willing to lay hold of the things. For God, being good through the ruling part of all creation, willing this to be saved, turned to making the rest too, furnishing them from the beginning this first benefaction — the coming to be; for that being is much better than not being, everyone would confess. Then, as it was possible for each to have of nature, it came to be, and comes to be, advancing toward its own better.

[169660] 17.153. So that it is not absurd that philosophy too was given by the divine providence, preparatory to the perfecting that is through Christ — unless philosophy be ashamed, being disciple to the barbarian knowledge, to advance toward truth. But "the hairs are numbered," and the small movements; and how is philosophy not in the account? And yet to Samson too the power was given in his hairs, that he might understand that the rejected arts of life — those that lie and remain on the ground after the soul's departure — were not given without the divine power. For instance, it says, "providence from above, from the leading things as from a head, pervades all, as the ointment," it says, "that comes down upon the beard of Aaron and upon the hem of his garment" (that is, of the great high priest, "through whom all things came to be, and without him not one thing came to be") — not into the adorning of the body, but, outside the people, philosophy, like a garment.

[170632] 17.154. The philosophers, then, who have trained themselves toward their own perceiving by a perceptive spirit, when they busy themselves, not with a part of philosophy, but with philosophy itself absolutely, truth-lovingly and without conceit bearing witness to the truth, even among the heterodox in the things well said, advance toward understanding, according to the divine governance, the unspeakable goodness that on every occasion leads the nature of the things that are toward the better, as far as may be; and then, having associated not only with Greeks but also with barbarians, they are led, from common joint training, to a private understanding, unto the faith; and having received the foundation of the truth, they take besides power to go forward to inquiry, and thence, having become disciples, they love, and craving knowledge, they hasten toward salvation. So the Scripture says that "a spirit of perception was given to the craftsmen by God"; and this is nothing but prudence, a contemplative power of the soul concerning the things that are, discerning the consequent, the like and the unlike, and again composing and commanding and forbidding, and conjecturing the things to come. And it stretches not only to the arts, but to philosophy itself.

[171901] 17.155. Why, then, is the serpent too called prudent? Because even in evil-doings one may find a certain sequence and discernment and composition and conjecture of the things to come. And the most of wrongs escape notice for this reason, that the wicked make their dispositions beforehand for themselves, to escape the punishments wholly and in every way. And prudence, being of many parts, stretched through the whole world and through all human affairs, changes its name in each of them: and when it applies to the first causes, it is called intellection; when it confirms this by demonstrative reasoning, it is named knowledge and wisdom and science; and when it comes to be in the things that tend to godliness, and, without contemplation, receives the ruling word, in respect of the keeping of the working in it, it is called faith; and in the things of sense, having made sure of what seems, as among these, most true, it is right opinion; and again in the actions with handiwork, it is art; and where, without contemplation of the first causes, by keeping of the like and by transition it makes a certain impulse and constitution, it is called experience. And that is the proper and truly authoritative and ruling thing, which over and above all the believer takes, after the sure faith, the holy Spirit, by oversight.

[173228] 17.156. Philosophy, then, having partaken of a more excellent perception, as has been shown from the foregoing, partakes of prudence. For instance, the rational going-through of the things thought, with choice and assent, is called dialectic, confirmatory of the things said about truth by demonstration, and beating off the difficulties brought against it. Those, then, run a risk who say that philosophy did not come here from God, of saying that it is impossible for God to know all the particular things, nor to be the cause of all noble things, even though each of the particulars chance to be one of them. For nothing of the things that are could have stood from the beginning, God being unwilling; but if of his will, then philosophy is from God, he having willed it to be such as it is, on account of those who will not abstain from evils except thus. For God knows all things, not only the things that are, but also the things that shall be, and how each shall be; and foreseeing the particular movements, he beholds all things and hears all things, seeing the soul bare within, and holds the thought of each of the particulars through eternity; and that which happens in the theatres, and in the parts of each man, by inlooking and surveying and joint-looking, this happens in the case of God. For he beholds all things at once, and each in part, by one application — yet not all in respect of the leading attention.

[174656] 17.157. By now, then, many of the things in life take their becoming through some human reasoning too, having received the spark from God. For instance, health through medicine, and good condition through the trainer's art, and wealth through money-getting, take becoming and presence according to the divine providence, but with human co-working. And understanding too is from God. For instance, the free choice of good men chiefly obeys the will of God; wherefore many of the advantages are common to good and to evil men, but become profitable only to the good and earnest, for whose sake God made them; for to the use of good men the power of the God-given things is by nature. But the thoughts too of virtuous men come about by divine inbreathing, the soul being somehow disposed, and the divine will being distributed into the human souls, the particular divine ministers contributing to such services. For the protectorships of the angels are distributed by nations and cities, and perhaps too certain are assigned to some of the particular men.

[175710] 17.158. The shepherd, at any rate, cares too for each of the sheep; and his oversight is most immediate to those who are eminent in their natures and able to help the multitudes. And these are the leading and educative men, through whom the working of providence is most plainly shown, whenever, either through education or through some rule and management, God wills to do good to men. And he wills it always; wherefore he stirs the fit to the profitable working-out of the things that tend toward virtue and peace and beneficence. And every virtuous thing is both from virtue and is referred to virtue, and either is given toward the becoming earnest, or, in those who are so, toward the using of the advantages according to nature; for it co-works both in the things universal and in the particular.

[176514] 17.159. How, then, is it not absurd, attributing disorder and injustice to the devil, to make him the giver of a virtuous thing, philosophy? For he runs the risk of having become more kindly to the Greeks, toward the becoming of good men, than the divine providence and purpose. But, on the contrary, I think, it is proper to law and to all right reason to render to each what is fitting and proper and what falls to him. For as the lyre belongs to the lyre-player alone, and the flute to the flute-player, so the advantages are possessions of good men; and as it is the nature of the good-doer to do good, as of fire to warm and of light to give light, an evil thing the good man would not do, as neither would light darken nor fire chill. So, on the contrary, evil would not do anything virtuous; for its working is to do evil, as it is of darkness to confound the sight. Not, then, is philosophy a work of evil, since it makes men virtuous. It remains, then, that it is of God, whose work alone is to do good; and all things that are given by God are nobly both given and received. Yes, and the use of philosophy is not of evil men; but if it has been given to the best of the Greeks, plainly whence it has been bestowed — from the providence that renders to each what is fitting according to worth. With reason, then, to the Jews the law, to the Greeks philosophy, until the coming; and from then the universal calling, gathering into a peculiar people of righteousness, according to the teaching that is by faith, through the one Lord, the only one God of both, of Greeks and of barbarians, or rather of the whole race of men.

[178147] 17.160. We have often said that we call philosophy the attaining, according to philosophy, of the truth, even though it chance to be partial; and now the goods in the arts too, as in arts, have their beginning from God. For as the doing of anything by art is comprehended in the theorems of the art, so the doing of anything prudently is ranked under prudence; and prudence is a virtue; and it is proper to it to know the other things, and much more, first, the things concerning itself. And wisdom, being a power, is nothing else than the science of things divine and human good things. And "the Lord's is the earth and the fulness thereof." The Scripture, teaching that good things come to men from God, has said it by a divine power and might, the distribution coming down unto human help. For instance, there are three modes of all benefit and imparting to another from another: the one according to accompaniment, as the trainer shapes the boy; another according to likeness, as he who exhorts another to advance by advancing first, and the one co-works with the learner, the other co-benefits the receiver. And a third mode is that according to command, when the trainer, no longer moulding the learner nor showing through himself the wrestling-feat for imitation by the boy, as one now more practised, commands him the wrestling-feat by name.

[179498] 17.161. The gnostic, then, having received from God the being able to help, profits some by shaping them by accompaniment, some by exhorting them by likeness, some by educating and teaching them by command. And indeed he himself too is benefited by the like things from the Lord. So, then, the benefit reaching to men from God becomes known, the angels co-exhorting; for through angels too the divine power furnishes good things, whether seen or unseen. Such too is the mode according to the manifestation of the Lord. And at times too, according to the thoughts of men and their reasonings, the power inbreathes something and sets in their hearts strength and a more exact perception, furnishing might and the boldness of eagerness toward the inquiries and toward the works. And there lie set out for us, for imitation and likeness, truly marvellous and holy examples of virtue, through the recorded deeds. And indeed too the mode of command is most manifest, both through the Lord's covenants and through the laws among the Greeks, and through the things enjoined according to philosophy. And, in a word, all benefit unto life, according to the highest account, is accomplished by God the Almighty, the Father who guides all, through the Son — who for this reason too is "the Saviour of all men," says the apostle, "but most of all of the faithful" — and according to the immediate, by those immediate to each, according to the command and enjoining of the one immediate to the first cause, the Lord.

[181002] 18.162. And our gnostic ever spends his time in the most authoritative things; and if anywhere there be leisure and a season of relaxation from the chief things, instead of other idleness, he lays hold of the Greek philosophy too, as a kind of sweetmeat eaten as a relish after dinner, not neglecting the better things, but taking these too, so far as is fitting, and for the reasons I said before. But those who craved the unnecessary and superfluous things of philosophy, and gave themselves to the contentious sophisms alone, were left behind the necessary and most authoritative things, downright pursuing the shadows of words. It is good, then, to know all things; but for him whose soul is too weak to stretch itself toward the much-learned experience, he will choose only the leading and better things. For the truly real science, which we say the gnostic alone has, is a sure apprehension, leading up, through true and sure reasonings, to the knowledge of the cause; and he who is scientific of the true about anything whatsoever is forthwith scientific too of the false about the same. And indeed that argument seems to me well enough: "If one must philosophize, one must philosophize; for the thing follows upon itself. But even if one must not philosophize — for no one could condemn anything not having first known this. One must philosophize, then."

[182366] 18.163. These things being so, the Greeks must learn, through law and prophets, to worship one only God, who is the truly existent Almighty; and then must be taught this through the apostle: "To us there is no idol in the world," since no likeness of God can be among begotten things; and must be taught besides that not even of the things which they worship would the images be the likenesses; for not at all is the kind of souls such, in respect of shape, as the Greeks mould the carved figures. For souls are invisible, not only the rational, but also those of the irrational animals; and their bodies never become parts of the souls, but instruments, of some seats, of some chariots, and of others, in another way, possessions.

[183099] 18.164. But not even the images of the instruments is it possible to imitate clearly; since let one mould the sun, as it is seen, and liken the rainbow by its colours. But when they leave the idols, then they shall hear the Scripture: "Unless your righteousness exceed more than that of the scribes and Pharisees" — who are justified by abstention from evils — "by the being able, together with the perfection in these things, to love the neighbour too and to do good, you shall not be kingly." For the intensity of the righteousness according to the law shows the gnostic. Thus one, ranked according to the ruling part of his own body, the head, having advanced to the height of faith, knowledge itself, about which all the senses are, shall likewise attain the highest inheritance. And the ruling part of knowledge the apostle plainly shows to those able to look through, writing thus to those Greekish Corinthians: "But having hope, as your faith increases, to be magnified among you according to our rule unto abundance, to preach the good news to the parts beyond you" — not meaning the extension of the preaching according to place (since he himself says that the faith abounded even in Achaia,

[184301] 18.165. and it is recorded too in the Acts of the Apostles that he preached the word in Athens too), but he teaches knowledge, which is the perfecting of faith, to abound beyond the catechizing, according to the magnificence of the Lord's teaching and the ecclesiastical rule. Wherefore too, a little after, he adds: "And though rude in speech, yet not in knowledge." But let those of the Greeks who boast at having apprehended the truth tell us from whom, having learned, they make their vaunt. From God, indeed, they would not say; from men they confess. And if this be so, then either, having learned it from themselves late — as indeed some of them, puffed up, boast — or from others like themselves. But men, speaking about God, are not trustworthy teachers, in so far as they are men; for one who is a man is not of weight to speak even the true things about God — the weak and perishable about the unbegotten and incorruptible, the work about him who made it.

[185269] 18.166. Then, he who is not able to speak the true things about himself — is he not the less to be believed about the things of God? For as much as a man falls short of the power of God, by so much also his word fails, even if he speak not God, but the things about God and the divine word. For the human word is by nature weak and unable to declare God — I do not mean the name (for to name it is common, not to philosophers only, but to poets too), nor the substance (for that is impossible), but the power and the works of God. And yet those who inscribe God as their teacher hardly come to a conception of God, the grace co-helping them unto a certain recognition — accustomed, as it were, to behold the will by the will and the Holy Spirit by the Holy Spirit; for "the Spirit searches the deep things of God, but the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit." Only, then, the wisdom among us is God-taught, from which all the springs of wisdom hang, as many as aim at the truth. For instance, as the Lord was to come to men, the one who should teach us, there were ten thousand signallers, heralds, preparers, forerunners, from above, from the foundation of the world, by deeds, by words, foretelling, prophesying that he should come, and where and how, and what the signs.

[186558] 18.167. For instance, from afar the law and the prophecy practise beforehand, and then the forerunner shows him present, and after him the heralds, teaching the power of the manifestation, declare it. . . . to a few only, and not even to all of these, did the philosophers please; but to Plato Socrates was pleasing, and Plato to Xenocrates, and Aristotle to Theophrastus, and Zeno to Cleanthes, who persuaded their own sectaries only. But the word of our teacher remained not in Judaea alone, as philosophy in Hellas, but was poured out over the whole inhabited earth, persuading Greeks and barbarians together, by nation and village and every city, whole houses and each privately of those who hearkened — yes, and not a few of the philosophers themselves — bringing them over already to the truth. And if any chance ruler hinder the Greek philosophy, it perishes forthwith; but our teaching, from then, together with the first proclamation, kings and tyrants and the particular rulers and governors, with all their hirelings, and besides the countless men, hinder, warring against us and trying as far as may be to root it out; but it flourishes the more. For it does not die as a human teaching, nor wither as a weak gift (for no gift of God is weak), but abides unhindered, prophesied to be persecuted to the end.

[187878] 18.168. Then, concerning poetry, Plato writes, "A poet is a light thing and holy, and not able to make until he becomes inspired and out of his senses." And Democritus likewise: "Whatever a poet writes with enthusiasm and a holy breath is very noble." And we know what kind of things poets say. But the prophets of God the Almighty — would not one be struck with awe at them, having become instruments of the divine voice? As, then, having moulded a statue of the gnostic, we have already shown what manner of man he is, having made plain, as in a sketch, the greatness and the beauty of his character; but what manner of man he is in respect of contemplation in things natural will be shown after these things, when we begin to treat of the becoming of the world.