WORK: Stromata  (slug: clement-of-alexandria-stromata-694383)

CHAPTER: 04-book-4



[110076] 19.118. Of this perfection, then, it is possible to partake alike for a man and alike for a woman. At once, it was not Moses alone who, hearing from God: "I have spoken to you once and twice, saying, I have seen this people, and behold, it is stiff-necked; let me utterly destroy them, and I will blot out their name from under heaven, and I will make you a great and wonderful nation, far more than this"—answers, entreating, not looking to his own advantage, but to the common salvation: "By no means, Lord; forgive the sin to this people, or blot me too out of the book of the living." How great the perfection of the man who wished to die together with the people rather than be saved alone! But Judith too, perfected among women, when the city was besieged, having begged the elders, goes out into the camp of the foreigners, despising every danger, giving herself over to the enemies for her country's sake, in faith of God; and at once she receives the reward of her faith—a woman who triumphed over the enemy of the faith, having become mistress of the head of Holofernes.

[111158] 19.119. And again, Esther, perfect in faith, delivering Israel from the tyrannical power and from the cruelty of the satrap, a single woman, afflicted with fastings, set herself against ten thousand armed right hands, undoing through faith the tyrannical decree; and indeed she tamed the one, and held back Haman, and through her perfect prayer to God kept Israel unharmed. For I pass over Susanna and the sister of Moses—how the one was fellow-general with the prophet, taking the lead of all the women renowned among the Hebrews for wisdom; and the other, by surpassing dignity, holding out even to death when condemned by her licentious lovers, remained, unwavering, a martyr of purity.

[111849] 19.120. Yes, and Dio the philosopher records that a certain woman, Lysidice, out of excess of modesty bathed in her very tunic; and Philotera, whenever she was about to enter the bath, quietly drew up the tunic as far as the water covered her bare parts, and then, rising up again little by little, put it on once more. And did not Leaena the Athenian too bear tortures manfully? She, being privy to the plot of Harmodius and Aristogeiton against Hipparchus, did not in any way tell of it, though well tortured. And they say too that the Argive women, with Telesilla the poetess leading them, merely by appearing routed the Spartans, valiant in war, and gained for those women fearlessness of death. The author of the Danaid says the like concerning the daughters of Danaus:

[112625] And then swiftly the daughters of Danaus armed themselves before the fair-flowing river of lord Nile,

[112728] 19.121. and so on. And the rest of the poets sing of Atalanta's swiftness in the hunt, and of the tender love of Anticleia, and of Alcestis' love of her husband, and of the good courage of Macaria and of the Hyacinthides. And what? Did not Theano the Pythagorean come to such a height of philosophy that, when a man, looking at her inquisitively, said, "A fair arm," she answered, "But not a public one"? Of the same dignity is reported also this saying: for, being asked on what day a woman goes down to the Thesmophoria after being with a man, she said, "From her own, at once; but from another's, never." Yes, and Themisto of Lampsacus, the wife of Leonteus of Lampsacus, philosophized in the Epicurean way, as did Myia the daughter of Theano in the Pythagorean way, and Arignote who wrote the things concerning Dionysus; for the daughters of Diodorus, surnamed Cronus, all became dialecticians, as Philo the dialectician says in the Menexenus, whose names he sets down as follows: Menexene, Argeia, Theognis, Artemisia, Pantacleia. I remember too a certain Cynic woman, called Hipparchia, the Maronite, the wife of Crates, in whose honour he even celebrated the "dog-wedding" in the Stoa Poikile.

[113930] 19.122. And Arete of Cyrene, the daughter of Aristippus, educated Aristippus surnamed the Mother-taught. And with Plato there philosophized Lasthenia the Arcadian and Axiothea the Phliasian. For of Aspasia the Milesian, of whom the comic poets too write much, Socrates made use for philosophy, and Pericles for rhetoric. I pass over the others, then, for the length of the discourse, neither cataloguing the poetesses—Corinna and Telesilla and Myia and Sappho—nor the women painters, such as Eirene the daughter of Cratinus and Anaxandra the daughter of Nealces, of whom Didymus speaks in the Symposiaca.

[114536] 19.123. And the daughter of Cleobulus the wise man and monarch of the Lindians was not ashamed to wash the feet of her father's guests; just as Sarah, the wife of Abraham, that blessed woman, herself prepared the cakes for the angels, and royal maidens among the Hebrews tended the sheep, whence too Nausicaa in Homer went to the washing-places. The prudent woman, then, would choose first to persuade her husband to be her partner in the things that lead to happiness; but if she is unable, let her hasten toward virtue alone—obedient to her husband in all things, so as never to do anything against his will, except in so far as it is judged to make a difference toward virtue and salvation. But even if anyone should hinder a woman, or a maidservant too, who unfeignedly sets out toward such a disposition, the man who does this then plainly does nothing other than purpose to lead her away from righteousness and prudence, and to make his own household at once unjust and licentious.

[115525] 19.124. It is not possible, then, for a man or a woman to become noteworthy in anything whatever without using learning and practice and training; and we say that virtue depends on nothing else so much as on ourselves. Other things one may hinder by warring against them, but the things in our power not at all, even if one should especially set himself against them; for the gift is god-given and not subject to anything else. Hence licence would be reckoned the evil of none other than the man who is licentious, and prudence the good of the man who is able to be prudent.

[116101] 20.125. Euripides sketches a husband-loving woman with dignity, counselling:

[116179] She must seem to speak well, when he says something, even if he does not speak, and to work out what she means to say so as to please the man who is with her.

[116339] And again somewhere, the like to these:

[116380] And it is sweet, if he fares ill in anything, for the wife to be downcast together with her husband, and to have her share in common of grief and pleasure.

[116537] And showing the gentle and tender-loving spirit somehow thus, he adds, even in misfortunes:

[116630] But I, when you are sick, will be sick along with you and endure, and I will bear your evils with you, and nothing is bitter to me;

[116763] for with friends

[116781] one must

[116791] fare well and fare ill; for what else is friendship but this?

[116854] 20.126. So marriage too is sanctified when it is perfected according to reason, if the union submits to God and is administered with a true heart in fullness of faith, the hearts being purified from an evil conscience and the body washed with pure water, and holding the confession of hope; for faithful is He who promised. And the happy marriage must be judged neither by wealth nor by beauty, but by virtue. "No woman," says the tragedy,

[117295] ever did her husband good by beauty; but virtue has done good to many; for every good woman, who has been welded to her husband, knows how to be prudent.

[117450] Then, as though giving counsels, she says:

[117494] First of all, this holds: even if the husband be unshapely, he must seem to be shapely to the woman who has got a mind. For it is not the eye that judges, but the mind that sees,

[117674] and the things following. For very properly the Scripture said that the woman was given to the man by God as a helper.

[117794] 20.127. It is plain, then, I think, that she will choose to heal by reason, with persuasion, each of the grievous things that befall from the husband in the housekeeping; but if he should not obey, then she will try, as far as is possible for human nature, to lead a sinless life—whether she must die with reason or live—reckoning God to be the helper and partner of such conduct, who is truly her support and saviour both for the present and for the future, having made Him the general and leader of every action, considering prudence and righteousness her work, and making love of God her end.

[118391] 20.128. Gracefully, then, in the epistle to Titus, the apostle says that the elder women must be in a state befitting holiness, not slanderers, not enslaved to much wine, that they may train the young women to be husband-lovers, child-lovers, prudent, pure, keepers of the house, good, subject to their own husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed. "But rather," he says, "pursue peace with all men, and sanctification, without which no one shall see the Lord, looking carefully lest anyone be a fornicator or profane, as Esau, who for one meal gave up his birthright; and lest any root of bitterness springing up cause trouble, and by it the many be defiled."

[119061] 20.129. Then, as though setting a coping-stone on the question concerning marriage, he adds: "Marriage is honourable in all, and the bed undefiled; but fornicators and adulterers God shall judge." And, one aim and one end having been shown to man and woman, what the perfect thing is, Peter says in his epistle: "Though now for a little while, if need be, you have been grieved by various trials, that the proof of your faith, far more precious than perishing gold yet tested through fire, may be found unto praise and glory at the revelation of Jesus Christ; whom not having seen you love, in whom now, though not seeing Him, yet believing, you rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, receiving the end of faith, the salvation of souls." Wherefore Paul too boasts that he has been, for Christ's sake, in labours more abundantly, in stripes above measure, in deaths often.

[119943] 21.130. Here I find "the perfect" taken in many ways, according to the man who succeeds in each virtue. One is perfected, then, both as devout and as patient and as continent and as a worker and as a martyr and as a gnostic; but perfect in all things at once I do not know if any man is, while still being a man, save only the One who put on man for our sake. And yet by the bare law a man might be perfect, the law that professes abstinence from evils; but this is a road both to the gospel and to good-doing. But the gnostic perfection of the man under the law is the taking on of the gospel, that the man under the law may become perfect; for so Moses, who was under the law, foretold that one must hear, that we might receive, according to the apostle, Christ the fullness of the law. And in the gospel the gnostic already advances, not using the law merely as a step, but understanding it and perceiving it as the Lord who gave the covenants handed it down to the apostles. And even if he should conduct himself rightly (as indeed it is impossible for knowledge to follow upon evil-doing), and be moreover a martyr, having most rightly confessed out of love—he would receive greater worth, as among men; yet not even thus will he be reckoned "perfect" while still in the flesh, since the consummation of life has anticipated this appellation, the gnostic martyr having already anticipated the displaying and presenting authentically of the perfect work through gnostic love, the spirit being sent forward when the blood is offered with thanks.

[121493] 21.131. Blessed, then, would he be from this point, and rightly proclaimed perfect, that the exceeding greatness of the power may be of God and not from us, as the apostle says; only let us preserve the power of choice and the love, "being afflicted in everything, but not crushed; perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed." For those who hasten toward consummation must, according to the same apostle, "give no offence in anything, but in everything commend themselves," not to men, but to God. And let it be, as a consequence, that we obey men too; for this too is reasonable on account of the slanderous blasphemies. And the commendation is "in much endurance, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labours, in watchings, in fastings, in purity, in knowledge, in long-suffering, in kindness, in the Holy Spirit, in unfeigned love, in the word of truth, in the power of God," that we may be temples of God, "cleansed from every defilement of flesh and spirit"; "and I," He says, "will receive you, and will be to you a Father, and you shall be to me sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty." "Let us perfect, then," he says, "holiness in the fear of God." For though fear begets grief, "I rejoice," he says, "not that you were grieved,

[122838] 21.132. but that you were grieved unto repentance; for you were grieved according to God, that you might suffer loss in nothing through us. For godly grief works repentance unto a salvation not to be repented of; but the grief of the world works death. For behold, this very thing, your being grieved according to God, what diligence it has wrought in you—nay, what defence, what indignation, what fear, what longing, what zeal, what avenging! In everything you have commended yourselves to be pure in the matter." These are the preliminary exercises of gnostic training. And since the Almighty God Himself gave some as apostles, some as prophets, some as evangelists, some as shepherds and teachers, for the perfecting of the saints unto the work of ministry, unto the building up of the body of Christ, until we all attain to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ—we must hasten to come to maturity in a gnostic way and to be perfected, as much as possible while still remaining in the flesh, having practised, from the perfect like-mindedness here, to run together with the will of God unto the restoration of the truly perfect nobility and kinship, unto the fullness of Christ, the thing perfectly completed out of the perfecting. We already see in what way and how and when the divine apostle speaks of "the perfect," and how he shows the differences of the perfect. And again, to each is given the manifestation of the Spirit for what is profitable. "For to one is given through the Spirit a word of wisdom, to another a word of knowledge according to the same Spirit, to another faith in the same Spirit, to another gifts of healings in the same Spirit, to another workings of powers, to another prophecy, to another discernment of spirits, to another kinds of tongues, to another interpretation of tongues; but all these things the one and the same Spirit works, dividing severally to each as He wills."

[124850] 21.133. This being so, the prophets are perfect in prophecy, the righteous in righteousness, the martyrs in confession, and others in preaching—not without share in the common virtues, but succeeding in the things in which they were appointed. For who that thinks rightly would say the prophet is not righteous? And what? Did not the righteous too, like Abraham, prophesy?

[125224] For to one God gave warlike works, to another the dance, to another the lyre and song,

[125312] says Homer. But each has his own gift from God, this one in this way, that one in that; but the apostles were filled in all things.

[125445] 21.134. You will find, then, if you wish, from their deeds and writings, the knowledge, the life, the preaching, the righteousness, the purity, the prophecy. And yet one must know that, even though Paul is younger in time, having flourished immediately after the Lord's ascension, still his Scripture hangs upon the old covenant, breathing and speaking from there; for the faith in Christ and the knowledge of the gospel are an explanation and a fulfilment of the law. And for this reason it was said to the Hebrews: "Unless you believe, you shall not understand"—that is, unless you believe the one prophesied through the law and decreed by the law, you shall not understand the old covenant, which He Himself explained at His own coming.

[126186] 22.135. The man who understands and is keen-sighted, this is the gnostic. And his work is not the abstinence from evils (for this is a stepping-stone to the greatest advancement), nor indeed the doing of any good thing either through fear (for it is written: "Where shall I flee, and where shall I hide from your face? If I go up into heaven, you are there; if I depart to the ends of the sea, there is your right hand; if I go down into the depths, there is your Spirit"), nor through hope of the promised honour (for it is said: "Behold, the Lord, and His reward is before His face, to give back to each according to his works"—"things which eye has not seen nor ear heard nor have entered into the heart of man, which God has prepared for those who love Him"), but only the good-doing through love, which is choiceworthy for the gnostic for the sake of the good itself.

[127060] 22.136. At once it is said to the Lord, in the person of God: "Ask of me, and I will give you the nations for your inheritance"—teaching Him to ask the most royal request, the salvation of men, without reward, that we ourselves may inherit and possess the Lord. For, on the contrary, to long for the knowledge concerning God for the sake of some need—that this may happen to me and that may not—is not proper to the gnostic; rather, the knowledge itself suffices him as a cause of contemplation. For I would dare to say that the man who pursues knowledge for the sake of the divine science itself will not choose knowledge for the sake of wishing to be saved. For thinking, by exercise, is stretched out into ever-thinking; and ever-thinking, becoming the substance of the knower by an undivided commingling, abides as an eternal contemplation, a living subsistence. If, then, one should set before the gnostic, by way of hypothesis, which he would wish to choose—the knowledge of God or eternal salvation—and these were separated (though they are most of all in identity), he would, without any hesitation whatever, choose the knowledge of God, judging that to be choiceworthy for its own sake which is the property of the faith that has ascended through love into knowledge.

[128338] 22.137. This, then, is the first good-doing of the perfect man, when it comes about not for the sake of any need of the things that tend toward himself, but, judging that it is good to do good, the activity, carried out earnestly, does good in every action—not in some things but not in others, but established in the habit of good-doing, no longer for the sake of glory or, as the philosophers say, of good repute, nor for the sake of a reward, whether from men or from God; . . . that he may carry out his life after the image and likeness of the Lord. And if, while doing good, something contrary should meet him, he will, as a good recompense, send it forth without remembering wrong, becoming just and good to the just and the unjust. To such men the Lord says: "Be as your Father, perfect." For such a man the flesh has died, and he himself alone lives, having consecrated the tomb into a holy temple to the Lord, having turned the old sinful soul toward God.

[129305] 22.138. This man is no longer continent, but has come into the habit of freedom from passion, awaiting to put on the divine form. "If you do alms," it says, "let no one know; and if you fast, anoint yourself, that God alone may know, and of men not one"—but neither ought the man who does the mercy himself to know that he is doing mercy; for so he will be sometimes merciful and at other times not. But when he does the beneficent thing in habit, he will imitate the nature of the good; and the disposition will be both nature and training. One must not, however, be lifted up and transported, but, walking, arrive where one must, having passed through the whole of the narrow road; for this is to be drawn by the Father—to become worthy to receive the power of grace from God and to run up unhindered. And even if some hate the elect man, he knows their ignorance, pitying the mind of their stupidity.

[130210] 22.139. With good reason, then, this knowledge loves even those who are ignorant, and teaches and educates the whole creation to honour the Almighty God. And if it has learned to love God, this man will in no way have his virtue cast away, neither waking nor sleeping nor in any imagination; since the habit never goes out of itself, falling away from being a habit, whether knowledge be called a habit or a disposition. For, by never letting in differing notions, the ruling part, remaining unaltered, does not take on any alteration of imaginations, dreaming the image-makings that come from the daytime motions. For this reason indeed the Lord commands us to keep awake, so that not even in a dream may our soul ever suffer passion, but He bids us preserve the conduct even of the night, as wrought in the day, pure and unspotted. For this is the likening to God, as far as is possible—to keep the mind in the same relation. And this is the relation of mind as mind; but the varied disposition comes about through the passionate attachment to material things.

[131274] 22.140. So that they seem to me to have called the night "the kindly time" [euphrone], since at that season the soul, having ceased from the senses, inclines toward itself and shares more in understanding. For this reason too the initiations are held mostly by night, signifying the night-time contraction of the soul from the body. "Let us, then, not sleep as the rest, but let us watch and be sober. For those who sleep, sleep by night, and those who are drunk are drunk by night; but let us, being of the day, be sober, having put on the breastplate of faith and love, and for a helmet the hope of salvation."

[131888] 22.141. And the things they say concerning sleep, the same must be understood concerning death too. For each shows the withdrawal of the soul, the one more, the other less; which is also to be got from Heraclitus: "Man in the kindly night kindles a light for himself, dead, his eyes being quenched; living, he touches the dead while sleeping, his eyes being quenched; awake, he touches the sleeper." For "blessed are those who know the season," according to the apostle, that "it is now the hour for you to be raised from sleep; for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed. The night is far advanced, and the day is at hand. Let us, then, put away the works of darkness, and put on the weapons of light." By "day" he allegorizes the Son and light, and again the commandments as the "weapons of light" metaphorically. So they say one must come washed to the sacred rites and the prayers, pure and bright.

[132803] 22.142. And this—the being adorned and purified outwardly—is done for the sake of a symbol; but purity is to think holy things. And indeed an image of baptism would be the one handed down to the poets from Moses in some such way:

[133034] And she, having washed herself, having clean garments on her flesh,

[133103] Penelope comes to her prayer; and Telemachus,

[133150] having washed his hands in the grey sea, prayed to Athena.

[133210] This was a custom of the Jews, as also the frequent washing themselves after the bed. Well, then, is that also said:

[133328] Know that you are pure not by washing, but by the mind.

[133385] For perfect purity, I think, is that of the mind and of the works and of the thoughts, and besides the sincerity of words, and, lastly, sinlessness in dreams.

[133545] 22.143. And it is sufficient, I think, as a purification for a man, an exact and sure repentance, if indeed, having condemned ourselves for our former deeds, we put away the past, and after these things having understood, and having drawn the mind up out of both the things that delight according to sense and the former errors. If, then, one must give the etymology of "knowledge" [epistēmē], and must take its application from "standing" [stasis], because it sets [histēsi] our soul among the things, the soul that before was carried now this way, now that, then likewise faith [pistis] must be etymologized as the standing of our soul about that which is. But we long to learn of the man who is always and in all things just—who, neither fearing the punishment from the law, nor being cautious of the hatred of evil felt by those who are present and who pursue evildoers, nor suspecting the danger from the wronged men themselves, remains just; for the man who, on account of these things, abstains from doing anything unjust is not willingly good, but good through fear. And Epicurus too says that the wise man according to him does not wish to do wrong for the sake of some gain; for he cannot get assurance of escaping notice. So that, if he should be persuaded he will escape notice, he will do wrong, according to him.

[134873] 22.144. And such are the dark doctrines. But if, in hope of the recompense from God for the just, a man should abstain from doing wrong, this man too is not willingly good; for as fear justified the one, so a reward justifies this man—or rather, makes him seem to be just. But the hope after death—that it is good for the good and the contrary for the base—not only those who pursue the barbarian wisdom know, but the Pythagoreans too; for they too laid down hope as the end for those who philosophize. So that Socrates too in the Phaedo says that the good souls depart hence with a good hope, and again, blaming the base, he sets against them: "For they live with an evil hope." With this Heraclitus too plainly agrees, in what he says discoursing about men: "Things await men, when they have died, which they neither expect nor suppose."

[135714] 22.145. Divinely, then, Paul writes outright to the Romans: "Affliction works endurance, and endurance proof, and proof hope, and hope does not put to shame." For endurance is for the sake of the hope to come; but "hope" is also called, by the same name, the giving-back and the restoration of hope, which also "does not put to shame," being no longer reproached. But the man who obeys the bare call, in so far as he has been called, hurries on toward knowledge neither through fear nor through pleasures; for he does not look around whether any profitable gain or enjoyment follows him from outside, but, drawn by love of the truly existent Beloved and led toward what is fitting, he is pious.

[136410] 22.146. Hence not even if, by hypothesis, he should receive authority from God to do the forbidden things without punishment, nor even if he should receive the promise of receiving, as a reward for these, the goods of the blessed—nay, not even if he should be persuaded that he will escape the notice of God in the things he does, which is impossible—would he ever wish to do anything contrary to right reason, having once chosen the truly good and choiceworthy of itself, and on this account lovely. For we have understood that the good does not lie

[136962] in the food of the belly.

[136989] But that man has heard that "food does not commend us, nor indeed marriage, nor again abstinence from marriage in ignorance, but the gnostic work according to virtue"—since the dog too, the irrational animal, might be called continent, that fears the man lifting the staff and on this account abstains from the meat. And of such men, know well, that when the promise made beforehand has been taken away, and the threatened fear circumscribed, and the impending danger removed, their purpose is convicted.

[137495] 23.147. For they do not become familiar with the very nature of the thing, so as truly to grasp gnostically that all things created for our use are good—as, for example, marriage and the begetting of children received with prudence—but that it is better than good to become free from passion and virtuous through the likening to the divine. But, being drawn by the external things, useful or unuseful, they abstain from some and not from others; and indeed the things from which they hold off, they plainly loathe, slandering the creation and the Demiurge, and in their seeming to conduct themselves faithfully they have an unholy judgement. But "You shall not covet" needs neither the necessity that comes from fear, which forces abstinence from pleasant things, nor the reward which by promise persuades one to check the impulses; nor is the obedience for the sake of the commandment. But those who have obeyed God for the sake of the promise choose it for the sake of the promise, having been chosen by the lure of pleasure;

[138524] 23.148. nor would the turning away from perceptible things consequently produce the familiarity with the intelligible; rather, on the contrary, the familiarity with the intelligible produces a natural turning of the gnostic from the perceptible, when he has chosen the good gnostically by an election of the noble things—marvelling at the generation and sanctifying the Maker, and sanctifying the likening to the divine. "But I will free myself from desire," he will say, "for the sake of my familiarity with you, O Lord. For good is the dispensation that was created, and all things are well administered; nothing comes about without cause. I must be among your things, Almighty; and even if I am here, I am with you. I wish to be free of fear, that I may be able to draw near to you, and to be content with little, practising your just election of the noble things from the like things."

[139415] 23.149. Most mystically and most holily the apostle, teaching us the truly thankful election—an election not by way of rejection of the others as base, but of making nobler things out of noble ones—indicated this when he said: "So that both the one who gives his virgin in marriage does well, and the one who does not give her in marriage does better, toward what is seemly and waits well upon the Lord without distraction." And we know that the things hard to procure have, in the love of the good, been made by God not necessary, and the necessary things easy to procure. Wherefore Democritus says well that nature and teaching are nearly the same; and he has briefly added the reason: "for teaching reshapes a man, and reshaping makes his nature, and it differs in nothing whether one was moulded such by nature or remodelled in time and by learning." But the Lord has provided both—the one according to creation, the other according to the re-creation and renewal from the covenant. And the thing profitable to the more sovereign is the more choiceworthy; and most sovereign of all is the mind. To the man, then, to whom the truly noble things appear most pleasant, he procures from himself the fruit he longs for, the stability of the soul. "But he who hears me," it says, "shall rest in peace, confident, and shall be quiet, fearless of every evil. Be confident, with your whole heart and your mind, in God." By this way it is possible for the gnostic already to become a god: "I said, You are gods, and sons of the Most High."

[140950] 23.150. And Empedocles too says that the souls of the wise become gods, writing in some such way:

[141049] And at the end they become seers and hymn-singers and physicians and leaders among men upon the earth; whence they spring up gods, highest in honours.

[141201] Man, then, simply, is moulded thus according to the form of the spirit that is congenital with him; for he is fashioned neither shapeless nor formless in the workshop of nature, where mystically the generation of man is accomplished, the craft and the substance being common. But the particular man is characterized according to the impress that comes into the soul of the things he has chosen. Hence we say that Adam was perfect as regards his moulding; for none of the things that characterize the form and shape of man was lacking to him. But that which he was to receive in the becoming—the perfection, and to be justified through obedience—this was the thing laid upon him, namely, to come to maturity. But of him who chose by his own cause, and still more chose the forbidden, God is not the cause; for generation is twofold—the one of things begotten, the other of things coming to be.

[142095] 23.151. And the manliness [andreia] of man, who is by substance subject to passion, makes, they say, the one who partakes of it fearless and unconquerable; and wrath is the spear-bearer of the mind in endurance and steadfastness and the like; and over desire are ranked prudence and saving practical wisdom. But God is free of passion, free of wrath and free of desire; and He is not fearless in the sense of avoiding terrors, nor prudent in the sense of ruling over desires; for neither could the nature of God fall into any terror, nor does God flee cowardice, just as neither will He desire, so as to rule over desire. So mystically, concerning us, the Pythagorean saying was uttered, that man too must become one, since the high priest himself is one, there being one God, according to the unchangeable habit of the good ever running on.

[142938] 23.152. So at once the Saviour, along with desire, took away wrath too, wrath being a desire of vengeance; for, in general, the passible part . . . to every kind of desire; but the man who is made divine into freedom from passion becomes purely monadic. As, then, those at sea, drawn taut from an anchor, draw the anchor, but do not drag it to themselves, but rather themselves to the anchor, so those who, in the gnostic life, draw God to themselves, unawares are themselves led toward God; for the man who serves God serves himself. In the contemplative life, then, a man takes care of himself, worshipping God, and through his own sincere purification he beholds the holy God holily; for prudence, conceived as standing by and watching over itself and contemplating itself unceasingly, is likened, as far as possible, to God.

[143768] 24.153. So at once the thing in our power is that of which we are equally lords, both of it and of its opposite—as the philosophizing or not, and the believing or disbelieving. Through our being equally lords of either of the opposites, the thing in our power is found possible. And indeed the commandments are such as can be both done and not done by us, upon which there reasonably follows praise and blame; and again those who are punished on account of the sins committed by them are punished for these alone; for the things done have passed away, nor could the thing done ever become undone. So the sins before faith are forgiven by the Lord, not that they should not have come to pass, but as not having come to pass. Yet not all of them, Basilides says; only the involuntary and those in ignorance are forgiven, as if it were a man, but not God, who provided so great a gift. To this man the Scripture says: "You supposed, lawless one, that I would be like you." But even if we are punished for the voluntary ones, we are punished, not that they should not have come to pass, having come to pass, but because they came to pass. And punishment does not profit the sinner toward his not having done it, but toward his no longer sinning, nor any other man falling into the like.

[145052] 24.154. Here, then, the good God educates for these three causes: first, that the one being educated may become better than himself; next, that those able to be saved through examples may be checked beforehand, being admonished; and third, that the wronged man may not be easily despised and fit to be wronged. And two are the modes of correction—the one didactic, the other punitive, which we have called also educative. One must know, however, that those who fall into sins after the washing are the ones being educated; for the things done before were forgiven, but the things supervening are purged out. Concerning the unbelievers it was said that they are reckoned "as dust, which the wind drives from the face of the earth, and as a drop from a bucket."

[145813] 25.155. Blessed is the man who has gained learning of inquiry, neither setting out to the harm of the citizens nor toward unjust deeds, but beholding the ageless order of immortal nature, in what way it came together, and where and how. To such men there never clings the practice of shameful deeds.

[146114] With good reason, then, Plato too says that the contemplator of the ideas will live a god among men; "and mind is the place of the ideas, and mind is God." He said, then, that the contemplator of the invisible God lives a god among men; and in the Sophist Socrates named the Eleatic stranger, who was a dialectician, "a god"—"such gods, like strangers from abroad, who visit cities." For when the soul, having risen above generation, is by itself and converses with the forms, like the chief one in the Theaetetus, having become as it were an angel, it shall be with Christ, being contemplative, ever beholding the will of God; truly "alone wise, but the others flit about as shadows"; for "the dead bury their own dead." Whence Jeremiah says: "I will fill her with dead, earth-born men, whom my wrath has struck."

[146930] 25.156. God, then, being indemonstrable, is not an object of scientific knowledge; but the Son is wisdom and knowledge and truth and all else akin to this, and indeed has demonstration and exposition. And all the powers of the Spirit, becoming together one thing, are summed up unto the same, the Son; but He is uncircumscribed by the notion concerning each of His powers. And indeed He becomes neither absolutely one as one, nor many as parts, the Son, but as all things one. Whence also all things; for He is a circle of all the powers rolled up and unified into one.

[147501] 25.157. For this reason the Word is called Alpha and Omega, of whom alone the end becomes beginning, and again ends at the upper beginning, taking no separation anywhere. Therefore to believe in Him and through Him is to become monadic, unified without distraction in Him; while to disbelieve is to be in doubt and to stand apart and to be divided. For this reason the Lord says these things: "Every alien-born son, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh"—that is, unclean in body and spirit—"shall not enter the holy place, from among the aliens in the midst of the house of Israel, but only the Levites." And by "aliens" He meant those who have not wished to believe, but choose to disbelieve.

[148209] 25.158. Only those, then, who live purely are truly priests of God. For this reason, though all the tribes were circumcised, the tribes that anoint the high priests and kings and prophets were reckoned holier. Whence too He bids them not even touch the dead nor enter to the departed—not as though the body were defiled, but because sin and disobedience are fleshly and embodied and dead, and therefore abominable. To the father alone, and to the mother and son and daughter who have died, is the priest permitted to enter, because these alone are kindred of flesh and seed, from whom the priest too has received the immediate cause of his entry into life. And these too are purified for seven days, the number through which generation is completed; for on the seventh the rest is worshipped, and on the eighth he offers propitiation, as it is written in Ezekiel, according to which propitiation it is possible to receive the promise.

[149145] 25.159. And the perfect purification, I think, is the faith that comes through the law and the prophets unto the gospel; and the propitiation is the purity that comes through all obedience, together with the putting off of the worldly things, unto the thankful giving-back of the tabernacle at the release of the soul. Whether, then, it be the time which, through the seven periods numbered, restores into the highest rest, or the seven heavens, which some reckon by ascent, or even the fixed region that borders on the intelligible world, which is called the ogdoad—still he says the gnostic must rise up out of generation and sin. So at any rate on the seven days the victims for sins are sacrificed, for there is still caution about turning, and the seventh revolution too is touched.

[149934] 25.160. And Job the just himself says: "Naked I came out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I depart thither"—naked not of possessions (for that is a small and common thing), but, as a righteous man, he departs naked of vice and sin and of the formless image that follows those who have lived unjustly; for this was the thing said, "Unless you turn and become as the little children," pure in the flesh, holy in the soul through abstinence from evil works—God showing that He wishes us to be such as He has begotten us from the womb of water; for generation, succeeding generation by way of advancement, wishes to make us immortal, but "the lamp of the impious shall be quenched."

[150618] 25.161. Yes, and the purity in body and soul which the gnostic pursues, the all-wise Moses, using the repetition fittingly, indicated, describing the incorruption of the body and of the soul in the case of Rebecca thus: "But the virgin was fair, she was a virgin, no man had known her." And Rebecca is interpreted "the glory of God"; and the glory of God is incorruption. This is the truly righteous thing—not to have advantage in either part, but to be a wholly sanctified temple of the Lord. Righteousness, then, is peace of life and stability, to which the Lord released, saying, "Depart in peace"; for Salem is interpreted "peace," of which our Saviour is recorded as king, whom Moses calls "Melchizedek, king of Salem, priest of the Most High God," the one giving the wine and the bread, the sanctified food, as a type of the Eucharist. And indeed Melchizedek is interpreted "righteous king"; and there is a synonymy of righteousness and peace.

[151569] 25.162. But Basilides supposes Righteousness and her daughter Peace to be subsistent beings, abiding ranked in the ogdoad. We must pass over, then, from the more natural matters to the more manifest ethical ones; for the discussion concerning those things will follow after the work in hand. The Saviour Himself, then, plainly, as in the tragedy, leads us into the mysteries,

[151946] seeing those who see, and gives the sacred rites.

[151997] And if you ask:

[152014] And these rites—of what form are they to you?

[152061] you will hear again:

[152083] Things not to be spoken, for mortals uninitiated to know.

[152142] And if anyone busily inquires of what kind they are, let him hear again:

[152216] It is not lawful for you to hear, but they are worthy to know: the rites hate the man who practises impiety against God.

[152338] God is without beginning, the wholly complete beginning of all things, the maker of the beginning. In so far, then, as He is substance, He is the beginning of the natural realm; in so far as He is the good, of the ethical; in so far again as He is mind, of the rational and judging realm. Whence too the Word alone is teacher, the Son of the Father-mind, the one who educates man.

[152720] 26.163. Not reasonably, then, do those run down the moulding and disparage the body, not perceiving that the structure of man was made upright for the contemplation of heaven, and that the organization of the senses tends toward knowledge, and the limbs and parts toward the good, not fitted out for pleasure. Hence this dwelling becomes receptive of the soul most precious to God and of the Holy Spirit, through the sanctification of soul and body, being deemed worthy and perfected by the equipping of the Saviour. And indeed the reciprocal sequence of the three virtues is found in connection with the gnostic man, who busies himself ethically and naturally and rationally about the divine. For wisdom is the knowledge of divine and human things; righteousness is the harmony of the parts of the soul; and holiness is the service of God. And if anyone should assert that the flesh, and through it generation, is slandered, citing Isaiah, who says, "All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of grass; the grass withered and the flower fell off; but the word of the Lord abides for ever," let him hear the Spirit interpreting the thing inquired into through Jeremiah: "And I scattered them like dry twigs blown by the wind into the desert.

[153980] 26.164. This is the lot and portion of your disobeying, says the Lord; because you forgot me and hoped in lies, I too will uncover your hinder parts to your face, and your dishonour shall be seen, your adultery and your neighing," and so on. For this is the flower of the grass—both walking according to the flesh and being fleshly, according to the apostle, being in sins. The soul, it has been agreed, is better than the man, and the body inferior; but neither is the soul good by nature nor again the body evil by nature, nor is that which is not good straightway evil. For there are indeed certain middle things, and among the middle things things preferred and things rejected. The composition of man, then, having come into being among perceptible things, had to be constituted of different things, but not of opposites—of body and soul.

[154825] 26.165. So the good deeds, then, are always, as better, attached to the better part, the spiritual; but the pleasure-loving and sinful ones are assigned to the inferior, the sinful part. So at once the soul of the wise and gnostic man, as though lodging as a guest in the body, conducts itself toward it gravely and honourably, not with passionate attachment, ready, whenever the time of departure should call, to leave the tabernacle. "A sojourner," it says, "in the land, and a pilgrim am I with you." And from this Basilides took to say that the election is a stranger to the world, as being by nature supramundane. But it is not so. For all things are of one God, and no one would be by nature a stranger to the world, the substance being one and the God one; but the elect man conducts himself as a stranger, knowing all things as things to be possessed and things to be given up.

[155712] 26.166. And all the things the Peripatetics wish to be threefold goods, he uses, even the body too, as a man setting out on a far journey uses inns and the dwellings by the road—taking care of and adorning the place where he lodges, but leaving the dwelling and the possession, like its use, without passionate attachment, readily following the one who leads him away from life, in no way turning back for any cause whatever, having given thanks for the sojourning, but blessing his departure, embracing the abode in heaven. For "we know that, if our earthly house of the tabernacle is dissolved, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. For indeed in this we groan, longing to be clothed upon with our dwelling from heaven, if indeed, being clothed, we shall not be found naked; for we walk by faith, not by sight," as the apostle says. "But we are willing rather to be away from the body and at home with the Lord." Now the "rather" is in comparison; and comparison is among things that fall under likeness, as the more courageous is more courageous than the courageous, and most courageous of the cowardly.

[156864] 26.167. Whence he added: "Wherefore we are ambitious, whether at home or away, to be well-pleasing to Him"—plainly to the one God, of whom all things are work and creation, both the world and the things above the world. I admire Epicharmus when he plainly says:

[157127] The man pious in mind would suffer no evil when he is dead; the spirit abides above in heaven;

[157223] and the lyric poet when he sings:

[157258] The souls of the impious flit below heaven over the earth in murderous pains, under inescapable yokes of evils; but the souls of the pious dwell in heaven, singing in hymns the great Blessed One.

[157455] The soul, then, is not sent down hither from heaven to the worse things—for God works all things toward the better—but the soul that has chosen the best life exchanges, by the righteousness of God, the earth for heaven.

[157676] 26.168. With good reason, then, Job, having become possessed of knowledge, said: "Now I know that you can do all things, and that nothing is impossible for you. For who reports to me things I did not know, great and marvellous things which I did not understand? But I despised myself, reckoning myself to be earth and ashes." For the man who is in ignorance is sinful and earth and ashes; but the man established in knowledge, made like to God so far as he can be, is already spiritual and on this account elect. And that the Scripture calls the foolish and disobedient "earth," Jeremiah the prophet will make plain, speaking against Joachim and his brothers: "O earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord; write this man down as a man banished by proclamation."

[158437] 26.169. And again another prophet says: "Hear, O heaven, and give ear, O earth"—calling understanding the "hearing," and the soul of the gnostic, who has taken upon himself the contemplation of heaven and of divine things, and in this way has become an Israelite, the "heaven"; for, on the contrary, he called the man who has chosen ignorance and hardness of heart "earth," and the "give ear" he addressed from the organs of hearing, the ears, assigning the fleshly things to those who cleave to the perceptible things. These are they concerning whom Micah the prophet says: "Hear, O peoples, the word of the Lord, you who dwell among pains." And Abraham said, "By no means, Lord, you who judge the earth"—since the man who has disbelieved is, according to the saving voice, already judged.

[159229] 26.170. And it is written too in Kingdoms, the judgement and the decree of the Lord being thus: "God hears the righteous, but the impious He does not save, because they do not wish to know God; for the Almighty will not accomplish absurd things." What against this voice do the heresies still utter, when the Scripture proclaims the Almighty to be a good God and guiltless of vice and injustice—if indeed ignorance arises through not knowing, but God does nothing absurd? For "this is our God," it says, "and there is none beside Him who saves"; for "there is no injustice with God," according to the apostle. And still more plainly the prophet teaches the counsel of God and the gnostic advancement through these words: "And now, Israel, what does the Lord your God ask of you, but to fear the Lord your God and to walk in all His ways and to love Him and to serve Him alone?" This He asks of you, who have the authority to choose salvation.

[160173] 26.171. What, then, did the Pythagoreans intend when they bade men pray aloud with the voice? It seems to me, not that they supposed the divine could not hear those who speak softly, but that they wished the prayers to be just—such as one would not be ashamed to make with many witnesses. But concerning prayer we shall treat at the proper season as the discourse proceeds; and as for works, we ought to have them crying aloud, walking as in the day: "For let your works shine." "And behold, the man and his works are before his face." "For behold, God and His works." One must imitate God, as far as is possible for the gnostic. And to me it seems that the poets too call the elect among themselves "godlike" and "divine" and "like to the gods" and "equal to Zeus in counsel" and "having counsels like the gods" and "godlike in form"—nibbling, as it were, at the "according to the image and likeness."

[161077] 26.172. Euripides, then, says:

[161109] Golden wings indeed are about my back,

[161149] and:

[161155] and the lovely sandals of the Sirens are fitted on, and I shall go, lifted high into the vast aether, to mingle with Zeus.

[161279] But I would pray that the Spirit of Christ might wing me into my own Jerusalem; for the Stoics too say that heaven properly is a city, but the things here on earth are no longer cities—they are called so, but are not; for a city is something earnest, and a people a noble assembly and a multitude of men governed by law, as the Church is by reason—an unbesieged, untyrannized city upon earth, a divine will upon earth as in heaven. The poets too create images of this city in their writings; for the Hyperborean and the Arimaspian cities and the Elysian plains are commonwealths of the just. And we know too Plato's city, laid up as a pattern in heaven.