WORK: Stromata  (slug: clement-of-alexandria-stromata-694383)

CHAPTER: 05-book-5



[109005] 13.90. And besides, that prophetic saying, "And the earth was invisible and unfurnished," supplied them with starting-points for a material substance. Indeed, to Epicurus the smuggling-in of chance came from not following the meaning; whence "vanity of vanities, all is vanity." And Aristotle was able to bring providence down only as far as the moon, from this Psalm: "O Lord, your mercy is in the heaven, and your truth reaches to the clouds." For the showing-forth of the prophetic mysteries was not yet uncovered before the coming of the Lord. And again, the punishments after death, and the chastisement by fire, the whole poetic muse, and the Greek philosophy too, filched from the barbarian philosophy. Plato, at any rate, in the last book of the Republic, says in these very words: "There, then, savage men, fiery to look upon, standing by and marking the utterance, took some apart and led them away; but Aridaeus and the others they bound, hands and feet and head, and threw down and flayed, and dragged them along the way outside, carding them upon thorns." For the fiery men he means to be angels, who take the unjust and chastise them; "he makes," it says, "his angels winds, and his ministers a flaming fire."

[110230] 13.91. And it follows upon these that the soul is immortal. For that which is chastised or instructed, being in sensation, lives, even though it be said to suffer. And again — does not Plato know of rivers of fire and the depth of the earth, calling, in poetic fashion, what is named by the barbarians Gehenna "Tartarus," and bringing in Cocytus and Acheron and Pyriphlegethon and certain such places of chastisement for the bringing of men to soberness through instruction? And of the little ones, according to the Scripture, and the least, the angels who behold God, and moreover the oversight that comes to us through the appointed angels — showing these things, he does not shrink from writing: "When all the souls had chosen their lives, as they had drawn lots, they went up in order to Lachesis; and she sent with each, as a guard of his life and a fulfiller of what he had chosen, that spirit which he had chosen." And perhaps the divine sign hinted some such thing to Socrates too.

[111221] 13.92. Indeed, that the world is begotten, the philosophers laid down as a doctrine taking it from Moses. And Plato downright says: "Was it always, having no beginning of generation, or has it come to be, beginning from some beginning? It has come to be; for it is visible and tangible, and being tangible has a body." And again, when he says, "Now the Maker and Father of this whole it is a task to find," he not only showed the world to be begotten, but signifies that it came to be from him as a son, and that he is called its Father, as having come from him alone and subsisted out of what was not. And the Stoics too lay it down that the world is begotten. And the devil so noised abroad by the barbarian philosophy, the ruler of the spirits, Plato in the tenth book of the Laws calls an evil-working soul, in these words: "Must we not say that a soul ordering and dwelling in all things that move every way orders the heaven too? Surely. One soul, or more? More — I will answer for you both. Let us lay down not fewer than two, the one beneficent, and the other able to work the contrary."

[112318] 13.93. And likewise in the Phaedrus he writes thus: "There are indeed other evils too; but some spirit has mingled with most of them, in the immediate present, a pleasure." But in the tenth book of the Laws, too, he downright shows forth that apostolic saying, "Our wrestling is not against blood and flesh, but against the principalities, against the powers, against the spiritual hosts in the heavens," writing somewhat thus: "Since, then, we have granted among ourselves that the heaven is full of many goods, and of their opposites too, but of the latter the more, there is, we say, such a battle undying, and needing wondrous watchfulness." And the barbarian philosophy, again, knows the world to be intelligible on the one hand, and sensible on the other; the one an archetype, the other the image of what is called the pattern; and it dedicates the one to the monad, as being intelligible, and the sensible to the hexad. For among the Pythagoreans the hexad, as being a generative number, is called marriage. And in the monad it sets up an invisible heaven and an unseen earth and intelligible light; "for in the beginning," it says, "God made the heaven and the earth; and the earth was invisible."

[113526] 13.94. Then it goes on: "And God said, Let there be light; and there was light." And in the sensible cosmogony he fashions a solid heaven (and the solid is sensible) and a visible earth and a light that is seen. Does it not seem to you that hence Plato leaves the ideas of living creatures in the intelligible world, and fashions the sensible kinds according to the intelligible genera? With reason, then, Moses says that the body was moulded out of earth — which Plato calls an "earthy tabernacle" — and that the rational soul was breathed in from above by God into the face. For here, they say, the ruling part is seated, interpreting the entrance of the soul through the senses in the case of the first-moulded man; wherefore man came to be after the image and likeness. For the image of God is the divine and royal Word, the man free from passion; and the image of the image is the human mind. And if you wish to take the assimilation by another name, you would find it called, in Moses, a divine "following"; for he says, "After the Lord your God you shall walk, and his commandments you shall keep." And followers, I think, and worshippers of God are all the virtuous.

[114702] 13.95. Hence the Stoics have said that the end of philosophy is to live in agreement with nature, and Plato, to be made like God (as we set forth in the second book of the Stromateis). And Zeno the Stoic, taking from Plato, and Plato from the barbarian philosophy, says that all good men are friends of one another. For Socrates says, in the Phaedrus, that it is not fated for evil to be friend to evil, nor good not friend to good — which he showed sufficiently in the Lysis too, that in injustice and wickedness friendship could never be preserved. And the Athenian stranger likewise says that there is an act dear to and in accordance with God, holding one ancient principle, when the like is friend to the like, it being measured, but the unmeasured is friend neither to the unmeasured nor to the measured.

[115514] 13.96. And God would be for us the measure of all things. Then, a little after, he adds again: "For every good man is like to every good man, and in this is like also to God, and is friend both to every good man and to God." Coming to this point, I called to mind that other saying; for at the end of the Timaeus he says that one ought to liken the thinking part to the thing thought, according to the ancient nature, and, having made it like, to attain the end of the best life set before man by the gods, both for the present and for the time to come. For these have the same force as those words: "He who seeks will not cease until he finds; and having found, he will be amazed; and being amazed, he will reign; and having reigned, he will rest." And again — do not those sayings of Thales hang upon these? For the "being glorified unto the ages of ages" and the being called among us "the knower of hearts" he plainly interprets. Thales, at any rate, being asked what the divine is, said, "That which has neither beginning nor end." And when another inquired whether the divine escapes a man's notice when he does anything, "How," he said, "when it does not escape him even when he thinks?" Indeed the barbarian philosophy knows only the noble to be good, and virtue to be sufficient for happiness, when it says: "Behold, I have set before your eyes the good and the evil, life and death; choose life." For the good it calls life, and the choice of it noble, but the choosing of the contrary it calls evil. And of good and of life there is one end, to become a lover of God; "for this is your life and your length of days, to love what is toward the truth."

[117177] 13.97. And those words have it still more plainly. For the Saviour, having charged us to love God and our neighbour, says that on these two commandments hang the whole law and the prophets. These doctrines the Stoics noise abroad, and before them Socrates, in the Phaedrus, praying: "O Pan and you other gods, grant that I may be beautiful within." And in the Theaetetus he says outright: "For he who speaks beautifully is beautiful and good." And in the Protagoras he confesses to his comrades that he met one fairer than Alcibiades, if indeed the wisest is the fairest; for he said virtue is the beauty of the soul, and, on the contrary, vice the ugliness of the soul. And Antipater the Stoic, having written three books on the point that, according to Plato, the noble alone is good, shows that, according to him too, virtue is sufficient for happiness, and sets down many other doctrines in accord with the Stoics. And to Aristobulus, who lived under Ptolemy Philometor, whom the writer of the epitome of the books of the Maccabees mentions, there belong sufficient books, in which he shows that the Peripatetic philosophy depends upon the law according to Moses and upon the other prophets.

[118374] 13.98. And let these things be so. But that we are brethren, as being of one God and one teacher, Plato too somewhere appears to declare, somewhat thus: "For you are all brethren in the city, as we shall say to them, telling our tale; but God, in moulding you, mingled gold in the begetting of those of you who are fit to rule, wherefore they are most honoured; and silver in the auxiliaries; and iron and bronze in the husbandmen and the other craftsmen." Hence, he says, there is need to welcome and to love these things, in which knowledge is, but those others, in which opinion is. Perhaps he divines this elect nature that reaches after knowledge — unless, supposing three natures, he is sketching three polities, as some have taken it, of the Jews the silver, of the Greeks the third, and of the Christians, in whom the royal gold, the Holy Spirit, has been mingled. And, setting forth the Christian life, he writes in these very words in the Theaetetus: "Let us speak of the chief men. For why should one speak of those who pass their time meanly in philosophy? These men know neither the way to the market-place, nor where the court is, nor the council-chamber, nor any other common gathering of the city; laws and decrees written they neither see nor hear. The eagernesses of partisans, and assemblies, and revels with flute-girls — to do such things does not occur to them even in a dream. And whether anyone in the city has been born well or ill, or what evil has befallen anyone from his forefathers, escapes them more than the proverbial pints of the sea. And he does not even know that he does not know all this; but in truth his body alone lies and sojourns in the city, while he himself, according to Pindar, flies about, measuring out the heavens above and the earth beneath, doing astronomy, and searching out all nature on every side."

[120230] 13.99. Again, to the Lord's saying, "Let your yes be yes, and your no, no," that other is to be likened: "But to me it is in no way lawful either to grant a falsehood or to do away with the truth." And with the prohibition of swearing this saying in the tenth book of the Laws agrees: "Let praise and oath be far from everything." And, in sum, Pythagoras and Socrates and Plato, when they say they hear the voice of God, beholding the framework of the whole accurately made by God and held together unceasingly, have heard Moses saying, "He said, and it came to be" — describing the word of God as a work. And standing upon the moulding of man out of dust, the philosophers at every turn proclaim the body earthy; and Homer does not shrink from setting, by way of curse, the words: "But may you all become water and earth," just as Isaiah says, "And tread them down as clay."

[121107] 13.100. And Callimachus plainly writes: "That was the year in which both the winged thing, and that in the sea, and the four-footed, so spoke, as the Promethean clay." And again the same: "If Prometheus moulded you, and you are come of clay and of no other thing." And Hesiod says concerning Pandora: "And he bade the renowned Hephaestus, as quickly as might be, to mix earth with water, and to set in it a man's voice and mind." The Stoics define nature as a craftsmanlike fire, going by a way toward generation; but God and his Word are allegorized by the Scripture as fire and light. And again — does not Homer too, paraphrasing the separation of the water from the earth, and the plain uncovering of the dry land, say of Tethys and Oceanus: "For already a long time they have held apart from one another the bed of love"? Again, the most learned among the Greeks ascribe to God omnipotence in all things — Epicharmus (and he was a Pythagorean) saying, "Nothing escapes the divine; this you must know: he himself is our watcher, and nothing is impossible to God."

[122175] 13.101. And the lyric poet: "And it is possible for God, out of black night, to raise an unstained light, and with dark cloudy gloom to cover the pure brightness of the day" (for the one who alone, while day is present, can make night, this, he says, is God); and in the work entitled Phaenomena, Aratus, having said, "Let us begin from Zeus," whom, O men, we never leave unspoken, adds: "and full of Zeus are all the streets, and all the gatherings of men, full too the sea and the harbours; everywhere we all have need of Zeus. For we are also his offspring" — that is, his creation; "and gentle to men he gives favourable signs, and stirs the peoples to work; and these signs he fixed in the heaven, distinguishing the stars; and he looked out, against the year, for stars that should most surely signify to men the things of the seasons, that all might grow firm; and him men ever propitiate first and last: hail, Father, great wonder, great help to men." And before him Homer too, fashioning the world after Moses upon the shield wrought by Hephaestus, says: "On it he made the earth, and on it the heaven, and on it the sea, and on it all the constellations with which heaven is crowned." For the Zeus sung of in the poems and in the prose writings carries the conception up to God.

[123465] 13.102. And already, as one might say, in the light of day, Democritus writes that there are a few of mankind who, lifting up their hands toward what we Greeks now call the air, say, "Zeus debates all things, and this one knows all things and gives all things and takes them away, and this is king of all." And more mystically the Boeotian Pindar, being a Pythagorean, hands down: "One is the race of men, one of gods, and from one mother do we both draw breath" — that is, of matter — and one Maker of these, whom he calls "the most excellent craftsman, the Father," who has furnished even the advances, according to desert, toward divinity. For I pass over Plato; he downright, in the letter to Erastus and Coriscus, appears, I know not how, to show forth Father and Son out of the Hebrew Scriptures, charging in these words: "Calling to witness, in earnest and not without the grace of the Muses, and with discipline, the sister of earnestness, the God who is the cause of all, and the Lord, the Father of the leader and cause, whom, if you philosophize rightly, you shall know." And the address in the Timaeus calls the Creator Father, saying somewhat thus: "Gods of gods, of whom I am Father and Maker of works."

[124684] 13.103. So that even when he says, "About the king of all are all things, and he is the cause of all noble things; and the second is about the second things, and the third about the third things," I for my part understand it in no other way than that the holy Trinity is signified: for the third is the Holy Spirit, and the Son the second, through whom all things came to be according to the will of the Father. And the same Plato, in the tenth book of the Republic, mentions Er the son of Armenius, by race a Pamphylian, who is Zoroaster. Zoroaster himself, at any rate, writes: "These things I, Zoroaster son of Armenius, a Pamphylian by race, having died in war, learned from the gods while I was in Hades." This Zoroaster Plato says came to life again, lying twelve days upon the pyre. Perhaps, then, he hints at the resurrection; or perhaps at this, that the way is made for souls, through the twelve signs of the zodiac, to the ascent; and he says the same descent is made even to birth. And in this way one must understand that the labours of Heracles too came to be twelve, after which the soul obtains its release from this whole world. Nor do I pass over Empedocles, who in his physical way speaks of the taking-up of all things, as if a change were to come at some time into the substance of fire.

[125994] 13.104. And most plainly Heraclitus of Ephesus is of this opinion, approving the view that one world is everlasting, and another is perishing — knowing that the world taken in respect of its arrangement is not other than the former, considered in a certain state. But that he knew the world, peculiarly qualified out of all substance, to be everlasting, he makes plain by speaking thus: "This world, the same for all, neither any of the gods nor of men made; but it ever was and is and shall be, an ever-living fire, kindled in measures and quenched in measures." And that he held it also to be begotten and perishable, the words that follow show: "The turnings of fire: first the sea; and of the sea, the half is earth, and the half the fiery storm-cloud." For in effect he says that fire, by the Word and God who orders the whole, is turned through air into the moisture which is as the seed of the world's ordering, which he calls "sea"; and out of this in turn come earth and heaven and all that they contain. And how it is again taken up and burned, he plainly shows by these words: "The sea is poured out and measured into the same proportion as it was before it became earth." And concerning the other elements the same things hold likewise.

[127244] 13.105. The most reputed of the Stoics dogmatize in a like manner, treating both of the conflagration, and of the world's ordering, and of the peculiarly-qualified world and man, and of the further continuance of our souls. And again Plato, in the seventh book of the Republic, has called the day here "nocturnal" (on account, I think, of the world-rulers of this darkness), and the soul's descent into the body "sleep" and "death," in agreement with Heraclitus. And perhaps the Spirit foretold this, concerning the Saviour, through David, saying: "I lay down and slept; I awoke, because the Lord will sustain me." For it allegorizes not the resurrection of Christ alone as a rousing from sleep, but the Lord's descent into the flesh too as a sleep.

[127995] 13.106. The same Saviour, for instance, charges: "Watch" — that is, "Practise living, and try to separate the soul from the body." And the Lord's day Plato divines in the tenth book of the Republic, by these words: "And when seven days had passed for each in the meadow, on the eighth they must arise and depart thence, and arrive on the fourth day after." The meadow, then, is to be understood as the fixed sphere, as a gentle place and a kindly, and the region of the holy; and the seven days as each motion of the seven, and all the workful craft hastening to the end of rest. But the journey after the wandering stars leads to heaven — that is, to the eighth motion and day. And he says the souls go away "on the fourth day," showing the journey through the four elements.

[128773] 13.107. But the seventh day, too, is held sacred not only by the Hebrews but by the Greeks, according to which the whole world of all things that are quickened and grow goes round. Hesiod, then, speaks of it thus: "First the new moon and the fourth, and the seventh, a holy day." And again: "On the seventh again the bright light of the sun." And Homer: "On the seventh thereupon came the holy day." And: "The seventh was holy." And again: "It was the seventh day, and on it all was accomplished." And again: "On the seventh dawn we left the stream from Acheron." Indeed Callimachus the poet too writes: "On the seventh dawn, and on it all things were fashioned." And again: "Among good things is the seventh, and the seventh is the birthday." And: "The seventh is among the first, and the seventh is perfect." And: "Seven were all the things made in the starry heaven, appearing in their circles as the years come round."

[129697] 13.108. But the elegies of Solon too greatly deify the hebdomad. And again — is it not like the Scripture that says, "Let us take away the just man, because he is troublesome to us," when Plato, all but prophesying the saving dispensation, says in the second book of the Republic, somewhat thus: "Thus disposed, the just man shall be scourged, racked, bound, have both his eyes burned out, and at last, having suffered all evils, shall be impaled"? And Antisthenes the Socratic, paraphrasing that prophetic voice, "To whom have you likened me? says the Lord," says that God is like to no one; wherefore no one can learn him thoroughly from an image. And Xenophon the Athenian says the like, in these words: "He, at any rate, who shakes all things and brings them to rest, that he is some great and powerful one is plain; but of what form he is, is unseen; nor does the sun, who seems all-radiant, even he, seem to allow himself to be looked upon, but if anyone gazes at him shamelessly, he takes away the sight." For "what flesh can with its eyes behold the heavenly and true immortal God, who dwells in the sky? Nay, men, mortal-born, cannot stand even over against the rays of the sun," the Sibyl foretold.

[130907] 13.109. Well, then, does Xenophanes of Colophon, teaching that God is one and incorporeal, add: "One God, greatest among gods and men, in no way like to mortals, neither in body nor in mind." And again: "But mortals think that the gods are born, and have their own raiment and voice and shape." And again: "But if oxen or lions had hands, so as to draw with their hands and accomplish such works as men, then horses would draw the forms of gods like horses, and oxen like oxen, and would make their bodies such as each itself had."

[131440] 13.110. Let us hear again Bacchylides the lyric poet speaking of the divine: "They are untamed of unseemly diseases, and unharmed, in no way like to men." And Cleanthes the Stoic, having written these things about God in a certain poem: "You ask me what the Good is like? Hear, then: ordered, just, holy, pious, master of itself, useful, beautiful, fitting, austere, downright, ever profitable, fearless, painless, advantageous, free of grief, beneficial, well-pleasing, secure, friendly, honoured, consistent, . . . of good repute, free of conceit, careful, gentle, strong, lasting, blameless, ever-abiding."

[132051] 13.111. And the same poet, in what he leaves unsaid, censuring the idolatry of the many, adds: "Unfree is everyone who looks to opinion, as though he should obtain from it some good." We must, then, no longer suppose things concerning the divine according to the opinion of the many. For neither do I think it secret — "putting on the shape of a malefactor of light, to come to your bed, like a man, to Zeus's chamber" — Amphion says to Antiope. And Sophocles plainly writes: "For Zeus wedded the mother of this man, not gold-shaped nor wrapped in the feather of a swan, as he made pregnant the Pleuronian maid, but as a man through and through." Then, coming on, he adds: "And swift the adulterer set foot upon the nuptial steps." Upon which, still more plainly, he describes the incontinence of the fabled Zeus, somewhat thus: "And he, touching neither feast nor lustral water, went to the bed, his heart stung; and all that night he raged with lust." Let such things, then, be left to the follies of the theatres. But Heraclitus says outright: "Though this Word is true forever, men prove uncomprehending, both before they hear it and when first they have heard it."

[133222] 13.112. And the lyric poet Melanippides, singing, says: "Hear me, O Father, wonder of mortals, ruler of the ever-living soul." And the great Parmenides, as Plato says in the Sophist, writes of the divine somewhat thus: "very many things, as that it is unbegotten and imperishable, whole and only-begotten and unshaken and unbegotten." And Hesiod too: "For he himself is king and lord of all the immortals; and against your might no other has matched himself." Indeed tragedy too, drawing men away from the idols, teaches them to look up to heaven.

[133771] 13.113. Sophocles, as Hecataeus, who composed the histories, says in his work On Abraham and the Egyptians, cries out plainly upon the stage: "One in very truth, one is God, who made the heaven and the broad earth, and the grey-green swell of the sea, and the strength of the winds. But we mortals, many, wandering in heart, set up for ourselves a comfort in our pains — images of the gods made of stones, or of bronze, or of figures wrought of gold or ivory; and decking these with sacrifices and vain festivals, we think thus we are pious."

[134315] 13.114. And Euripides, playing the tragedian upon the same stage, says: "Do you behold this boundless aether on high, and the earth held round in its moist embraces? This deem to be Zeus; this hold to be God." And in the play Pirithous the same poet also sings these things in tragic vein: "You, the self-grown, who have woven the nature of all things in the aetherial whirl, around whom light, and round whom dusky night of changing hue, and the countless throng of stars unceasingly dance." For here by "the self-grown" he means the creative Mind, and what follows is ranked of the world, in which are the oppositions of light and darkness. And Aeschylus, the son of Euphorion, says of God most solemnly: "Zeus is the aether, Zeus is the earth, Zeus is the heaven; Zeus, indeed, is all things, and whatever is higher than these."

[135148] 13.115. I know that Plato too bears witness to Heraclitus, who writes: "The one wise alone is unwilling and willing to be called by the name of Zeus." And again: "It is law also to obey the counsel of one." And if you should wish to refer that saying, "He who has ears to hear, let him hear," you would find it indicated somewhat thus by the Ephesian: "The uncomprehending, when they have heard, are like the deaf; the saying bears them witness that, being present, they are absent." But do you long to hear of one beginning even from the Greeks? Timaeus the Locrian, in his work on nature, will witness to me thus, word for word: "There is one beginning of all things, unbegotten; for if it had come to be, it would no longer be a beginning, but that from which the beginning came to be." For from that source flowed the true opinion: "Hear, O Israel; the Lord your God is one, and him alone you shall serve." "This one, behold, is plain to all, unwandering," as the Sibyl says.

[136129] 13.116. And already Homer too appears to speak of Father and Son, by these words, having hit upon a happy divining: "If, then, no one forces you, being alone, it is in no way possible to escape the malady of great Zeus; for the Cyclopes care nothing for Zeus the aegis-bearer." And before him Orpheus, bearing upon the matter before us, has said: "Son of great Zeus, Father of Zeus the aegis-bearer." And Xenocrates of Chalcedon, calling the one Zeus highest and the other lowest, leaves a showing of Father and Son. And, most marvellous of all, Homer appears to know the divine, though he brings in the gods as subject to human passion — which not even Epicurus reverences thus.

[136810] 13.117. He says, at any rate: "Why, son of Peleus, do you pursue me with swift feet, yourself being mortal, a god immortal? Have you not yet known that I am a god?" For he has made plain that the divine is not to be caught nor grasped by a mortal, neither with feet nor with hands nor with eyes, nor at all with the body. "To whom have you likened the Lord? Or with what likeness have you likened him?" says the Scripture. "Has a workman made an image, or a goldsmith, having melted gold, gilded it over?" — and the things that follow.

[137347] 13.118. And the comic poet Epicharmus speaks plainly of the Word in his Republic, somewhat thus: "Life has very great need for man of reckoning and number; we live by number and reckoning, for these save mortals." Then he downright adds: "Reason governs men, and saves them in their measure." Then: "If there is reckoning in man, there is also a divine reason. The one in man is born for the conduct of life; but the divine reason attends upon all the arts, itself teaching men what they must do for their advantage. For man did not find out an art, but God brings it; and the reason in man is sprung from the divine reason."

[137974] 13.119. Indeed, when the Spirit cries out through Isaiah, "What to me is the multitude of your sacrifices? says the Lord; I am full of whole-burnt-offerings of rams, and the fat of lambs and the blood of bulls I do not want"; and a little after adds, "Wash yourselves, become clean, take away the wickednesses from your souls," and the things that follow — Menander the comic poet writes in these very words: "If anyone, O Pamphilus, bringing a sacrifice — a multitude of bulls or of kids, or, by Zeus, of other such things, or fashionings, having made golden cloaks or purple ones, or figures of ivory or emerald — thinks to make God well-disposed, he is deceived and has a feather-light mind. For a man must be of use, not corrupting maidens nor committing adultery, not stealing and slaughtering for the sake of money. Nor covet even the thread of a needle, friend; for God sees you, being present near at hand." "I am a God who draws near, and not a God afar off; or shall a man do anything in secret, and I shall not see him?" he says through Jeremiah.

[139033] 13.120. And again Menander, paraphrasing that Scripture, "Sacrifice a sacrifice of righteousness, and hope upon the Lord," writes somewhat thus: "Never covet, dearest, even a needle that belongs to another; for God delights in righteous deeds, and not in unjust ones, and suffers the man who toils to lift up his own life, ploughing the earth night and day. To God sacrifice continually, being righteous, not splendid in your cloaks so much as in your heart. If you hear thunder, do not flee, conscious of no evil within yourself, O master; for God sees you, being present near at hand." "While you are still speaking," says the Scripture, "I will say, Behold, I am here."

[139707] 13.121. Again Diphilus the comic poet discourses thus concerning the judgement: "Do you think, Niceratus, that the dead, who have partaken of all luxury in life, have escaped the divine as though unobserved? There is an eye of Justice that sees all things. For we believe there are two paths in Hades — one of the just, the other of the impious. And if the earth shall cover both for all time, then go off and plunder, steal, despoil, throw all into confusion; but be deceived in nothing — there is a judgement even in Hades, which God will hold, the master of all, whose name is fearful, and which I would not even name. He gives to those who sin a long span of life. And if any mortal thinks that, doing some evil by day, he has escaped the gods, he is convicted of thinking wickedly, and of being so, whenever Justice chances to have leisure. Look, all you who think there is no God: there is, there is. And if any man, being evil by nature, does well, let him gain the time; for in time, afterward, he will pay the penalty." And tragedy sings in tune with these things by these words: "For there shall be, there shall be, that time of the age, when the golden-faced aether shall let loose its treasury full of fire, and the nursed flame, raging, shall burn up all things upon earth and on high."

[141008] 13.122. And a little after he goes on again: "But when the whole shall fail, all the deep of the waves shall be gone, and the earth bereft of its seats, and the air, set on fire, shall no longer bear up the winged tribes; and then it shall save all that it formerly destroyed." The like to these we shall find in the Orphic writings too, written somewhat thus: "For having hidden all, again into the gladdening light he brought them up from his holy heart, doing dreadful deeds." But if we live our lives in holiness and righteousness, we are blessed here, and more blessed after our departure hence, having our happiness not for some time only, but able to rest in eternity, "fellow-hearth with other immortals, and at their tables, free from the woes of men, unworn," as the philosophic poetry of Empedocles says. Not even among the Greeks, then, shall anyone be so great as to overstep Justice, nor so small as to escape her.

[141938] 13.123. The same Orpheus says these things too: "Looking to the divine Word, attend upon it, guiding straight the intelligent vessel of your heart; and walk well in the path, and gaze upon the immortal Ruler of the world alone." And again concerning God, calling him invisible, he says he was made known to one only, a Chaldean by race — whether he means Abraham, or his Son — by these words: "Except one only, a scion sprung from the stock of the Chaldeans from above; for he knew the path of the star, and the movement of the sphere round the earth, how it revolves in a circle, evenly upon its own axle, and he guides the winds about the air and about the stream."

[142607] 13.124. Then, paraphrasing, as it were, "The heaven is my throne, and the earth the footstool of my feet," he goes on: "But he himself, again, is fixed upon the great heaven on a golden throne, and the earth has gone beneath his feet; and his right hand he has stretched out to the bounds of Ocean; and the base of the mountains trembles within at his wrath, nor can it bear his mighty force. And he is everywhere heavenly, and on earth he accomplishes all things, himself holding beginning and middle and end. In no other way is it lawful for you to speak; and my limbs tremble in my mind. From on high he sways," and the rest. For by these things he has shown forth all those prophetic words: "If you open the heaven, trembling shall seize the mountains from before you, and they shall melt, as wax melts before the face of fire."

[143441] 13.125. And the words through Isaiah: "Who measured the heaven with a span, and the whole earth with a handful?" Again, when he says: "Lord of aether and Hades, of sea and earth, who with your thunders shakes the strong dwelling of Olympus; before whom the spirits shudder, and the throng of gods is afraid; whom the Fates obey, inexorable though they are; imperishable one, mother-and-father, by whose passion all things are stirred; you who move the winds, and cover all with clouds, cleaving the broad aether with your lightnings; yours is the order among the stars, running upon unchangeable behests; and beside your fiery throne stand the much-toiling angels, whose care it is that all things be accomplished for mortals; yours is the spring that shines new with purple flowers; yours the winter that comes on with chill clouds; your fruits the reveller Bromius once distributed."

[144328] 13.126. Then he adds, downright naming God Almighty: "Imperishable, immortal, utterable only to the immortals. Come, greatest of all gods, with strong necessity, dread, unconquerable, great, imperishable, whom aether crowns." By the "mother-and-father" he has not only shown forth the coming-to-be out of what is not, but has also given handles to those who bring in the emanations — perhaps even to conceive a consort of God. And he paraphrases those prophetic Scriptures: that through Hosea, "I am he that fixes fast the thunder and creates the wind, whose hands founded the host of heaven"; and that through Moses, "See, see, that I am, and there is no other God beside me. I will kill and make alive; I will smite, and I will heal; and there is none who shall deliver out of my hands." "But he himself plants evil for mortals out of good, and chilling war and tearful pains," according to Orpheus.

[145231] 13.127. Such things Archilochus of Paros too says: "O Zeus, Father Zeus, yours is the rule of heaven, and you behold the works of men, both lawless and unrighteous." Again let Orpheus the Thracian sing for us: "And his right hand he has stretched out to the bound of Ocean, and the earth has gone beneath his feet." These things are plainly taken thence: "The Lord shall save inhabited cities, and shall lay hold of the whole world with his hand like a nest; the Lord who made the earth in his strength," as Jeremiah says, "and set up the world in his wisdom." And besides these, Phocylides, calling the angels spirits, presents some of them as good and some as base, by these words — since we too have received that some are apostates: "But indeed there are spirits upon men, now these, now those; some, when evil comes on, to deliver men from it."

[146082] 13.128. Well, then, does Philemon the comic poet also cut down idolatry, by these words: "There is for us no Fortune that is a god, there is none; but the chance thing that comes to pass for each as it happens is called fortune." And Sophocles the tragedian: "Not even for the gods," he says, "are all things self-willed, save for Zeus; for he holds the end and the beginning." And Orpheus: "One power, one spirit there came to be, a great one, kindling heaven; and one are all things made, in which all these things wheel round — fire and water and earth."

[146641] 13.129. And the things that follow. And Pindar the lyric poet is, as it were, carried away as in a bacchic frenzy, saying outright: "What is God? That which is the whole." And again: "God who fashions all things for mortals." And when he says: "What do you hope of wisdom? Little it is that a man has over a man. To search out the counsels of the gods with a mortal mind is hard; and one is born of a mortal mother" — thence he drew the thought: "Who knew the mind of the Lord? Or who became his counsellor?" But Hesiod too, by what he writes, sings in tune with the foregoing: "There is no seer among earth-dwelling men who could know the mind of Zeus the aegis-bearer." With reason, then, Solon the Athenian, in his elegies, following Hesiod too, writes: "Wholly hidden to men is the mind of the immortals."

[147452] 13.130. Again, when Moses prophesied that the woman, on account of the transgression, should bring forth into toils and pains, a poet of no mean note writes: "Never by day shall they cease from toil and grief, nor by night, hard pressed; and grievous cares the gods will give." Further, Homer, having said, "And the Father himself stretched out the golden scales," shows forth God as just. And Menander the comic poet, interpreting God as good, says: "For every man at his very birth a spirit stands beside, a good guide of his life; for one must not think there is an evil spirit harming a good life." Then he adds: "And every god is good" — either saying that every god is good, or, what is rather the meaning, that in all things God is good.

[148198] 13.131. Again, Aeschylus the tragedian, setting forth the power of God, does not shrink from calling him Most High too, by these words: "Set God apart from mortals, and do not think him to be fleshly, like to yourself. You do not know him: now he appears as fire, an unapproachable rush; now as water; now as gloom. And he becomes like to beasts, to wind and cloud and lightning, thunder and rain. And sea and rocks serve him, and every spring and gatherings of water. And the mountains and the earth tremble, and the monstrous deep of the sea, and the great height of the mountains, when he casts upon them the dread eye of the Master. For all-powerful is the glory of the Most High God." Does it not seem to you that he is paraphrasing the saying, "From before the face of the Lord the earth trembles"?

[149004] 13.132. Besides these, Apollo, the most oracular, witnessing to the glory of God, is constrained to speak concerning Athena, at the time when the Medes were marching against Hellas, how she besought and supplicated Zeus on behalf of Attica. The oracle runs thus: "Pallas cannot propitiate Olympian Zeus, though she entreat with many words and shrewd counsel; but many temples of the immortals he will give over to the devouring fire — temples that even now, perhaps, stand streaming with sweat, quaking with terror," and the rest.

[149536] 13.133. And Thearidas, in his work On Nature, writes: "The beginning of the things that are — the beginning truly and indeed true — is one; for that, in the beginning, is one and only." "Nor is there any other apart from the great King," says Orpheus. Persuaded by him, the comic poet Diphilus most sententiously says: "Him who is the Father of all, this one alone honour continually, the finder and founder of so many goods." With reason, then, Plato too trains the best natures to come to the lesson which we said before is the greatest — to behold the Good and to mount that ascent. "And this, as it seems, is no mere turning round of a shell, but a turning-about of the soul, from a kind of nocturnal day to the true ascent into being, which we shall say is true philosophy." And those who have shared in this he judges to be of the golden race, saying, "You are all brethren," but those of the golden race the most exactly and in every way. Of the Father, then, and Maker of all things, all creatures lay hold, by nature and untaught, on every side: lifeless things sympathizing with the living; of living things, some already immortal, working day by day; of those still mortal, some in fear, even while borne in the womb of their mother; others by free will — and of men, all, both Greeks and barbarians. And there is no race anywhere, whether of husbandmen or of nomads, nor even of city-dwellers, that can live without being first possessed by faith in a higher being. Therefore every nation that touches the eastern shores, and every one that touches the western, the northern and all that lie toward the south, holds one and the same preconception concerning him who appointed the rule, if indeed the most universal of his works have passed alike upon all things.

[151312] 13.134. And much more did the busy inquirers among the Greeks, setting out from the barbarian philosophy, give the prerogative to him who is invisible and alone and most powerful and most skilful and most causative of the noblest things — not knowing the consequences of these things, unless they had been instructed by us, nor knowing even how God himself is naturally to be conceived, but only, as we have often said, by a true periphrasis. With reason, then, the apostle says, "Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not also of the Greeks?" — not only saying prophetically that those of the Greeks who believe shall come to know God, but also signifying this, that in power the Lord and God of all might be, and is in truth Almighty; but in respect of knowledge he is not the God of all. For they know neither what he is, nor how he is Lord and Father and Maker, nor the rest of the dispensation of the truth, not having been taught by it.

[152256] 13.135. In the same way the prophetic words too have the same force as the apostolic word. For Isaiah says: "But if you say, 'Upon the Lord our God we have trusted,' now mingle with the Lord, my king of the Assyrians." And he adds: "And now, have we come up against this country to war against it without the Lord?" And Jonah, himself also a prophet, hints at the same thing by these words: "And the captain came to him and said to him, 'Why do you snore? Arise, call upon your God, that he may save us, and we perish not.'" For the "your God" he said to him who knew by recognition; but by the "that he may save us" God showed the common consciousness of those of the Gentiles who had set their minds upon the Almighty, but had not yet believed. And again the same: "And he said to them, 'I am a servant of the Lord, and I fear the Lord, the God of heaven.'"

[153117] 13.136. And again the same: "And they said, 'By no means, Lord; let us not perish for the soul of this man.'" And Malachi the prophet downright shows God saying: "I will not accept a sacrifice from your hands, because from the rising of the sun to its setting my name has been glorified among the Gentiles, and in every place sacrifice is offered to me." And again: "Because I am a great king, says the Lord Almighty, and my name is glorious among the Gentiles." What name? Among those who have believed, the Son revealing the Father; but among the Greeks, "God the Maker." And Plato shows forth free will by these words: "Virtue is without a master; and as each man honours or dishonours it, so he shall partake more or less of it. The fault is the chooser's; God is faultless." For God is never the cause of evils. "O war-loving Trojans," says the lyric poet, "Zeus who rules on high, who sees all things, is not to the cause of great woes for mortals; but it lies in the midst, for all men to attain, holy Justice, the companion of pure Order and of prudent Right; happy are the children of those who find her for their housemate."

[154253] 13.137. And Pindar downright brings in Zeus the Saviour too, dwelling with Themis, the king, the saviour, the just, interpreting somewhat thus: "First the well-counselling heavenly Themis, with golden horses, beside the streams of Ocean, the Fates led up to the august stairway of Olympus, along the shining way, to be the ancient consort of Zeus the Saviour; and she bore the gold-crowned, bright-fruited, true Hours." He, then, who is not persuaded by the truth, but puffed up with human teaching, is ill-fated and wretched, and, according to Euripides, "he who, beholding these things, perceives not God, and has cast far off the crooked deceits of those who babble of things on high, whose ruinous tongue casts at random concerning the unseen, having no share of judgement."

[155033] 13.138. He, then, who is come to the true learning, if he will, let him hear Parmenides the Eleatic promising: "You shall know the aetherial nature, and all the signs in the aether, and the unseen works of the pure torch of the bright sun, and whence they came to be; and you shall learn the wandering works of the round-eyed moon and its nature; and you shall know also the heaven that holds all round, whence it grew, and how Necessity, leading it, bound it to hold the bounds of the stars." And Metrodorus, though he was an Epicurean, has said these things divinely inspired: "Remember, Menestratus, that, born mortal and having received a fixed span of life, you ascended in your soul up to the age and the infinity of things, and beheld both 'the things that are to be and that have been before.'" Then, "in company with the blessed choir," according to Plato, "we shall view the blessed sight and vision, following — we with Zeus, and others with other gods — being initiated, as it is lawful to say, into the most blessed of mysteries, which we celebrate, ourselves whole and untouched by the evils that awaited us in a later time; and beholding, as initiates and viewers, whole and unshaken visions in pure light, being ourselves pure and unmarked by this which now, carrying it about, we call body, bound to it after the manner of an oyster."

[156386] 13.139. The Pythagoreans call the heaven the counter-earth, the earth concerning which it is said through Jeremiah: "I will set you among the children, and will give you a chosen land, the inheritance of God Almighty," which those who inherit it shall be kings of the earth. And ten thousand things upon ten thousand more flow in upon me to set down; but for the sake of due proportion the discourse must now be brought to a stop, lest we ourselves suffer the fate the tragedian Agathon speaks of: "treating what is by the way as the main work, and labouring at the main work as though it were by the way."

[156994] 13.140. Now that it has been plainly shown, as I think, how it is to be understood that the Greeks were called thieves by the Lord, I willingly leave aside the doctrines of the philosophers. For if we should go through their very words, we should not have done — gathering together what a multitude of notes — in showing that all the wisdom among the Greeks is borne from the barbarian philosophy. Upon which contemplation we shall lay hold again none the less, as it becomes necessary, when we collect the opinions concerning first principles that are current among the Greeks. But this too comes quietly before us to consider, from what we have said — in what way one who is able to swim through the waves in them must meet the Greek books. "Blessed," as it seems, then, is he, according to Empedocles, "who has won the wealth of divine thoughts, but wretched he whose care is a dim opinion concerning the gods." Divinely he showed forth knowledge and ignorance as the bounds of happiness and of misery. "For philosophic men must be inquirers into very many things," according to Heraclitus; and in truth one who seeks to be good must of necessity wander much.

[158158] 13.141. It is, then, plain to us from what has been said before, that the beneficence of God is everlasting, and that the natural righteousness, equal downright to all from a beginning that has no beginning, comes to each according to the desert of its kind, never having begun. For God took no beginning of being Lord and good, being always what he is; nor shall he ever cease from doing good, even though he bring each thing to its end. And each of us partakes of his beneficence according as he will, since the difference of election is wrought by the soul's choice and joint exercise, become worthy. Thus, then, let our fifth book of the gnostic notes, according to the true philosophy, the Stromateis, be brought to a close.