WORK: Protrepticus  (slug: clement-of-alexandria-protrepticus-3b3e12)

CHAPTER: 01-protrepticus



[0] 1. Amphion of Thebes and Arion of Methymna were both singers, and both are the stuff of legend; and to this day the song is sung in the chorus of the Greeks, telling how by the art of music the one lured a fish and the other walled in Thebes. Another, a Thracian sophist (this too is a Greek legend), tamed the wild beasts by his bare song, and even transplanted trees, the oaks, by his music. I could tell you of yet another legend and singer akin to these, Eunomus the Locrian and the Pythian grasshopper. A Greek festival was being held over a dead serpent at Pytho, and Eunomus sang the serpent's dirge. Whether the song was a hymn or a lament for the snake I cannot say; but it was a contest, and Eunomus was playing the lyre in the heat of noon, when the grasshoppers were singing among the leaves up and down the mountains, warmed by the sun. They were singing, of course, not to the dead serpent, the Pythian, but to the all-wise God, a song of their own making, finer than the measures of Eunomus. A string broke in the Locrian's hand; the grasshopper flew down upon the bridge of the instrument; it chirped as though upon a branch; and the singer, adjusting his playing to the song of the grasshopper, supplied the missing string. So it is not by the song of Eunomus that the grasshopper is moved, as the legend will have it — the legend that set up at Pytho a bronze statue of Eunomus with his very lyre, and his fellow-contestant the Locrian. No: of its own will the grasshopper flew down, and of its own will it sang, though the Greeks supposed it had become an actor in the performance of music.

[1611] How then have you come to believe in empty fables, imagining that living creatures are charmed by music? Yet the bright face of truth alone seems to you, it appears, to be a counterfeit, and falls under the eyes of your unbelief. So Cithaeron and Helicon and the mountains of the Odrysians and Thracians, those halls of initiation into error, have been deified and hymned because of the mysteries. For my part, even if these are only legends, I cannot endure to see so many calamities set out as tragedy; whereas with you the very records of your evils have become dramas, and the actors of those dramas a spectacle for your delight. But as for the dramas and the poets who play the Lenaean reveller, by now wholly drunk — let us crown them with ivy, raving extravagantly in the Bacchic rite, with their satyrs and their frenzied troop, together with the rest of the chorus of demons; let us shut them up in Helicon and Cithaeron, now grown old, and let us bring down from above, from the heavens, truth together with her radiant wisdom, to the holy mountain of God and to the holy choir of the prophets. And let her, shedding as far as may be a light that shines from afar, illumine on every side those who are wallowing in darkness, and free men from their error, stretching out to them her highest right hand, understanding, unto salvation. And let those who lift up their heads and look up leave Helicon and Cithaeron behind, and dwell in Zion: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem — the heavenly Word, the genuine champion crowned in the theatre of the whole world. This Eunomus of mine sings no measure of Terpander or of Capion, nor any Phrygian or Lydian or Dorian air, but the eternal measure of the new harmony that bears the name of God, the new song, the Levitical, "that lulls grief and anger, and brings forgetfulness of every ill." A sweet and true medicine of persuasion is blended into that song.

[3569] To my mind, then, that Thracian Orpheus, and the Theban and the Methymnean — men who were no men — were deceivers; under the pretext of music they laid waste human life; possessed by an artful sorcery that worked corruption, celebrating outrages, deifying griefs, they were the first to lead men by the hand to idols; indeed, they built up the rudeness of the custom out of stones and timber — that is, out of statues and painted images; and that noble freedom of those who live as citizens under heaven they yoked, by songs and incantations, to the uttermost slavery.

[4139] But not such is my singer; he has come to put an end, and that without delay, to the bitter slavery of the tyrant demons, and, transferring us to the gentle and kindly yoke of piety, he calls back to heaven those who had been cast down to earth. He alone of all who have ever lived tamed the most intractable of beasts — human beings — the flighty among them as birds, the deceivers as reptiles, the hot-tempered as lions, the pleasure-loving as swine, the rapacious as wolves. The senseless are stones and timber; and a man steeped in ignorance is more insensible even than a stone. Let the prophetic voice come forward as our witness, accordant with truth, pitying those who are worn down by ignorance and folly: "for God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham." He, taking pity on the great unlearning and the hardness of heart of those who had been turned to stone against the truth, raised up from those stones — from the nations that had put their trust in stones — a seed of piety, alive to virtue. Again, certain venomous and treacherous hypocrites who go about waylaying righteousness he has somewhere called a brood of vipers; yet even of these serpents, if one repent of his own will and follow the Word, he becomes a man of God. Others again he allegorizes as wolves clothed in sheepskins, hinting at the rapacious who go about in the shapes of men. And all these most savage beasts, and such stones, the heavenly song itself has transformed into gentle men. For we too were once foolish, disobedient, going astray, slaves to pleasures and manifold lusts, passing our days in malice and envy, hateful, hating one another, as the apostolic Scripture says; "but when the kindness and love toward man of God our Saviour appeared, not by works done in righteousness which we did, but according to his own mercy he saved us."

[5992] See how strong the new song is: it has made men out of stones and men out of beasts. And those who were otherwise dead, who had no part in the life that truly is, became alive again by merely hearing the song. It is this same song that set the whole in order harmoniously and tuned the discord of the elements into the concord of music, so that the whole world might become for it a harmony. It let loose the sea, yet forbade it to encroach upon the land; the land in turn, which was in motion, it made firm, and fixed it as a boundary of the sea; the rush of fire too it softened with air, blending, as it were, the Dorian harmony with the Lydian, and the harsh coldness of air it tamed by the interweaving of fire, tuning these extreme notes of the universe melodiously together. And indeed this pure song, the stay of all things and the harmony of all, stretched from the centre to the limits and from the extremes to the centre, has tuned this universe — not according to the Thracian music, like that of Jubal, but according to the ancestral will of God, which David emulated. He who is of David, and was before him, the Word of God, scorning the lyre and the harp, those lifeless instruments, and tuning by the Holy Spirit this universe, and especially that little universe, man — his soul and body alike — makes music to God through the many-voiced instrument, and accompanies his song upon the instrument that is man. "For you are my harp and pipe and temple": a harp because of the harmony, a pipe because of the breath, a temple because of the Word; so that the one may sound, the other breathe, and the third contain the Lord. Yes, and David the king, the harper of whom we spoke a little before, exhorted men toward the truth and turned them away from idols; far from hymning the demons, he drove them out by true music, with which, when Saul was possessed, he healed him by merely singing. A fair instrument, breathing and alive, did the Lord fashion man to be, after his own image; and the Lord himself is indeed an all-harmonious instrument of God, melodious and holy, the wisdom that is above the world, the heavenly Word.

[8132] What, then, does this instrument, the Word of God, the Lord, and the new song, desire? To open the eyes of the blind and unstop the ears of the deaf, and to lead by the hand the lame in foot, or the wandering, into righteousness; to reveal God to senseless men, to put an end to corruption, to conquer death, to reconcile disobedient sons to their Father. The instrument of God loves mankind. The Lord has pity, instructs, exhorts, admonishes, saves, guards; and as the reward of our learning he promises us, out of his abundance, the kingdom of heaven, taking from us this one thing only — that we be saved. For wickedness feeds upon the corruption of men, but truth, like the bee, harming none of the things that are, rejoices only in the salvation of men. You have, then, the promise; you have his love toward mankind: partake of the grace.

[8977] And do not suppose that my song of salvation is new in the sense in which a vessel or a house is new; for it was "before the morning star," and "in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God." Error is old, but truth appears new. Whether, then, the mythical goats teach that the Phrygians are most ancient, or the poets who record the Arcadians as older than the moon, or those who dream that the Egyptians first brought forth from this earth both gods and men — yet not one of these existed before this universe; but before the foundation of the world were we, who, because we were destined to be in it, had been begotten beforehand by God: we, the rational creatures of the Word of God, on whose account we lay claim to antiquity, "because in the beginning was the Word." But because the Word was from on high, he was and is the divine beginning of all things; and because he has now taken the name that was long ago consecrated and is worthy of power, the name of Christ, I have called him a new song.

[10016] The Word, then, Christ, is the cause both of our being long ago (for he was in God) and of our well-being; and now this very Word has appeared to men — he who alone is both, God and man — the author for us of all good things; instructed by whom in living well, we are escorted on to eternal life. For according to that inspired apostle of the Lord, "the saving grace of God has appeared to all men, instructing us, that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly and righteously and godly in this present age, awaiting the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ." This is the new song: the manifestation, now shining forth among us, of the Word who was in the beginning and was before the beginning. The pre-existent Saviour has appeared but lately; he who exists in the One that is has appeared, because the Word "was with God"; he has appeared as Teacher, the Word by whom all things have been made; who, as Creator, granted us life together with our fashioning, and, appearing as Teacher, taught us to live well, that as God he might afterward bestow life everlasting.

[11156] He did not now for the first time take pity on us in our error, but from of old, from the beginning; now, however, he has appeared and rescued us when we were already perishing. For the wicked and creeping beast, working its sorceries, even now enslaves and torments men, punishing them, it seems to me, after a barbarous fashion — those barbarians who are said to bind their captives to dead bodies, until the living rot away together with them. So this wicked tyrant and serpent, having bound whomever he can master from birth to stones and timber and statues and such like idols by the wretched chain of superstition, has, as the saying goes, carried the living off and buried them with the dead, until they too perish together. For this cause — since there is one deceiver who from of old led astray Eve, and now leads the rest of men down to death — there is also one helper and succourer for us, the Lord, who from the beginning foretold by the prophets, and now plainly calls us to salvation.

[12157] Let us flee, then, obeying the apostolic command, "the prince of the power of the air, of the spirit that now works in the sons of disobedience," and let us run to the Lord our Saviour, who both now and always exhorted men to salvation — through wonders and signs in Egypt, and in the wilderness through the bush and through the cloud that, by an attendant grace of love toward man, served the Hebrews like a handmaid. By the fear of these things he exhorted the hard of heart; but already, through Moses the all-wise, and through Isaiah the lover of truth, and through all the choir of the prophets, he turns to the Word, in more reasonable fashion, those who have ears. Sometimes he reproaches, sometimes he threatens; some men he laments; to others he sings — like a good physician of ailing bodies, who plasters some parts, soothes others, bathes others, cuts some with the knife and cauterizes others, and sometimes even amputates, if by any means the man can be made whole even in part or limb. Many-voiced indeed and of many turns is the Saviour for the salvation of men: by threatening he admonishes, by reproaching he turns men about, by lamenting he shows pity, by making music he exhorts; he speaks through the bush — they had need of signs and wonders — and frightens men by fire, kindling a flame from a pillar, a token at once of grace and of fear: if you obey, the light; if you disobey, the fire. And since flesh is more precious than pillar and bush, after these the prophets speak, the Lord himself speaking in Isaiah, himself in Elijah, himself in the mouth of the prophets. But if you do not believe the prophets, and take both the men and the fire for a fable, the Lord himself shall speak to you — he who, being in the form of God, "thought it not robbery to be equal with God; but he emptied himself," the compassionate God, longing to save man. And now the Word himself speaks to you plainly, shaming your unbelief — yes, I say, the Word of God, who became man, that you too might learn from a man how it is that a man may become God.

[14217] Is it not then absurd, my friends, that God should ever be exhorting us to virtue, while we draw back from the benefit and put off our salvation? For does not John too call men to salvation, becoming wholly a voice of exhortation? Let us, then, ask of him: "Who are you, and whence among men?" Elijah he will not say he is; that he is the Christ he will deny; but he will confess that he is a voice crying in the wilderness. Who, then, is John? Let it be permitted to say, taking him as a type: he is the exhorting voice of the Word, crying in the wilderness. What do you cry, O voice? Tell us also. "Make straight the ways of the Lord." John is the forerunner, and the voice is the forerunner of the Word — a voice of consolation, preparing the way for salvation, a voice exhorting men to the inheritance of the heavens; through which she that was barren and desolate is no longer childless.

[15111] This conception was foretold to me by an angel's voice; that voice too was a forerunner of the Lord, bringing good tidings to a barren woman, as John brought them to the wilderness. Through this voice of the Word, then, the barren bears fair children and the wilderness brings forth fruit. The two voices that are forerunners of the Lord, of the angel and of John, hint to me at the salvation laid up in store: that, when this Word has appeared, we should carry off the fruit of fair offspring, life everlasting. The Scripture, bringing both voices to the same point, makes the whole plain: "Hear, you that bear not; break forth into a cry, you that travail not: for more are the children of the desolate than of her that has a husband." To us the angel brought glad tidings; us John exhorted to recognize the husbandman and to seek the husband. For one and the same is he, the husband of the barren, the husbandman of the wilderness, who filled both the barren and the wilderness with the divine power. Since the children of the noble woman were many, while she who of old had borne many children, the Hebrew woman, was childless through disobedience, the barren receives the husband, and the wilderness the husbandman; then the one becomes a mother of fruits, the other of believers, but both mothers through the Word; and for the unbelieving even now there is left both barrenness and desolation. John, then, the herald of the Word, in this way exhorted men to make themselves ready for the coming of God, of Christ; and this was what the silence of Zacharias signified, awaiting the forerunning fruit of Christ, that the light of truth, the Word, might loose the mystic silence of the prophetic riddles, becoming good tidings. But if you long to see God in truth, partake of purifications worthy of God — not laurel leaves and fillets adorned with wool and purple, but, binding righteousness upon your brow and setting about your head the leaves of self-control, seek diligently after Christ. "For I am the door," he says somewhere; which we must learn thoroughly if we wish to apprehend God, that he may throw open wide for us the gates of the heavens. For the gates of the Word are gates of reason, opened by the key of faith. No one has known God except the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him. And I well know that he who opens the door that hitherto was shut afterward reveals what is within and shows what it was not possible to know before, except for those who have gone through Christ, by whom alone God is beheld.

[17644] 2. Do not, then, busy yourselves about godless shrines, nor about the mouths of chasms full of marvel-mongering, nor about the Thesprotian cauldron, the Cirrhaean tripod, or the bronze of Dodona. As for the aged tree-stump honoured amid the desert sands, and the oracle there withered together with its very oak, leave them to legends that have grown old. The fountain of Castalia, at any rate, is silenced, and the other fountain of Colophon; and likewise the other prophetic streams are dead, stripped of their pretension late indeed, yet at last confuted, having flowed away together with their own legends. Recount to us also the useless oracles of the rest of your divination — or rather mania: the Clarian, the Pythian, the Didymaean, the oracle of Amphiaraus, of Apollo, of Amphilochus; and, if you will, dedicate to perdition along with them the prodigy-mongers and the bird-augurs and the interpreters of dreams. Set up beside the Pythian, too, the diviners by meal and the diviners by barley and the ventriloquists still honoured among the many; yes, and let the shrines of the Egyptians and the necromancies of the Etruscans be handed over to darkness. These, in truth, are the lecture-halls of faithless men and the gaming-houses of unmixed error; partners in this sorcery are the goats trained for divination, and the ravens taught by men to give oracles to men.

[19021] But what if I were to recount to you the mysteries? I will not parody them, as they say Alcibiades did, but I will lay quite bare, in accordance with the argument of truth, the sorcery hidden in them, and your so-called gods themselves, whose mystic rites they are; I will wheel them out, as it were upon the stage of life, before the spectators of truth. The Bacchants celebrate the orgies of the maddened Dionysus, conducting their sacred frenzy by eating raw flesh, and consummate the distribution of the meat of their slaughter, crowned with serpents, shrieking out "Eua!" — that Eve through whom error followed; and a consecrated serpent is the badge of the Bacchic orgies. At any rate, according to the exact speech of the Hebrews, the name "Hevia," with the rough breathing, is interpreted as "the female serpent." Deo and Kore have already become a mystic drama, and Eleusis celebrates with torches their wandering, the rape, and the mourning.

[19974] It seems to me that we ought to derive the etymology of the words "orgies" and "mysteries": the one from the wrath (orge) of Deo against Zeus, the other from the pollution (mysos) that befell Dionysus. And if you derive it from a certain Myous, an Athenian whom Apollodorus says was killed while hunting, I do not grudge it: your mysteries have been glorified with a sepulchral honour. You may also take "mysteries" as "myth-hunts" (mytheria), the letters answering to each other; for, if certain others hunt, so too do such legends as these hunt the most barbarous of the Thracians, the most senseless of the Phrygians, and the superstitious among the Greeks. May he perish, then, who began this deception among men — whether it was Dardanus, who introduced the mysteries of the Mother of the gods, or Eetion, who founded the orgies and rites of the Samothracians, or that Phrygian Midas, who, having learned them from the Odrysian, then passed on the artful deception to his subjects. For the islander Cinyras of Cyprus would never persuade me — he who dared to bring out from night into day the lewd orgies of Aphrodite, ambitious to deify a fellow-citizen who was a harlot. Others say that Melampus son of Amythaon brought over from Egypt to Greece the festivals of Deo, a hymned mourning. These men I should call the authors of mischief, the fathers of godless myths and of ruinous superstition, who sowed in human life the seed of wickedness and corruption — the mysteries.

[21455] But now — for it is high time — I will expose your very orgies, full of deception and marvel-mongering. And if you have been initiated, you will laugh all the more at these your honoured myths. I will proclaim openly the things kept secret, not ashamed to tell what you are not ashamed to worship. There is the foam-born and Cyprus-born goddess, dear to Cinyras — I mean Aphrodite, the lover of the members (philomedea), because she was revealed from the members, those severed members of Uranus, the lustful, which after the cutting did violence to the wave. As fit fruit of lewd parts, in the rites of this pleasure of the sea a lump of salt and a phallus are given to the initiates as a token of her birth, and they bring her money, as lovers to a courtesan, the initiates.

[22233] The mysteries of Deo are the amorous embraces of Zeus with his mother Demeter, and the wrath — of the mother, or the wife, I no longer know which to call Deo — on account of which she is said to have been styled Brimo; and the suppliant entreaties of Zeus, and the draught of gall, and the tearing out of hearts, and the unspeakable deeds. The same rites the Phrygians celebrate for Attis and Cybele and the Corybantes. They have babbled that Zeus, tearing off the testicles of a ram, threw them into the bosom of Deo, paying a false penalty for his violent embrace, as though he had castrated himself. The symbols of this initiation, set out in full, I know will move you to laughter, even though you are in no mood for laughing because of the exposures: "I ate from the drum; I drank from the cymbal; I carried the sacred dish; I crept beneath the canopy." Are not these symbols an outrage? Are not the mysteries a mockery? And what if I should add the rest? Demeter conceives, Kore is brought up, and again this same Zeus, the begetter, has intercourse with Pherephatta, his own daughter, after the mother Deo, forgetful of his former pollution — Zeus the father and corrupter of the maiden — and he has intercourse in the form of a serpent, which he was, being convicted. The token of the Sabazian mysteries for the initiates is "the god through the bosom"; and this is a serpent, drawn through the bosom of the initiates, a proof of the incontinence of Zeus.

[23698] Pherephatta also conceives a son in the form of a bull; for, as a certain idolatrous poet says, "a bull, father of a serpent, and a serpent, father of a bull, the secret goad upon the mountain, herdsman's goad" — calling, I suppose, the fennel-stalk the herdsman's goad, which the Bacchants wreathe with garlands. Do you wish me to recount to you also the flower-gatherings of Pherephatta, and the basket, and the rape by Aïdoneus, and the cleft of the earth, and the swine of Eubuleus that were swallowed up along with the goddesses — the reason why, at the Thesmophoria, they cast pigs into the chasms? This story the women celebrate variously throughout the cities — Thesmophoria, Skirophoria, Arrhetophoria — dramatizing in many fashions the rape of Pherephatta.

[24466] The mysteries of Dionysus are utterly inhuman. While he was still a child, with the Curetes dancing about him in arms, and the Titans creeping in by stealth, these Titans, having beguiled him with childish toys, tore him to pieces while he was still an infant, as Orpheus the Thracian, the poet of the rite, says: "Cone and bull-roarer and limb-bending toys, and golden apples fair from the clear-voiced Hesperides." And it is not useless to set out, for their condemnation, the useless symbols of this rite: knuckle-bone, ball, top, apples, bull-roarer, mirror, fleece. Athena, then, having made off with the heart of Dionysus, was called Pallas from its throbbing (pallein). And the Titans, who had torn him to pieces, set a cauldron upon a tripod, threw in the limbs of Dionysus, and first boiled them; then, piercing them through with spits, they held them over the fire. But Zeus, appearing later — if he was a god, perhaps having got a share of the savour of the roasting flesh, the privilege which your gods admit they are allotted — blasted the Titans with the thunderbolt and entrusted the limbs of Dionysus to his son Apollo for burial. And Apollo, since he did not disobey Zeus, carried the mangled corpse to Parnassus and laid it down.

[25715] If you wish also to behold the orgies of the Corybantes, these slew their third brother, covered the head of the dead man with a purple cloak, and, crowning it with garlands, buried it, carrying it upon a bronze shield to the foothills of Olympus. And these are the mysteries — to put it briefly, murders and burials. The priests of these rites, whom those whose business it is call "Lords of the Initiation," add a further marvel to the calamity, forbidding men to set whole celery, root and all, upon the table; for they believe that celery sprang up from the blood that flowed from the Corybant. So too the women who keep the Thesmophoria take care to eat no pomegranate seeds that have fallen to the ground, believing that pomegranates have sprung from the drops of the blood of Dionysus. Calling the Corybantes "Cabiri," they also proclaim a Cabiric rite. For these two fratricides, taking up the chest in which the privy member of Dionysus had been laid, brought it down into Etruria, merchants of a glorious cargo; and there they settled, being exiles, setting before the Etruscans, to be reverenced, that highly prized teaching of piety — a privy member and a chest. For which reason not without ground do some wish Dionysus to be called Attis, since he was deprived of his members.

[27007] And what wonder is it if the barbarous Etruscans are initiated in such shameful sufferings, when among the Athenians, and in the rest of Greece — I am ashamed even to say it — the legend about Deo is full of shame? For Deo, wandering in search of her daughter Kore about Eleusis (this is a place in Attica), grew weary and sat down at a well in her grief. This even now is forbidden to the initiates, lest the consecrated should seem to imitate her in her lamentation. At that time there dwelt about Eleusis the earth-born men; their names were Baubo and Dysaules and Triptolemus, and besides them Eumolpus and Eubuleus. Triptolemus was a herdsman, Eumolpus a shepherd, Eubuleus a swineherd; from whom the families of the Eumolpidae and the Heralds, that priestly clan at Athens, came into flower. And now — for I will not refrain from telling it — Baubo, having received Deo as a guest, offered her a draught of barley-water; and when she refused to take it and would not drink, being plunged in grief, Baubo, grievously stung at being thus, as she thought, slighted, drew up her garments and displayed her private parts to the goddess; and Deo was pleased at the sight, and at last, hardly, took the draught, delighted by the spectacle. These are the secret mysteries of the Athenians. These too Orpheus records. I will set before you the very verses of Orpheus, that you may have the conductor of the mysteries himself as witness of their shamelessness: "So saying, she drew up her robes and showed all, the unseemly form of her body; and there was the boy Iacchus, and laughing he kept tossing his hand beneath the bosom of Baubo; and the goddess then smiled, smiled in her heart, and took the gleaming vessel in which the draught lay." And the watchword of the Eleusinian mysteries is this: "I fasted; I drank the barley-draught; I took from the chest; having done the work, I placed in the basket, and from the basket into the chest." Fair spectacles indeed, and fit for a goddess! Worthy, in truth, of night and fire, and of the great-hearted — rather, the vain-minded — people of the Erechtheidae, and of the rest of the Greeks besides, "whom there awaits after death such things as they do not even expect." To whom, then, does Heraclitus of Ephesus prophesy? "To night-roamers, magi, Bacchants, Maenads, initiates" — to these he threatens the things after death, to these he prophesies the fire; "for the rites accounted mysteries among men are celebrated in unholy fashion."

[29494] Custom, then, and empty supposition are the mysteries, and a kind of deception of the serpent is worshipped, when men turn with bastard piety to initiations that are no initiations and rites that are no rites. And of what sort are the mystic chests? For we must lay bare their holy things and tell out their secrets. Are not these sesame-cakes and cones and lumps and round cakes with many bosses, and lumps of salt, and a serpent, the orgy of Dionysus Bassareus? And besides these, pomegranates and fig-branches and fennel-stalks and ivy, and round cakes and poppies? These are their holy things. And besides, the secret tokens of Themis the Earth-goddess: marjoram, a lamp, a sword, a woman's comb — which is, to speak euphemistically and mystically, a woman's part. O the manifest shamelessness! Of old, for sober men, night that kept silence was the veil of pleasure; but now, for the initiates, night that is talked about is a trial of incontinence, and the torch-lit fire convicts the passions. Quench the fire, O hierophant; have shame, O torch-bearer, before the torches; the light convicts your Iacchus. Permit night to hide the mysteries; let the orgies be honoured by darkness. The fire does not play a part: it is commanded to convict and to chastise.

[30759] These are the mysteries of the godless. And I rightly call godless those who have not known the God who truly is, but who shamelessly reverence, out of shame, a child torn to pieces by the Titans, and a poor woman mourning, and members that are in truth unspeakable; men held fast in a twofold godlessness: the first, in that they are ignorant of God, not knowing the God who truly is; the second and other, in this their error, that they reckon as existing the things that are not, and call gods these things that do not truly exist — nay, do not exist at all, but have got only the name. For this reason, indeed, the apostle convicts us, saying: "And you were strangers from the covenants of the promise, having no hope, and godless in the world."

[31510] Many blessings be upon the king of the Scythians, whoever he was. He shot down with arrows his own subject, who, imitating among the Scythians the rite of the Mother of the gods practised among the Cyzicenes, beat a drum and clashed a cymbal and had hanging from his neck the trappings of a begging priest of the Mother — judging him to have become unmanly among the Greeks, and a teacher to the rest of the Scythians of the womanish disease. For which reason — for I must by no means hide it — it occurs to me to wonder in what manner men have called "godless" Euhemerus of Acragas, Nicanor of Cyprus, Diagoras and Hippo, both of Melos, and besides these that Cyrenean (Theodorus was his name) and several others, men who lived soberly and saw more keenly than the rest the error about these gods — even though they did not perceive the truth itself, yet they suspected the error, which is no small living spark, a seed springing up toward the truth of understanding. One of them charges the Egyptians: "If you believe them gods, do not lament them nor beat your breasts; but if you mourn them, no longer reckon these to be gods." Another, taking up a Heracles made of wood — he happened to be cooking something at home, as was likely — said: "Come now, Heracles; now is your time, as once for Eurystheus, so now for us also, to render this thirteenth labour and prepare the dish for Diagoras"; and then he put him into the fire as firewood.

[32954] Godlessness and superstition, then, are the extremes of unlearning, outside which we must strive to remain. Do you not see how Moses, the hierophant of truth, commands that the eunuch and the man with severed parts shall not enter the assembly, and besides these him that is born of a harlot? By the first he hints at the godless temper, deprived of the divine and generative power; by the last, the third, at him who inscribes for himself many falsely-named gods in place of the one true God — just as he that is born of a harlot inscribes for himself many fathers, in ignorance of his true father. There was, however, a certain ancient kinship implanted in men toward heaven, darkened by ignorance, yet now and then leaping out of the darkness and shining up; such as that which someone has said: "Do you behold this boundless ether on high, holding the earth round about in its moist embraces?" and "O thou that art the earth's support and hast thy seat upon the earth, whoever thou art, hard to descry"; and all the other things of the kind that the children of the poets sing.

[34037] But mistaken notions, turned aside from the straight path, ruinous in truth, have turned the heavenly plant, man, away from the heavenly mode of life and stretched him out upon the earth, persuading him to cling to earthly fashionings. For some, deceived straightway about the spectacle of heaven and trusting sight alone, gazing upon the motions of the stars, wondered and deified them, naming the stars "gods" from their "running" (thein), and worshipped the sun, as the Indians, and the moon, as the Phrygians. Others, gathering the cultivated fruits of the things that grow from the earth, called the grain Deo, as the Athenians, and the vine Dionysus, as the Thebans. Others, considering the requitals of wickedness, deify the recompenses and worship the calamities; hence the poets of the stage have fashioned the Erinyes and the Eumenides, and the Palamnaei and Prostropaei and Alastores. Some philosophers too, after the poets, make idols of the types of the passions within you — Fear and Love and Joy and Hope — just as Epimenides of old set up at Athens altars to Insolence and Shamelessness; while others, starting from the very affairs of men, deify them and fashion them in bodily form: a certain Justice, and Clotho and Lachesis and Atropos and Destiny, and Auxo and Thallo, the Attic goddesses. There is a sixth, an introductory, manner of deception that produces gods, according to which they reckon the twelve gods — of whom Hesiod sings his own theogony, and all that Homer treats of as theology. The last that remains (for these manners are seven in all) is that which starts from the divine benefit conferred upon men. For not understanding the God who benefits them, they fashioned certain saviours, the Dioscuri, and Heracles the averter of ills, and Asclepius the physician.

[35837] These are the slippery and harmful deviations from the truth, dragging man down from heaven and overturning him into the pit. But I wish to show you the gods themselves at close quarters, what manner of beings they are, and whether they are anything at all, so that at last you may cease from your error and run back again to heaven. For we too were once "children of wrath, even as the rest; but God, being rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, when we were already dead in our trespasses, made us alive together with Christ." For the Word is living, and he that is buried together with Christ is exalted together with God. But the unbelieving are still called children of wrath, nourished by wrath; we, however, are no longer nurslings of wrath, we who have been torn away from error and are hastening toward the truth. Thus we, who were once sons of lawlessness, have now, through the love of the Word toward mankind, become sons of God; whereas your own poet, Empedocles of Acragas, hints at your case: "Therefore, distraught with grievous wickednesses, never shall you ease your soul of its wretched griefs." Most things, then, have been turned into myth and invented about your gods; and as for whatever is supposed actually to have happened, these things have been recorded concerning shameful men who lived in wantonness: "In conceit and madness you walk; and forsaking the right straight path, you have gone off through thorns and stakes. Why do you wander, mortals? Cease, vain men; leave the gloom of night, and lay hold of the light." This the prophetic and poetic Sibyl enjoins upon us; and truth enjoins it too, stripping from this rabble of gods their astonishing and stupefying masks, refuting the false opinions about them by certain identities of name.

[37628] For example, there are some who record three Zeuses: one the son of Ether in Arcadia, the other two the sons of Cronus; of these two, the one in Crete, the other again in Arcadia. And there are some who posit five Athenas: one the daughter of Hephaestus, the Athenian; another the daughter of the Nile, the Egyptian; a third the daughter of Cronus, the inventor of war; a fourth the daughter of Zeus, whom the Messenians have surnamed Coryphasia after her mother; and over all the daughter of Pallas and of the Titaness daughter of Ocean, who, having impiously sacrificed her father, was adorned with her father's skin like a fleece.

[38263] Yes, and as for Apollo, Aristotle reckons the first the son of Hephaestus and Athena — here, then, Athena is no longer a virgin; the second the son of Corybas in Crete; the third the son of Zeus; and the fourth the Arcadian, son of Silenus — this one is called Nomius among the Arcadians; and after these he lists the Libyan, son of Ammon; and Didymus the grammarian adds to these a sixth, the son of Magnes. And how many Apollos are there even now — countless mortal and perishable men, called by the same name as those mentioned before? And what if I were to tell you of the many Asclepiuses, or the Hermeses that are counted up, or the Hephaestuses recorded in legend? Should I not seem superfluous, flooding your ears with these many names? But indeed their fatherlands and their crafts and their lives, and besides these their tombs, convict them of having been men.

[39136] Take Ares, who even among the poets is honoured as much as may be — "Ares, Ares, bane of mortals, blood-stained, stormer of walls" — this fickle and hostile one was, as Epicharmus says, a Spartan; Sophocles knows him for a Thracian; and others for an Arcadian. And Homer says that he was bound for thirteen months: "Ares endured it, when Otus and mighty Ephialtes, sons of Aloeus, bound him in a strong bond; in a bronze jar he lay bound for thirteen months." Many blessings be upon the Carians, who sacrifice dogs to him. And let not the Scythians cease from sacrificing asses, as Apollodorus and Callimachus say: "Phoebus rises among the Hyperboreans at sacrifices of asses." The same poet elsewhere: "Fat sacrifices of asses delight Phoebus." Hephaestus, whom Zeus hurled from Olympus "from the divine threshold," fell in Lemnos and worked as a smith, lamed in both feet, "and his slender legs moved nimbly beneath him." You have also a physician, not a smith only, among the gods; and the physician was a lover of money — Asclepius was his name. And I will set before you your own poet, the Boeotian Pindar: "Gold, appearing in his hands at a princely wage, turned even him aside; and the son of Cronus, casting the thunderbolt through the breasts of both, took away their breath swiftly, and the blazing bolt brought down doom." And Euripides: "For Zeus, slaying my son Asclepius, is the cause, hurling the flame into his breast." This one, then, lies blasted by the thunderbolt within the bounds of Cynosuris. And Philochorus says that in Tenos Poseidon is honoured as a physician, and that Sicily lies upon Cronus, and that he is buried there. Patrocles of Thurii and Sophocles the younger relate in certain tragedies about the Dioscuri: these two Dioscuri were mortal men, if Homer is enough to confirm what is said: "These the life-giving earth already held there in Lacedaemon, in their dear native land." Let the author of the Cypria too come forward: "Castor was mortal, and the doom of death was fated for him; but immortal was Polydeuces, scion of Ares." This is a poetic falsehood; but Homer, more worthy of trust than he, said this concerning both the Dioscuri, and besides convicted Heracles too of being a phantom: "the mighty man Heracles, well versed in great deeds." Heracles, then, Homer himself knows for a mortal man; and Hieronymus the philosopher describes even the build of his body — short, bristly-haired, robust; while Dicaearchus calls him slender, sinewy, dark, hook-nosed, with somewhat gleaming eyes and straight hair. This Heracles, then, having lived two and fifty years, ended his life, buried on the pyre at Oeta.

[41789] As for the Muses, whom Alcman traces to Zeus and Mnemosyne, and whom the rest of the poets and prose-writers deify and reverence — so that whole cities consecrate temples to them as Muses — these were Mysian handmaids, bought by Megaclo, the daughter of Macar. Macar reigned over the Lesbians, and was always quarrelling with his wife; and Megaclo was indignant for her mother's sake — and why should she not be? So she buys these Mysian handmaids, of such a number, and calls them Moisai, in the dialect of the Aeolians. These she taught to sing and to play the lyre, recounting the deeds of old harmoniously. And they, playing continually and singing soothingly, charmed Macar and made him cease from his wrath. For which reason Megaclo dedicated them in bronze as a thank-offering on her mother's behalf, and ordered them to be honoured throughout all the temples. Such, then, are the Muses; and the story is in Myrsilus the Lesbian.

[42727] Hear now, then, the loves of your gods, and the strange myths of their incontinence, and their wounds and bonds and laughter and battles, their servitudes too and banquets, and again their embraces and tears and passions and lewd pleasures. Summon me Poseidon and the chorus of women corrupted by him — Amphitrite, Amymone, Alope, Melanippe, Alcyone, Hippothoe, Chione, and the rest, the countless others; among whom, many as they were, the passions of your Poseidon were still cramped for room. Summon me Apollo too: this is Phoebus, a pure prophet and a good counsellor; but Sterope does not say so, nor Aethusa, nor Arsinoe, nor Zeuxippe, nor Prothoe, nor Marpessa, nor Hypsipyle; for Daphne alone escaped both the prophet and the ravishing. And let Zeus himself come last of all, the father, as you say, "of men and gods." So much was he poured out upon love-making that he desired all women and satisfied his desire upon all. At any rate, he was filled with women no less than the goat of Thmuis is with she-goats. And at your verses, Homer, I am amazed: "Yea, and with his dark brows the son of Cronus nodded; the ambrosial locks of the lord streamed forward from his immortal head; and he made great Olympus quake." You make Zeus august, Homer, and attach to him a nod that is held in honour. But only show him the girdle, fellow, and Zeus too is convicted, and his hair is put to shame. To what a pitch of wantonness has that Zeus driven — he who took such pleasure in his nights with Alcmene? For not even the nine nights were long to the licentious one — nay, on the contrary, the whole of his life was short for his incontinence — that he might sow for us the god who averts ills. Heracles, son of Zeus — truly son of Zeus — begotten of that long night, who toiled at his twelve labours over a long time, but corrupted the fifty daughters of Thestius in a single night, becoming both adulterer and bridegroom of so many maidens. Not without reason, then, do the poets call him reckless and a worker of wickedness. It would be long to recount his adulteries of every sort and the corruptions of boys. For not even from boys did your gods abstain: one loving Hylas, another Hyacinthus, another Pelops, another Chrysippus, another Ganymede. Let your women worship such gods, and let them pray that their husbands may be like them, so chaste, that they may be like the gods, emulating the same things; let your sons accustom themselves to revere these, that they too may become men who take the gods as a vivid image of fornication.

[45268] But perhaps the male gods alone among them rush after love-making, while "the female goddesses each abode at home for shame," says Homer — the goddesses being ashamed, out of their solemnity, to look upon Aphrodite taken in adultery. But these behave more wantonly, bound fast in adultery: Eos with Tithonus, Selene with Endymion, a Nereid with Aeacus, Thetis with Peleus, Demeter with Iasion, Pherephatta with Adonis. Aphrodite, put to shame over Ares, passed on to Cinyras, and married Anchises, and lay in wait for Phaethon, and loved Adonis; she contended with the ox-eyed goddess, and the goddesses, stripping themselves naked for the sake of an apple, presented themselves to the shepherd, that he might judge which of them seemed fair.

[46012] Come now, let us briefly survey the games also, and abolish these funeral festivals — the Isthmian and the Nemean and the Pythian and, after these, the Olympic. At Pytho the Pythian serpent is worshipped, and the festival of the snake is proclaimed as the Pythia. At the Isthmus the sea spat up a pitiful piece of refuse, and the Isthmian games mourn Melicertes. At Nemea another little boy, Archemorus, is buried, and the funeral games of the child are called the Nemea. Pisa is for you, O Panhellenes, the tomb of a Phrygian charioteer; and the Olympic games, the libations of Pelops, the Zeus of Pheidias appropriates. The games, it seems, were mysteries celebrated over the dead, just as the oracles were, and both have become public property. But the mysteries at Agra and those at Halimous in Attica are confined to Athens; while the games — and the phalli celebrated for Dionysus — have become a worldwide disgrace, perverting human life for the worse.

[46973] For Dionysus, longing to go down to Hades, did not know the way; and a certain man, Prosymnus by name, promises to tell him — but not without a price; and the price was no fair one, though fair to Dionysus: it was a favour of love that Dionysus asked. The request was agreeable to the god, and so he promises to grant it, if he should return, confirming the promise with an oath. Having learned the way, he set off; he came back again; he does not find Prosymnus, for he had died. To discharge his obligation to his lover, Dionysus hastens to the tomb and does an unseemly thing. Cutting, then, a branch of a fig-tree as it chanced, he shaped it after the manner of a man's member, and sat upon the branch, fulfilling his promise to the dead. As a mystic memorial of this experience, phalli are set up to Dionysus throughout the cities; "for if it were not to Dionysus that they made a procession and sang a song to the privy parts, the most shameless deeds would be done," says Heraclitus; "but Hades and Dionysus are the same, in whose honour they rave and keep the Lenaean rite" — not so much because of the drunkenness of the body, as I think, as because of the disgraceful initiation into wantonness.

[48180] Fitly, then, are such gods of yours slaves, having become slaves of the passions. Nay, even before the so-called Helots among the Lacedaemonians, Apollo passed under the yoke of slavery to Admetus in Pherae, Heracles to Omphale in Sardis; Poseidon and Apollo served Laomedon as a worthless hireling, Apollo not even being able, it seems, to obtain his freedom from his former master; and then they two built up the walls of Ilium for the Phrygian. And Homer is not ashamed to portray Athena holding a golden lamp in her hands for Odysseus; and we have read of Aphrodite, like some wanton little handmaid, carrying and setting the chair of the adulterer right before the face of Helen, to draw her into intercourse. For Panyassis, besides these, records that many other gods served men, writing somewhat thus: "Demeter endured it, and the famed Lame-god endured it, and Poseidon endured it, and Apollo of the silver bow endured to serve a mortal man for a year; and stout-hearted Ares too endured it under the constraint of his father" — and what follows thereon.

[49244] Upon these things it fittingly follows that they introduce, by every means, these amorous and passion-ridden gods of yours as subject to human feelings. For indeed "their flesh too was mortal." Homer testifies to it, most exactly bringing in Aphrodite crying out sharp and loud over her wound, and relating how the most warlike Ares himself was wounded in the flank by Diomedes. Polemon says that Athena too was wounded by Ornytus; yes, and Homer says that Aïdoneus was shot by Heracles, and Panyassis records that Helios was. And the same Panyassis records that Hera, the goddess of marriage, was wounded by the same Heracles "in sandy Pylos." And Sosibius says that Heracles was wounded on the hand by the sons of Hippocoon. And if there are wounds, there is blood too; for the ichor of the poets is more loathsome even than blood, since ichor is understood to be the putrefaction of blood. It is necessary, then, to bring in for them attendance and nourishment, of which they stand in need. Hence tables and drinkings and laughter and unions — which they would not have, were they not using human pleasures, nor begetting children, nor sleeping, if they were immortal and without need and unaging. Zeus himself partook of a human table among the Ethiopians, and of an inhuman and lawless one, feasted by Lycaon the Arcadian; at any rate he was filled with human flesh against his will. For the god did not know that Lycaon the Arcadian, his host, having slaughtered his own son (Nyctimus was his name), had set him before Zeus as a dish. A fine fellow indeed is Zeus the prophetic, the god of strangers, of suppliants, the gentle, the giver of omens, the averter — or rather the unjust, the lawless, the impious, the unholy, the inhuman, the violent, the corrupter, the adulterer, the lover. But once he was such, when he was such, when he was a man; now, it seems to me, your very myths have grown old. Zeus is a serpent no longer, no swan, no eagle, no amorous man; he does not fly as a god, does not love boys, does not love women, does not do violence — and yet there are even now many fair women, comelier than Leda and fresher than Semele, and youths more graceful and more refined than the Phrygian herdsman. Where now is that eagle? Where the swan? Where Zeus himself? He has grown old, feathers and all; for he surely does not repent of his amours nor is he being schooled to be chaste. The myth is laid bare to you: Leda is dead, the swan is dead, the eagle is dead. Seek your Zeus; do not busy yourself about heaven, but search the earth. The Cretan will tell you, in whose land he is also buried — Callimachus in his hymns: "For they fashioned a tomb for thee, O lord — the Cretans." For Zeus is dead — do not take it ill — like Leda, like the swan, like the eagle, like an amorous man, like a serpent.

[52063] By now even the superstitious themselves are seen, unwillingly indeed, yet still perceiving the error about the gods. For "they are not of an oak of ancient story, nor of a rock, but they are of the race of men"; and a little later they will be found to be oaks and rocks after all. Staphylus records that a certain Agamemnon is honoured as Zeus in Sparta; and Phanocles, in his Loves or Fair Ones, says that Agamemnon king of the Greeks set up a temple of Aphrodite Argynnis in honour of Argynnus, his beloved. The Arcadians worship an Artemis called "the Strangled," as Callimachus says in his Causes. And in Methymna another Artemis, "the Condylitis," is honoured. There is also a sanctuary of another Artemis, "the Foot-snarer" (Podagra), in Laconia, as Sosibius says. Polemon knows of a statue of "the Gaping Apollo" (Cechenotos), and again of another "the Glutton Apollo" (Opsophagos) honoured in Elis. There the Eleans sacrifice to Zeus "the Fly-averter" (Apomyios); and the Romans sacrifice to Heracles the Fly-averter, and to Fever and to Fear, whom they too enroll among the company of Heracles. I pass over the Argives: the Argives and Laconians worship Aphrodite "the Grave-robber," and the Spartans revere Artemis "Chelytis," since they call coughing "chelyttein."

[53342] Do you suppose that what we adduce is brought to you from some forged sources? You do not seem even to recognize your own writers, whom I call as witnesses against your unbelief — men who have filled your whole unlivable life, you wretches, with godless mockery. Is not a "Bald Zeus" honoured in Argos, and another "Avenger" in Cyprus? Do not the Argives sacrifice to Aphrodite "the Open-thighed," the Athenians to "the Courtesan," and the Syracusans to "the Fair-buttocked," whom Nicander the poet has somewhere called "the Beautiful-rumped"? Of Dionysus "the Swine-fingerer" (Choiropsalas) I say nothing now: the Sicyonians worship him, having set Dionysus over the female parts, reverencing as the founder of outrage the overseer of shame. Such, then, are their gods, and such are they themselves, sporting with the gods — or rather mocking and outraging themselves. And how much better are the Egyptians, who, village by village and city by city, honour the irrational animals, than the Greeks who worship such gods? For the animals, though beasts, are not adulterers, are not lewd, and none of them hunts after a pleasure contrary to nature; but the gods — of what sort they are, why need I say more, since they have been refuted sufficiently?

[54592] The Egyptians, however, whom I just now mentioned, are divided in their worships: the men of Syene reverence the phagrus fish, the men of Elephantine the maeotes (another fish); the Oxyrhynchites the fish that bears the name of their own region; the Heracleopolites the ichneumon; the men of Sais and the Thebans a sheep; the Lycopolites a wolf; the Cynopolites a dog; the Memphites the Apis; the Mendesians the goat. But you, who are altogether better than the Egyptians — I shrink from saying worse — who never cease laughing at the Egyptians day by day, what sort of people are you concerning the irrational animals? Some of you Thessalians have honoured the storks because of custom, and the Thebans the weasels because of the birth of Heracles. And the Thessalians again? They are recorded to reverence ants, since they learned that Zeus, likened to an ant, had intercourse with Eurymedusa, daughter of Cletor, and begot Myrmidon. And Polemon records that the inhabitants about the Troad reverence the native mice, which they call sminthoi, because they gnawed through the bowstrings of the enemy's bows; and they surnamed Apollo "Sminthian" from those mice. And Heraclides, in his Foundations of Temples concerning Acarnania, where is the promontory of Actium and the temple of Apollo of Actium, says that an ox is offered in sacrifice to the flies. Nor will I forget the Samians: a sheep, as Euphorion says, the Samians reverence; nor the Syrians who inhabit Phoenicia, of whom some reverence doves, others fishes, with as extravagant a worship as the Eleans pay to Zeus.

[56172] Well then: since they are not gods whom you worship, it seems good to me to consider next whether they are really demons, classed in this second rank, as you say. For if they are demons, they are gluttonous and foul. It is possible to find, openly, in city after city, local demons reaping honour: among the Cythnians Menedemus, among the Tenians Callistagoras, among the Delians Anius, among the Laconians Astrabacus. A certain hero too is honoured at Phalerum at the stern of a ship; and the Pythia ordained that the Plataeans should sacrifice to Androcrates and Democrates and Cyclaeus and Leucon, when the contests of the Median wars were at their height. One may discern very many other demons too, for anyone able to consider even a little: "for thrice ten thousand are upon the bountiful earth the immortal demons, guardians of mortal men." Who are the guardians, O Boeotian? Do not grudge to tell. Or is it plain that these, and those more honoured than they, the great demons — Apollo, Artemis, Leto, Demeter, Kore, Pluto, Heracles, Zeus himself? But they do not guard us from running away, Ascraean, but rather, perhaps, from sinning — they who have surely had no experience of sins. Here it is fitting to add the proverbial saying: "the father admonishes a child past admonition." But if indeed these are guardians, it is not out of goodwill toward us that they are full of feeling, but, intent upon your destruction, after the manner of flatterers, they hang about human life, enticed by the smoke of sacrifice. The demons themselves somewhere confess their own gluttony: "for this is the privilege we have obtained," they say, "libation and savour." What other utterance, if the gods of the Egyptians took a voice — cats and weasels — would they send forth than the Homeric and poetic one, dear to savour and to cookery? Such, then, among you, are the demons and the gods, and any "demigods," if there be such — as "mules" are so called by mingling; for you have no poverty even of names for your compoundings of impiety.

[58208] 3. Come, then, let us add this also, that your gods are inhuman and man-hating demons, who not only rejoice over the madness of men, but also take their pleasure in the slaying of men; now procuring for themselves occasions of delight in the armed contests of the stadiums, now in the countless rivalries of wars, that they may have the fullest licence to glut themselves with human slaughter. And ere now, falling upon cities and nations like a pestilence, they have demanded savage libations. Aristomenes the Messenian, at any rate, slaughtered three hundred men to Ithometan Zeus, supposing that he was offering sacrifices of fair omen, so many and such hecatombs at once; among whom was Theopompus, the king of the Lacedaemonians, a noble victim. And the Tauri, the people who dwell about the Taurian peninsula, whatever strangers they capture among them — those of them who have been shipwrecked at sea — these they straightway sacrifice to the Taurian Artemis; these sacrifices of yours Euripides puts upon the stage as tragedy. And Monimus records, in his collection of marvels, that at Pella in Thessaly an Achaean man was sacrificed to Peleus and Cheiron. Anticleides, in his Returns, declares that the Lyctians (these are a Cretan people) slaughter men to Zeus; and Dosidas says that the Lesbians offer the like sacrifice to Dionysus. The Phocaeans too — for I will not pass them by either — these Pythocles, in his third book On Concord, records as offering up a man as a whole burnt offering to Artemis Tauropolus. Erechtheus the Athenian and Marius the Roman sacrificed their own daughters; the former to Pherephatta, as Demaratus says in the first book of his Tragic Subjects, the latter, Marius, to the Averting Powers, as Dorotheus records in the fourth book of his Italian Affairs.

[60008] Loving toward men, indeed, do the demons show themselves to be from these things; and how should the superstitious not be holy in like proportion? The one are called Saviours, the other ask salvation from those who plot against salvation. Imagining that they are offering acceptable sacrifices to them, they have not noticed that they are slaughtering men. For the murder does not become a sacrifice because of the place, not even if a man should slaughter a man to Artemis and Zeus in what is supposed to be a sacred spot, rather than in wrath and love of money, to other like demons, at altars or in the roads, calling it a sacrifice: such a sacrifice is murder and manslaughter. Why then, O men, wisest of all the other animals, do we flee from the savage beasts, and if anywhere we meet with a bear or a lion, turn aside — "as when a man, seeing a serpent, starts back in the glens of a mountain, and trembling seizes his limbs, and he draws back again" — yet, when we perceive beforehand and understand that the demons are ruinous and accursed, plotters and man-haters and destroyers, you do not turn aside nor turn away from them? What truth could the wicked tell, or whom could they benefit? At any rate I can show you a man better than these gods of yours, the demons: against the prophetic Apollo, Cyrus and Solon. Your Phoebus is fond of giving, but not fond of man. He betrayed his friend Croesus, and, forgetting his fee — so fond of glory was he — he led Croesus across the Halys to the pyre. So loving are the demons that they guide men into the fire. But you, O man more loving of mankind and more truthful than Apollo, take pity on him bound upon the pyre; and you, Solon, prophesy the truth; and you, Cyrus, command that the pyre be quenched. Be wise at last, Croesus, taught by your suffering: ungrateful is he whom you worship; he takes his fee and, after the gold, lies again. So in the end it is not the demon, but the man, who speaks to you. Solon does not prophesy in crooked riddles; him you will find true, O barbarian — this oracle alone; this you shall test upon the pyre.

[62109] Hence it occurs to me to wonder by what fancies the first deceived men were led astray, when they proclaimed superstition to men, ordaining by law the worship of accursed demons — whether it was that Phoroneus, or Merops, or some other, who set up temples and altars for them, and besides are fabled to have been the first to establish sacrifices. For indeed in later times too men kept fashioning gods to worship. This very Eros, who is said to be among the most ancient of the gods, no one honoured before Charmus seized a certain youth and set up an altar in the Academy as a thank-offering for a lust brought to fulfilment; and they have called the wantonness of the disease Eros, deifying unbridled lust. The Athenians, again, did not even know who Pan was, until Philippides told them.

[62902] Reasonably, then, did superstition, having got its beginning from somewhere, become a fountain of senseless wickedness; and then, not being checked, but coming to increase and flowing in full flood, it sets itself up as the maker of many demons, sacrificing hecatombs and holding festivals and setting up statues and building temples — which (for I will not pass these by in silence either, but will convict them too) are euphemistically called temples, but are in fact tombs. But do you, even now at last, forget superstition, ashamed to honour tombs. In the temple of Athena in Larissa, on the acropolis, is the tomb of Acrisius; and at Athens, on the acropolis, the tomb of Cecrops, as Antiochus says in the ninth book of his Histories. And what of Erichthonius? Is he not buried in the temple of Athena Polias? And Immaradus, son of Eumolpus and Daeira, is he not buried in the enclosure of the Eleusinion below the acropolis? And the daughters of Celeus, are they not buried at Eleusis? Why should I recount to you the women from the Hyperboreans? Hyperoche and Laodice they are called, and they are buried in the Artemisium in Delos, and the spot is in the sanctuary of the Delian Apollo. And Leandrius says that Cleochus is buried in Miletus, in the Didymaeum. Here it is not fitting to pass over the monument of Leucophryne, following Zenon of Myndus, who is buried in the sanctuary of Artemis in Magnesia; nor indeed the altar of Apollo at Telmessus: this too they record to be a memorial of Telmessus the seer. And Ptolemy son of Agesarchus, in the first book of his work about Philopator, says that at Paphos, in the sanctuary of Aphrodite, Cinyras and his descendants are buried. But indeed, if I were to go over all the tombs worshipped among you, all time would not suffice me; and as for you, unless some shame for your audacities steals over you, then, being yourselves utterly dead, you go about trusting in the dead: "Ah, wretched men, what evil is this you suffer? In night your heads are shrouded."

[64922] 4. But if, in addition to these things, I were to bring before you the statues themselves to inspect, you would, on going over them, find custom to be in truth a folly, when you worship insensible works of men's hands. Of old, then, the Scythians worshipped the dagger, the Arabs the stone, the Persians the river; and the still more ancient among the rest of men set up conspicuous logs and erected columns of stones — which were called xoana from the "scraping" (apexesthai) of the material. At any rate, in Icarus the statue of Artemis was an unwrought log, and that of Cithaeronian Hera in Thespiae a cut tree-trunk; and that of Samian Hera, as Aethlius says, was at first a plank, but later, in the archonship of Procles, became of human form. And when the xoana began to be made in the likeness of men, they got the name brete from "mortals" (brotoi). At Rome, in old times, the xoanon of Ares was a spear, as Varro the prose-writer says, the craftsmen not yet having rushed to this fair-faced bad artistry. But when the art came into flower, the error increased.

[65993] That they made the stones and the timber, and, to put it briefly, the material, into statues in the likeness of men, on which you counterfeit piety, slandering the truth, is from this point already plain; nevertheless, since the subject requires some proof, it must not be declined. That Pheidias made the Zeus at Olympia and the Athena Polias at Athens of gold and ivory is doubtless clear to all; and Olympichus records, in his Samian Affairs, that the xoanon of Hera in Samos was made by Smilis the son of Eucleides. Do not doubt, then, that of the goddesses called the Venerable at Athens, Scopas made two out of the so-called lychnean stone, and Calos the middle one of them; I can show you Polemon recording this in the fourth of his works against Timaeus. Nor doubt that the statues of Zeus and Apollo at Patara in Lycia were made again by that same Pheidias, just like the lions dedicated together with them; or, if, as some say, the work is of Bryaxis, I do not contend: you have him too as a maker of statues; put down whichever of them you wish. And indeed the nine-cubit statues of Poseidon and Amphitrite, worshipped in Tenos, are the work of Telesius the Athenian, as Philochorus says. And Demetrius, in the second book of his Argolic Affairs, records that the material of the xoanon of Hera in Tiryns was a wild pear-tree, and its maker Argus. Many, perhaps, would marvel if they learned that the Palladium called "heaven-fallen," which Diomedes and Odysseus are recorded to have stolen from Ilium and deposited with Demophon, was made from the bones of Pelops, just as the Olympian Zeus was made from other bones, those of an Indian beast. And I cite Dionysius, who records this in the fifth part of his Cycle. Apellas, in his Delphica, says that there were two Palladia, both fashioned by men. But that no one may suppose that I have passed these over too out of ignorance, I will add that the statue of Dionysus Morychus at Athens was made of the stone called phellata, and is the work of Sicon son of Eupalamus, as Polemon says in a certain letter. And there were also two other sculptors, Cretans, I think (they were named Scyllis and Dipoenus); these made the statues of the Dioscuri in Argos, and the statue of Heracles in Tiryns, and the xoanon of Munychian Artemis in Sicyon.

[68294] And why do I waste time upon these, when I can show you who the great demon himself was — he whom we hear to be deemed worthy, above all, of universal worship, whom they have dared to call "not made with hands," the Egyptian Sarapis? For some record that he was sent as a thank-offering by the men of Sinope to Ptolemy Philadelphus, king of the Egyptians, who recovered them, when they were wasted by famine, by sending for grain from Egypt; and that this xoanon was a statue of Pluto; and that Ptolemy, receiving the statue, set it up on the headland now called Rhacotis, where also the sanctuary of Sarapis is honoured, and the precinct is neighbour to those places. And Blistiche his concubine, who died at Canopus, Ptolemy removed and buried beneath the aforesaid shrine. Others say that Sarapis is a Pontic image, and was conveyed to Alexandria with festal honour. Isidore alone says that the statue was brought from the Seleucians near Antioch, when they too were in want of grain and were sustained by Ptolemy. But Athenodorus son of Sandon, wishing to make out Sarapis to be ancient, somehow fell into the very thing that proved him a made statue. For he says that Sesostris, the Egyptian king, having subdued most of the nations among the Greeks, on his return to Egypt brought back skilful craftsmen; he himself, then, ordered his own ancestor Osiris to be wrought sumptuously, and Bryaxis the craftsman made him — not the Athenian, but another of the same name as that Bryaxis — who used a mixed and varied material for the work. For he had filings of gold and silver, of bronze and iron and lead, and besides, of tin; and of Egyptian stones not one was lacking, but fragments of sapphire and haematite and emerald, and of topaz too. Having ground them all up and mingled them, he coloured them with blue, on which account the colour of the statue is rather dark; and mixing the whole with the pigment left over from the burial of Osiris and Apis, he moulded Sarapis — whose very name hints at the partnership of the burial and the fashioning from the entombment, being compounded from Osiris and Apis, Osirapis.

[70419] And another new god the king of the Romans deified with reverence in Egypt, and nearly among the Greeks too — his beloved, who had become exceedingly fair: Antinous he consecrated, just as Zeus did Ganymede; for lust, when it has no fear, is not easily restrained. And men now worship the holy nights of Antinous — nights which the lover who shared their sleeplessness knew to be shameful. Why do you reckon among the gods one honoured by fornication? Why did you command him to be mourned as a son? Why too do you describe his beauty? Beauty is a shameful thing when it has been blasted by outrage. Do not tyrannize, O man, over beauty, nor outrage the youth in his bloom; keep it pure, that it may be fair. Be a king of beauty, not a tyrant; let it remain free; then I shall recognize your beauty, when you have kept the image pure; then I shall worship beauty, when it is the true archetype of fair things. But now it is the tomb of the beloved; there is a temple of Antinous, and a city; just as, I think, the temples, so too the tombs are admired — pyramids and mausoleums and labyrinths, other temples of the dead, as those are tombs of the gods. As your teacher I will set before you the prophetess Sibyl, "oracle-singer not of a lying Phoebus, whom vain men called a god, and falsely styled a seer, but of the great God, whom the hands of men did not fashion, like to dumb idols of polished stone." This same prophetess calls the temples ruins, foretelling thus that the temple of Ephesian Artemis shall be swallowed up by chasms and earthquakes: "Ephesus shall wail prostrate, weeping by her banks, and seeking a temple that dwells there no more"; and she says that the temple of Isis and Sarapis in Egypt shall be cast down and burned: "Isis, thrice-wretched goddess, you shall remain alone upon the streams of the Nile, a speechless Maenad upon the sands of Acheron"; and then, going on: "And you, Sarapis, heaped about with many useless stones, you shall lie a mighty ruin in thrice-wretched Egypt." But if you will not hearken to the prophetess, hearken at least to your own philosopher, Heraclitus of Ephesus, reproaching the statues with their insensibility: "And they pray to these statues, as if one were to chatter with houses." Are they not, in truth, prodigious, who turn to stones, and then, moreover, set them up before their gates as though they were active, worshipping Hermes as a god and setting up Agyieus as a doorkeeper? For if they outrage them as insensible, why do they worship them as gods? And if they think them to share in sensation, why do they set them up as doorkeepers? And the Romans, ascribing their greatest successes to Fortune, and reckoning her the greatest goddess, carried her into the privy and dedicated her there, assigning the latrine to the goddess as a fitting temple.

[73243] But surely insensible stone and timber and rich gold care not at all — not for savour, not for blood, not for smoke, by which, being honoured and fumigated, they are blackened; nor yet for honour, nor for outrage. Statues are things meaner than any animal. And how the insensible things have come to be deified, it occurs to me to be at a loss, and to pity the erring for their folly as wretched. For even if some of the animals do not have all the senses, like grubs and caterpillars and all that appear maimed straightway from their first birth, as moles and the shrew-mouse, which Nicander calls "blind and dreadful" — yet these are better than these xoana and statues, which are wholly dumb; for they have at least some one sense, say hearing or touch, or that which answers to smell or taste; whereas the statues partake of not even one sense. And there are many of the animals which have neither sight nor hearing nor voice, such as the race of oysters, but they live and grow, and moreover are affected together with the moon; whereas the statues are idle, inactive, insensible, and are bound and nailed and fixed, are cast, filed, sawn, planed, carved. The dumb earth, then, the statue-makers outrage, displacing it from its proper nature, persuading men by their art to worship it; and the god-makers worship not gods and demons, according to my sense of it, but earth and art, which the statues are. For the statue is in truth dead matter shaped by a craftsman's hand. But for us the image is not of perceptible matter and perceptible, but intelligible. God is intelligible, not perceptible — the only true God.

[74866] And again, in those very straits, the superstitious, the worshippers of stones, having learned in fact not to reverence insensible matter, perish through superstition, overcome by the very want it cannot relieve; yet, while they despise the statues, not wishing to seem to despise them altogether, they are convicted by the very gods to whom the statues are ascribed. For Dionysius the younger tyrant, having stripped off the golden cloak of Zeus in Sicily, ordered a woollen one to be put about him, wittily saying that this was better than the golden one, both lighter in summer and warmer in cold. And Antiochus of Cyzicus, when he was short of money, ordered the golden statue of Zeus, fifteen cubits in height, to be melted down, and another like it, of meaner material, gilded over with leaf, to be set up again. And the swallows and most of the birds fly in and defile the very statues, caring nothing for Olympian Zeus or Epidaurian Asclepius or Athena Polias or Egyptian Sarapis; from whom not even do you learn the insensibility of the statues. But there are certain malefactors or enemies who, attacking, have for shameful gain ravaged the sanctuaries and plundered the offerings, or have even melted down the statues themselves. And if a Cambyses or a Darius or any other madman attempted such things, and if one slew the Egyptian Apis, I laugh that he slew their god, but am vexed that he did wrong for gain. So I will willingly forget this wrongdoing, reckoning it a work of greed, and not a proof of the impotence of the idols. But fire and earthquakes are not greedy; and they neither fear nor stand in awe of the demons or the statues, any more than the waves do of the pebbles heaped along the shores. I know a fire that convicts and is a remedy for superstition. If you wish to cease from your folly, the fire will be your torch-bearer. This fire burned down the temple in Argos, together with its priestess Chrysis; and the temple of Artemis in Ephesus, the second after the Amazons; and the Capitol in Rome it has consumed many times. Nor did it spare the sanctuary of Sarapis in the city of the Alexandrians. At Athens it cast down the temple of Dionysus Eleuthereus; and the temple of Apollo in Delphi first a storm-blast seized, and then a chastening fire made away with. This is shown you as the prelude of what the fire promises.

[77223] Do not the makers of statues shame those of you who have sense, into despising the matter? The Athenian Pheidias inscribed on the finger of the Olympian Zeus, "Pantarkes is fair"; for it was not Zeus that was fair to him, but his beloved. And Praxiteles, as Posidippus makes clear in his work on Cnidus, when fashioning the statue of Cnidian Aphrodite, made her like in form to Cratine his mistress, that the wretches might have Praxiteles' mistress to worship. And when Phryne the Thespian courtesan was in her bloom, all the painters reproduced the images of Aphrodite to the beauty of Phryne, just as again the stone-cutters at Athens likened the Hermae to Alcibiades. It is left to bring your judgement to bear upon the deed, whether you will worship courtesans too. Hence, I think, the kings of old, moved and despising these myths, freely proclaimed themselves gods, since from men there was no danger, teaching that those others too were made immortal through fame. Ceyx son of Aeolus was called Zeus by his wife Alcyone, and Alcyone in turn was called Hera by her husband. Ptolemy the fourth was called Dionysus; and Mithridates of Pontus was himself called Dionysus too; and Alexander wished to seem the son of Ammon and to be fashioned by the statue-makers with horns, eager to outrage the fair face of man with a horn. And not kings only, but private men too dignified themselves with divine titles, like Menecrates the physician, surnamed Zeus. Why need I list Alexarchus — he was by profession a grammarian, as Aristus of Salamis records — who fashioned himself into Helios? Why mention Nicagoras — he was a Zeleite by birth, of the times of Alexander — Hermes was Nicagoras called, and he used the dress of Hermes, as he himself testifies? Where whole nations, indeed, and cities, men and all, putting on flattery, degrade the myths about the gods, fashioning men into equals of the gods, puffed up by glory, voting themselves enormous honours; now ordaining the worship of the Macedonian from Pella, Philip son of Amyntas, in the Cynosarges — him with the broken collar-bone and the maimed leg, who had his eye knocked out; again proclaiming Demetrius too a god; and where he dismounted from his horse on entering Athens, there is a sanctuary of Demetrius "the Alighter," and altars everywhere. And a marriage with Athena was prepared for him by the Athenians; but he scorned the goddess, being unable to marry the statue, and, taking Lamia the courtesan, went up to the acropolis and consorted with her in the bridal chamber of Athena, displaying to the old virgin the postures of the young courtesan. Nor is there any cause for indignation against Hippo, who made his own death immortal; this Hippo ordered to be inscribed upon his monument this elegy: "This is the tomb of Hippo, whom Fate made equal to the immortal gods in his death." Well done, Hippo, you show us human error! For if they did not believe you while you spoke, let them become disciples of the dead man. This is an oracle of Hippo: let us mark it. Those whom you worship were once men, and then died; and myth and time have honoured them. For somehow the things present are wont, through familiarity, to be despised, while the things past, removed by the obscurity of time from immediate refutation, are honoured by fiction, and the one are disbelieved, the other admired. At any rate, the ancient dead, dignified by the long lapse of error, are reckoned gods by those that come after. Your pledge of these things is your very mysteries, your festivals, the bonds and wounds and weeping gods: "Ah, woe is me, that Sarpedon, dearest of men, is doomed to be slain by Patroclus son of Menoetius." The will of Zeus has been overcome, and Zeus laments for you over Sarpedon, defeated. Reasonably, then, have you yourselves called them idols and demons, since Homer too, honouring even Athena herself and the rest of the gods with wickedness, styled them demons: "And she went to Olympus, to the house of aegis-bearing Zeus, among the other demons." How, then, are the idols and the demons still gods, being in truth abominable and unclean spirits, admitted by all to be earthly and foul, weighed downward, lurking about the tombs and the monuments, where dim shadowy phantoms appear faintly? These are your gods, the idols, the shadows, and besides these those lame and wrinkled ones, "with eyes asquint," the Prayers, daughters rather of Thersites than of Zeus; so that it seems to me Bion said wittily, how could men justly ask of Zeus fair offspring, which he could not even provide for himself? Alas for the godlessness! The incorruptible essence — as far as in you lies — you bury, and that pure and holy being you have heaped into the tombs, robbing the truly existing essence of its divinity. Why, then, have you assigned to the things that are not gods the prerogatives of God? Why, forsaking heaven, have you honoured earth? What else is gold, or silver, or adamant, or iron, or bronze, or ivory, or precious stones? Are they not earth, and from earth? Are not all these things that you see the offspring of one mother, earth? Why, then, O vain and empty-minded — for I will say it again — having blasphemed the region above the heavens, have you dragged piety down to the ground, fashioning for yourselves chthonic gods, and, pursuing these created things in preference to the uncreated God, fallen into deeper gloom?

[82633] The Parian stone is fair, but it is not yet Poseidon; the ivory is fair, but it is not yet the Olympian. Matter is always in need of art, but God is without need. Art has come forward, matter has been clothed with the shape; and the richness of the substance, fit for gain, becomes worthy of worship only through the shape. Your statue is gold, it is wood, it is stone, it is earth, if you consider it from above — earth that has received its form from the craftsman. But I have learned to tread the earth, not to worship it; for it is not lawful for me ever to entrust the hopes of the soul to lifeless things. We must, then, go as close as possible to the statues, that their error may be convicted out of their very appearance as native to them; for the forms of the statues have stamped upon them very plainly the character of the demons. If, then, one were to go round and gaze upon the paintings and the statues, he would at once recognize your gods from their disgraceful figures: Dionysus from his dress, Hephaestus from his craft, Deo from her calamity, Ino from her veil, Poseidon from his trident, Zeus from his swan; the pyre points to Heracles; and if one sees a naked woman painted, he understands the golden Aphrodite. Thus that Cyprian, Pygmalion, fell in love with an ivory statue; the statue was of Aphrodite, and it was naked; the Cyprian is overcome by the figure and unites with the statue — and this Philostephanus records. And another Aphrodite in Cnidus was stone, and was fair; another man fell in love with this one and united with the stone — Posidippus records it, the former in his work on Cyprus, the latter in his work on Cnidus. So strong was art to deceive, becoming a pander to amorous men, leading them into the pit. Productive indeed is the craftsman's art, but it cannot deceive a rational man, nor those who have lived according to reason. Doves, indeed, flew to painted doves because of the likeness, and horses neighed at well-painted mares; they say a maiden fell in love with an image, and a fair youth with the Cnidian statue — but the eyes of the spectators were deceived by the art. For no man in his right mind would have embraced a goddess, or been buried with a corpse, or fallen in love with a demon and a stone. But you art deceives by another sorcery: even if it does not lead you to love, yet it does lead you to honour and worship the statues and the paintings. The painting is like, indeed: let the art be praised, but let it not deceive man as though it were truth. The horse stands quietly, the dove is still, the wing inactive; but the cow of Daedalus, made of wood, drew a wild bull to her, and the art, deceiving him, forced the beast to mount a woman in love. So great a frenzy did the arts, working their evil arts, breed in the senseless. But the keepers and tenders of apes have marvelled that no waxen or clay likeness or doll deceives these creatures; yet you, then, will become worse even than apes, clinging to little statues of stone and wood and gold and ivory, and to paintings. The makers of such ruinous playthings for you are the stone-cutters and the statue-makers, the painters too and the carpenters and the poets, who bring in a great rabble of such things: in the fields Satyrs and Pans, in the woods the Nymphs of the mountains and the Hamadryads, yes, and about the waters and the rivers and the springs the Naiads, and about the sea the Nereids. And by now the magi boast of demons as ministers of their own impiety, having enrolled them as their own servants, having made them by their incantations into slaves under compulsion. The marriages, then, of gods, and the begettings of children, and the childbirths recorded, and the adulteries sung, and the feastings made matter of comedy, and the laughter brought in over the wine — all these urge me to cry out, even though I would be silent: Alas for the godlessness! You have made heaven a stage, and the divine has become for you a drama, and the holy you have made a comedy with the masks of demons, satirizing true piety with superstition. "Then the harper struck up to sing a fair song" — sing to us, Homer, the fair strain — "of the love of Ares and fair-crowned Aphrodite, how first they lay together secretly in the house of Hephaestus; and much he gave, and shamed the bed and couch of the lord Hephaestus." Stop the song, Homer; it is not fair, it teaches adultery; and we have refused even our ears to fornication; for we — we are they who carry about the image of God in this living and moving statue, man — an indwelling image, a counsellor, a companion, a sharer of the hearth, sympathetic, more than sympathetic; we have become an offering to God for Christ's sake. We are "the elect race, the royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people, who once were no people, but now are the people of God"; we who, according to John, "are not of those below," but have learned the whole from him who came from above; who have understood the dispensation of God; who have practised to walk in newness of life. But the many do not think these things; casting away shame and fear, they inscribe at home the lewd doings of the demons. Indeed, fixing their gaze on certain painted tablets hung up rather high, they have adorned their bedchambers with wantonness, reckoning licentiousness piety; and reclining upon their couches, in the very midst of their embraces, they look up at that naked Aphrodite, bound fast in her embrace, and at the amorous bird flitting about Leda; and, approving the picture of the female, they impress it on their seal-rings, using a seal suited to the licentiousness of Zeus. These are the archetypes of your luxury, these the theologies of outrage, these the teachings of the gods who join with you in fornication; for "what each man wishes, that also he thinks," according to the Athenian orator. And of what sort, again, are your other images — little Pans and naked girls and drunken Satyrs and swollen members, laid bare in the paintings, convicted of their incontinence? And now, openly gazing upon the figures of all wantonness, set out for the whole public, you are not ashamed, but keep them up still more, dedicating them, just as, forsooth, you do the images of your gods, consecrating at home pillars of shamelessness, inscribing on equal terms the postures of Philaenis as the labours of Heracles. Of these we proclaim forgetfulness not only of the use, but also of the very sight and hearing. Your ears have played the harlot, your eyes have committed fornication, and — what is stranger — before the embrace your eyes have committed adultery. O you who have done violence to man and struck out the divine impress of his fashioning, you disbelieve everything, that you may give yourselves up to passion; and you believe in the idols, emulating their incontinence, but disbelieve God, not enduring chastity; you have hated the better and honoured the worse, becoming spectators of virtue but contenders for vice. Blessed alone, then, so to speak, are all those, of one mind, of whom the Sibyl says, "who shall deny all temples when they see them, and altars, vain shrines of dumb stones, and stone xoana and statues made with hands, defiled with living blood and with sacrifices of four-footed creatures, of two-footed, of winged things, and with the slaughter of beasts." For indeed it has been forbidden us to ply openly a deceiving art: "you shall not make," says the prophet, "the likeness of anything that is in heaven above or that is in the earth beneath." Could we, then, still suppose Praxiteles' Demeter and Kore and the mystic Iacchus to be gods, or the arts of Lysippus, or the hands of Apelles, which have clothed matter with the appearance of divine glory? But you, that the statue may be wrought as comely as possible, persevere; yet that you may not yourselves, through insensibility, be made like to the statues, you take no thought. Very plainly and briefly does the prophetic word convict custom, saying that "all the gods of the nations are idols of demons; but God made the heavens" and the things in heaven. Some, then, wandering from this point, somehow worship divine art, but not God — the sun and moon and the rest of the choir of the stars — supposing these, against all reason, to be gods, the very instruments of time. "For by his word were they established, and by the breath of his mouth is all their host." But human art makes houses and ships and cities and pictures; and how could I tell all that God makes? Behold the whole world: it is his work; and heaven and the sun and the angels and men are the works of his fingers. How great is the power of God! His mere will is the making of a world; for God alone made it, since he alone is truly God. By his mere willing he creates, and on his mere willing follows the coming-to-be. Here the chorus of philosophers turns aside, agreeing that man has been made altogether fair for the spectacle of heaven, yet worshipping the things that appear in heaven and are grasped by sight. For even if the works in heaven are not human, yet they have been made for men. And let none of you worship the sun, but let him long for the maker of the sun; let none deify the world, but let him seek after the maker of the world. The only refuge, it seems, left to him who is to come to the doors of salvation is divine wisdom; from this, as from some inviolable sanctuary, man can no longer be carried off by any of the demons, as he hastens to salvation.

[92135] 5. Let us now run over, if you will, the opinions of the philosophers too, all that they boast about the gods, that we may find whether philosophy itself, for vainglory's sake, makes matter into an idol, or whether, in passing, we can show it deifying certain spirits, dreaming the truth. The elements, then, some set down as first principles, hymning them: Thales of Miletus, water; and Anaximenes, himself also a Milesian, air, whom Diogenes of Apollonia afterward followed. Parmenides the Eleatic introduced as gods fire and earth; but one of these only, fire, Hippasus of Metapontum and Heraclitus of Ephesus supposed to be a god. As for Empedocles of Acragas, he fell into a plurality, and in addition to these four elements reckons up Strife and Love. These too, then, are godless, who, by a certain unwise wisdom, worship matter; and though they do not honour stones or timber, they deify earth, the mother of these; and though they do not fashion a Poseidon, they bow down to water itself. For what is Poseidon but a certain liquid substance, named from "drinking" (posis)? Just as, of course, the warlike Ares is named from "lifting up" (arsis) and "destruction" (anairesis), by which it seems to me that many, especially those who simply fix a sword and sacrifice to it as to Ares — and this is a Scythian custom, as Eudoxus says in the second book of his Circuit of the Earth; and of the Scythians, the Sauromatae, as Hicesius says in his work On Mysteries, reverence the scimitar. This too is the case with the followers of Heraclitus, who reverence fire as the primal element; for this fire others have named Hephaestus. And the magi of the Persians have honoured fire, and many of the inhabitants of Asia, and besides them the Macedonians, as Diogenes says in the first book of his Persian Affairs. Why need I list the Sauromatae, whom Nymphodorus in his Barbarian Customs records as reverencing fire, or the Persians and the Medes and the magi? Dinon says that these sacrifice in the open air, reckoning fire and water alone as the statues of the gods. Nor did I conceal their ignorance either. For even if they think they are most of all escaping error, yet they slide into another deception: statues of gods they have not supposed to be wood and stones, like the Greeks, nor ibises and ichneumons, like the Egyptians, but fire and water, like philosophers. After many cycles of years, however, they too came to reverence statues of human form, as Berossus shows in the third book of his Chaldaic Affairs, this having been introduced by Artaxerxes son of Darius son of Ochus, who first set up the statue of Aphrodite Anaïtis in Babylon and Susa and Ecbatana, and showed the Persians and Bactrians and Damascus and Sardis to reverence it. Let the philosophers, then, confess that their teachers are the Persians or the Sauromatae or the magi, from whom they have learned the godlessness of the principles they reverence, ignorant of the ruler who is the maker of all things and the fashioner of those principles themselves — the God without beginning — while they turn to those poor and weak elements, as the apostle says, made for the service of men. And of the other philosophers, all who, passing beyond the elements, busied themselves with something loftier and more extraordinary, some of them hymned the Infinite, as Anaximander (he was a Milesian) and Anaxagoras of Clazomenae and the Athenian Archelaus. These two, indeed, both set Mind over the Infinite; but Leucippus the Milesian and Metrodorus of Chios, it seems, left two principles also, the full and the void; and Democritus of Abdera, taking these two, added the images. For Alcmaeon of Croton thought the stars were gods, being ensouled. I will not pass over their shamelessness: Xenocrates (this man was a Chalcedonian) hints at seven gods, the planets, and an eighth, the world composed of all the fixed stars. Nor indeed will I pass by the Stoics, who say that the divine pervades all matter, even the meanest, who simply disgrace philosophy. Nor do I think it hard, now that I have come to this point, to make mention also of those of the Peripatos; and the father of the school, not understanding the Father of all things, thinks that the one called "Supreme" is the soul of the universe; that is, supposing the soul of the world to be God, he is pierced by his own argument. For he who limits providence as far as the moon herself, and then reckons the world a god, overturns himself, dogmatizing a god that has no share in God. And that Eresian, Theophrastus, the pupil of Aristotle, sometimes suspects heaven, sometimes spirit, to be God. Of Epicurus alone I will willingly be forgetful, who thinks that God cares for nothing, being impious through and through. And what of Heraclides of Pontus? Is there any point where he too is not dragged down to the images of Democritus?

[97003] 6. And a great rabble of such men flows in upon me, bringing in, like some hobgoblin, a strange shadow-painting of foreign demons, mythologizing with old wives' twaddle. Far be it from us to permit men to listen to such tales, men whom we do not accustom even to soothe our own children with myths when they cry, as the saying goes, dreading to nurse up in them the godlessness proclaimed by these would-be wise men, who know the truth no better than babes. For why, in the name of truth, do you show those who have believed you to be subject to flux and motion and disorderly eddies? Why do you fill my life with idols, fashioning into gods winds or air or fire or earth or stones or timber or iron — this world of ours — and making gods too of the planets, prating astrology, not astronomy, to men truly led astray, with this much-bruited star-talk? I long for the Lord of the winds, the Lord of fire, the maker of the world, the kindler of the sun's light; I seek after God, not the works of God. Whom, then, shall I take from you as a fellow-worker in the search? For we have not utterly despaired of you. If you will, take Plato. Where, then, must we track God, O Plato? "For it is a task to find the father and maker of this universe, and, having found him, it is impossible to declare him to all." Why so, in the name of God himself? "Because it can in no wise be spoken." Well said, Plato; you have touched upon the truth. But do not weary; lay hold with me of the search concerning the Good; for into all men without exception, but especially those who spend their lives in discourse, there has been instilled a certain divine effluence. Wherefore, even unwillingly, they confess that there is one God, imperishable and unbegotten, somewhere up above, about the back of heaven, in his own proper watch-tower, truly existing forever. "But what kind of God should one conceive? Him who sees all things, while himself unseen," says Euripides. Menander, then, seems to me to have gone astray, where he says: "O Sun, you must worship first of the gods, through whom it is possible to behold the other gods." For not even the sun could ever show the true God; but the sound Reason, which is the sun of the soul, alone — through which alone, when it has risen within, in the depth of the mind — its eye is illumined. Hence not unreasonably did Democritus say that "few of the men of reason, stretching out their hands to this place which we Greeks now call air, said that all this was Zeus; and he knows all things and gives all and takes away, and he is king of all." In this way, too, Plato, thinking of God, hints at him: "About the king of all are all things, and that is the cause of all fair things." Who, then, is the king of all? God, the measure of the truth of the things that are. As, then, the things measured are grasped by the measure, so too, by the understanding of God, the truth is measured and grasped. And the truly holy Moses says: "There shall not be in your bag a weight and a weight, great or small; nor shall there be in your house a measure great or small; but you shall have a true and just weight" — taking God to be the weight and measure and number of all things. For the unjust and unequal idols are hidden away at home, in the bag and in the soul that is, so to speak, filthy; but the only just measure, the only truly existing God, ever equal in the same way and after the same manner, measures all things and weighs them, encompassing and upholding without bias, as in the balance of justice, the nature of the universe. "God, then, as the ancient saying goes, holding the beginning and end and middle of all things that are, completes a straight course, journeying round according to nature; and ever upon him follows Justice, the avenger of those who fall short of the divine law." Whence, O Plato, do you hint at the truth? Whence does the unstinted supply of your words prophesy piety? "Wiser than these," he says, "are the races of the barbarians." I know your teachers, even if you wish to conceal them: geometry you learn from the Egyptians, astronomy from the Babylonians, the wholesome incantations you take from the Thracians; the Assyrians too have taught you much; but the laws, all that are true, and the right opinion concerning God, you have profited from the Hebrews themselves, "who not with empty deceits, nor with works of men — gold and bronze and silver and ivory, and idols of wood and of stone, of dead mortals — do they pay honour, all that mortals do in their empty-minded counsel; but they raise to heaven pure arms, rising at dawn from their beds, ever purifying their flesh with water, and they honour the One alone who ever rules, the immortal." And do not, O Philosophy, set before me this one Plato only, but be eager to bring forward many others too, who declare the one and only true God to be God, by his inspiration, if anywhere they have laid hold on the truth. For Antisthenes thought this — not as a Cynic, but as a pupil of Socrates — that God is like to no one; wherefore no one can learn him from an image. And Xenophon the Athenian would himself also have written something expressly, bearing witness about the truth as Socrates did, had he not feared the poison of Socrates; yet none the less he hints: "He who shakes all things and brings them to rest is manifest as some great and powerful one; but of what form he is, is unseen; nor indeed does the sun, that seems all-shining, seem to permit itself to be looked at, but if anyone shamelessly gazes at it, it takes away his sight." Whence, then, does the son of Gryllus draw his wisdom? Plainly from the prophetess of the Hebrews, who prophesies somewhat thus: "What flesh can with its eyes behold the heavenly and true immortal God, who dwells in the pole? Nay, men, born mortal, cannot even stand against the rays of the sun." Cleanthes of Pedasus, the philosopher of the Stoa, shows not a poetic theogony, but a true theology. He did not conceal what he had in mind concerning God: "Do you ask me what the Good is like? Listen, then: ordered, just, holy, pious, master of itself, useful, fair, fitting, austere, self-contained, ever profitable, fearless, griefless, advantageous, painless, helpful, pleasing, secure, friendly, honoured, agreeing, glorious, free from conceit, careful, gentle, vehement, lasting, blameless, ever abiding. Every man is base who looks to glory, as though he would get from her some fair thing." Here, I think, he clearly teaches what God is, and how common opinion and custom enslave those who follow them, but not those who seek after God. Nor must we conceal the followers of Pythagoras, who say: "God is one; and this God is not, as some suppose, outside the world-order, but within it, whole in the whole circle, overseer of all coming-to-be, the blending of all the ages and the worker of his own powers and of all works, the light-giver in heaven and father of all, mind and the ensouling of the whole circle, the mover of all things." Enough is even this for the knowledge of God, written down by them through the inspiration of God, and selected by us, for one able to discern the truth even a little.

[104179] 7. Now let there come to us — for philosophy alone is not sufficient — poetry too, which has busied itself wholly about falsehood, at last, late as it is, to bear witness to the truth, or rather to confess to God its mythical wandering. Let whatever poet wishes come forward first. Aratus, then, understands the power of God to pervade all things: "that all things may grow firm; therefore him men ever propitiate first and last. Hail, Father, great wonder, great boon to men." In this way too the Ascraean Hesiod hints at God: "For he himself is king and lord of all, and of the immortals none else has matched his might." Even upon the stage they lay bare the truth: the one — "looking up to the ether and to heaven, hold this to be God," says Euripides. And Sophocles son of Sophillus: "In truth there is one God, one, who made heaven and the wide earth and the gleaming swell of the sea and the force of the winds; but mortals, much wandering in heart, set up for ourselves, as a comfort in griefs, statues of the gods from stones, or figures wrought of bronze or gold or ivory; and rendering to these sacrifices and empty festivals, we suppose that thus we are pious." This poet, then, has now, and even at some risk, brought the truth onto the stage before the spectators.

[105459] And the Thracian hierophant and poet at once, Orpheus son of Oeagrus, after his initiation into the orgies and his theology of the idols, brings in a recantation of truth, singing the truly sacred discourse, late at last, yet for all that singing it: "I will speak to those for whom it is lawful; but set up the doors, all you profane alike. But you, hearken, son of light-bringing Mene, Musaeus; for I will declare what is true. And let not the things that before appeared in your breast rob you of your dear life. Looking to the divine Word, attend to it, guiding straight the understanding vessel of the heart; and tread well the path, and look on him alone, the immortal King of the world." Then, going on, he expressly adds: "He is one, self-begotten; from one are all things begotten; and in them he himself moves about; and no mortal beholds him, but he himself beholds all." So, then, Orpheus; in time, at last, having wandered, he came to understand. But do not you, mortal of crafty mind, delay and tarry; but, turning back from your wandering, propitiate God. For even if the Greeks, having got certain sparks of the divine Word, uttered some few things of the truth, they bear witness indeed to its power, that it is not hidden, but they convict themselves as weak, not having reached the end. For by now, I think, it has become plain to everyone that those who do or say anything apart from the Word of truth are like men forced to walk without a footing.

[106929] And the very refutations of your gods, which the poets, constrained by truth, put into comedy, may shame you into salvation. Menander the comic poet, for instance, in the play The Charioteer: "No god pleases me," he says, "who goes about outside with an old woman, nor who slips into houses upon a little board" — for such are the begging priests of the Mother. Hence Antisthenes reasonably said to them as they begged: "I do not feed the Mother of the gods, whom the gods feed." Again the same comic poet, in the play The Priestess, vexed at the custom, tries to convict the godless conceit of error, adding sensibly: "For if a man by his cymbals drags the god where he wishes, then he who does this is greater than the god; but these are instruments of recklessness and of livelihood, devised by men." And not Menander only, but Homer too and Euripides and many other poets convict your gods, and do not fear to revile them, even to no small degree. At once they call Athena "dog-fly" and Hephaestus "lame in both legs"; and to Aphrodite Helen says, "Mayest thou never return on thy feet to Olympus." And of Dionysus Homer writes openly: "who once chased the nurses of frenzied Dionysus down through holy Nysa; and they all together cast their wands to the ground, beneath the murderous Lycurgus." Worthy in truth of a Socratic schooling is Euripides, looking to the truth and despising the spectators; now convicting Apollo, "who dwells at the central seat, dealing out to mortals utterance most clear" — "obeying him, I slew my mother; hold him impious and slay him; he erred, not I, being more ignorant than the fair and the just" — now bringing in Heracles mad, and elsewhere drunken and insatiable. For how should he not be? — who, feasting on the flesh, "ate green figs upon it, howling without music, so as to be understood even by a barbarian." And in the play Ion he wheels out the gods bare-headed to the theatre: "How, then, is it just that you who wrote the laws for mortals should yourselves incur a charge of injustice? But if — for it shall not be, yet I will use the argument — you shall pay penalty to men for forced unions, you and Poseidon and Zeus who rules heaven, you shall empty your temples in paying for your injustices."