WORK: Historical Library  (slug: diodorus-siculus-historical-library-3031ad)

CHAPTER: 01-book-1



[110326] 56.7. For, since it was a custom among the Persians that the man who brought a concubine to the king should carry her in a covered carriage, and that none of those they met should be inquisitive or come face to face with the woman who was being conveyed, Lysithides used this opportunity for his design.

[110631] 56.8. For, having prepared the carriage adorned with costly hangings, he placed Themistocles in it, and, having brought him through with all safety, met with the king, and, conversing cautiously, received from him pledges that he would do the man no harm. And, having brought him in before the king, and the king having given Themistocles leave to speak and having learned that he had done him no wrong, he was released from punishment.

[111069] 57.1. Having been unexpectedly saved by an enemy, he fell again into greater dangers for the following reasons. Mandane was the daughter of Darius, who had slain the Magi, and the full sister of Xerxes, and met with the greatest acceptance among the Persians.

[111330] 57.2. She, having been deprived of her sons at the time when Themistocles defeated the fleet of the Persians at Salamis, bore the destruction of her children with difficulty, and, because of the magnitude of her misfortune, was pitied by the multitudes.

[111585] 57.3. She, learning of the presence of Themistocles, went to the palace wearing mourning dress, and with tears begged her brother to inflict punishment on Themistocles. As he paid no heed to her, she went about to the best of the Persians making her request and, in general, provoking the multitudes to the punishment of Themistocles.

[111921] 57.4. As the crowd ran together to the palace and with a shout demanded Themistocles for punishment, the king replied that he would establish a court from the best of the Persians, and that what was judged should meet with fulfillment.

[112158] 57.5. All consenting, and a sufficient time being given for the preparation of the trial, Themistocles, having learned the Persian language and using it in his defense, was acquitted of the charges.

[112358] 57.6. The king, being overjoyed at the man's deliverance, honored him with great gifts; for he joined to him in marriage a Persian woman, distinguished in nobility and beauty and, moreover, praised for her virtue, and a multitude of servants . . . for his attendance, and all sorts of cups and the other furnishing suited to enjoyment and luxury.

[112706] 57.7. He gave him also three cities well suited for his maintenance and enjoyment: Magnesia on the Maeander, which had the most grain of the cities in Asia, for bread; Myus, for relish, having a sea rich in fish; and Lampsacus, which had much vine-bearing land, for wine.

[112979] 58.1. Themistocles, then, having been freed from his fear among the Greeks, and, unexpectedly, having been driven into exile by those whom he had most greatly benefited, and benefited by those whom he had most grievously harmed, lived out his life in these cities, well supplied with all the goods that pertain to enjoyment; and, dying in Magnesia, he met with a notable burial and a monument that still remains to this day.

[113405] 58.2. Some of the historians say that Xerxes, desiring to campaign again against Greece, invited Themistocles to be general in the war, and that he agreed, and took sworn pledges concerning these matters that Xerxes would not campaign against the Greeks without Themistocles.

[113682] 58.3. A bull having been sacrificed and the oaths taken, Themistocles, having filled a cup with the blood, drank it down and at once died; and Xerxes desisted from this design, while Themistocles by his own death left behind the fairest defense, that he had nobly conducted his public life toward the Greeks.

[113992] 58.4. We are come to the death of the greatest man among the Greeks, concerning whom many dispute whether he, having wronged his native land and the other Greeks, fled to the Persians, or, on the contrary, whether the city and all the Greeks, having been greatly benefited, forgot their gratitude and unjustly led their benefactor into the uttermost dangers.

[114352] 58.5. But if anyone should examine, without envy and with accuracy, both the nature of the man and his deeds, he will find that of all whom we remember he held the first place in both the things that have been said. Therefore one might reasonably marvel that they were willing to deprive themselves of a man of such a nature.

[114679] 59.1. For what other man, when Sparta was the more powerful and Eurybiades the Spartiate held the leadership of the fleet, would by his own deeds have taken from Sparta this glory? What other man have we recorded who by a single deed made himself excel the commanders, his city the Greek cities, and the Greeks the barbarians? Under what general did it come about that there were fewer resources or greater dangers?

[115096] 59.2. Who, ranged against all the force from Asia with his city laid waste, conquered? Who in peace, by such works, made his native land powerful? Who, when a very great war held it, saved it, and, by a single device—that concerning the bridge—humbled the land force of the enemy by one-half, so that it became easy for the Greeks to overcome?

[115441] 59.3. Therefore, whenever we contemplate the magnitude of his deeds, and, examining the particulars, find that he was dishonored by his city, while the city was exalted because of his deeds, we reasonably find that the city which seems to be of all cities the wisest and most reasonable was most harsh toward that man.

[115761] 59.4. Concerning the virtue of Themistocles, then, even if we have dwelt at length in this digression, we judged it not right to leave his virtue unmarked. While these things were being done, in Italy Micythus, who held the dominion of Rhegium and Zancle, founded the city Pyxus.

[116042] 60.1. When Demotion was archon at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Publius Valerius Publicola and Gaius Nautius Rufus. In their time the Athenians, having chosen as general Cimon the son of Miltiades and given him a notable force, sent him to the coast of Asia to aid the allied cities and to liberate those still held by Persian garrisons.

[116391] 60.2. He, taking over the fleet at Byzantium, and sailing to the city called Eion, this, which the Persians held, he subdued; and Scyros, which the Pelasgians and Dolopians inhabited, he took by siege, and, establishing an Athenian as founder, apportioned the land by lot.

[116665] 60.3. After this, intending to begin greater enterprises, he sailed to the Piraeus, and, taking on more triremes and preparing the other supplies on a notable scale, then sailed out having two hundred triremes; and afterward, having sent for more from the Ionians and all the others, he had in all three hundred.

[116979] 60.4. Sailing, then, with the whole fleet to Caria, those of the coastal cities that had been colonized from Greece he at once persuaded to revolt from the Persians, while those that were of two languages and had Persian garrisons he besieged, bringing force against them. And, having won over the cities in Caria, he likewise persuaded and took on those in Lycia.

[117345] 60.5. And, taking on ships from the allies who were ever being added, he increased his fleet still more. The Persians prepared their land army by themselves, and gathered their navy from Phoenicia and Cyprus and Cilicia; and Tithraustes, a bastard son of Xerxes, was general of the Persian forces.

[117644] 60.6. Cimon, learning that the fleet of the Persians was tarrying about Cyprus, and sailing against the barbarians, fought at sea with two hundred and fifty ships against three hundred and forty. A fierce struggle taking place and both fleets fighting brilliantly, in the end the Athenians conquered, and destroyed many of the enemy's ships and captured more than a hundred together with their men.

[118044] 60.7. As the rest of the ships fled for refuge to Cyprus, the men in them withdrew to the land, and the ships, being empty of defenders, fell into the hands of the enemy.

[118216] 61.1. After this Cimon, not content with so great a victory, at once put in with the whole fleet against the land camp of the Persians, the camp being beside the river Eurymedon. Wishing to outgeneral the barbarians, he embarked on the captured ships the best of his own men, giving them tiaras and putting about them the rest of the Persian equipment.

[118570] 61.2. The barbarians, as the fleet was just sailing up, deceived by the Persian ships and equipment, supposed them to be their own triremes. Therefore these received the Athenians as being friends, while Cimon, when night had now come on, having disembarked his soldiers, and being received as a friend by them, fell upon the encampment of the barbarians.

[118927] 61.3. As great confusion arose among the Persians, Cimon and his men slew all whom they met, and, having caught in his tent the other general of the barbarians, Pherendates, the nephew of the king, slew him; and of the rest, some they killed, others they wounded, and all, because of the unexpectedness of the attack, they forced to flee; and in general such consternation and ignorance held the Persians that the greater part did not know who those attacking them were.

[119399] 61.4. For they did not suppose that the Greeks had come against them with a force, being persuaded that they had no land army at all; but the Pisidians, who were neighbors and hostilely disposed toward them, they supposed had come with a force. Therefore, thinking that the onset of the enemy was from the mainland, they fled to the ships as to friends.

[119754] 61.5. As the night was moonless and dark, it came about that the ignorance was much increased and no one could see the truth.

[119881] 61.6. Therefore, much slaughter taking place because of the disorder of the barbarians, Cimon, having told his soldiers beforehand to run together to the beacon that would be raised, raised the signal by the ships, being wary lest, the soldiers being scattered and rushing to plunder, something unexpected might happen.

[120202] 61.7. When all had gathered to the beacon and ceased from plunder, then they withdrew to the ships, and on the next day, setting up a trophy, they sailed off to Cyprus, having won two fairest victories, the one by land, the other by sea; for never yet are such and so great deeds recorded as having taken place on the same day with both naval and land forces.

[120563] 62.1. Cimon, having through his own generalship and valor achieved great things, won a far-famed glory not only among the citizens, but also among the other Greeks. For he had taken three hundred and forty ships, and more than twenty thousand men, and a notable quantity of money.

[120845] 62.2. The Persians, having fallen into such great defeats, built still more triremes, fearing the growth of the Athenians. For from these times the city of the Athenians received much increase, being equipped with a quantity of money and having met with great glory in courage and generalship.

[121140] 62.3. The people of the Athenians, setting aside a tithe from the spoils, dedicated it to the god, and inscribed this on the dedicated offering they had made: Since the sea divided Europe from Asia and impetuous Ares holds the cities of mortals, never yet did such a deed of earthly men take place at once on the mainland and on the sea. For these men, having destroyed many Medes in Cyprus, took at sea a hundred Phoenician ships full of men; and greatly groaned Asia, smitten by them with both hands in the might of war.

[121664] 63.1. These things, then, were done in this year. When Phaion was archon at Athens, at Rome Lucius Furius Mediolanus and Marcus Manilius Vason succeeded to the consular office. In their time a great and unexpected calamity befell the Lacedaemonians; for, great earthquakes occurring in Sparta, it came about that the houses fell from their foundations and more than twenty thousand of the Lacedaemonians were destroyed.

[122085] 63.2. As for a long time continuously the city was being shaken down and the houses were falling, many bodies, caught by the falling of the walls, were destroyed, and the earthquake ruined no small amount of the property in the houses.

[122322] 63.3. And this misfortune they suffered as though some divine power had taken vengeance on them; but other dangers befell them at the hands of men for the following reasons.

[122497] 63.4. The Helots and Messenians, being hostilely disposed toward the Lacedaemonians, previously kept quiet, fearing the superiority and power of Sparta; but when, because of the earthquake, they saw that the greater part of them had perished, they came to despise those who were left, being few. Therefore, having agreed with one another, they jointly waged the war against the Lacedaemonians.

[122892] 63.5. The king of the Lacedaemonians, Archidamus, through his own forethought both saved the citizens during the earthquake and during the war nobly ranged himself against the assailants.

[123081] 63.6. For, the city being held fast by the severity of the earthquake, he, first of the Spartiates, having snatched up his armor from the city, ran out into the country, and ordered the other citizens to do the same.

[123299] 63.7. The Spartiates obeying, in this way those who survived were saved; whom King Archidamus, marshaling, prepared to make war on those who had revolted.

[123455] 64.1. The Messenians, marshaled together with the Helots, at first set out against Sparta, supposing that they would take it because of the lack of defenders; but when they heard that those who had survived, marshaled with King Archidamus, were ready for the contest in defense of their native land, they desisted from this design, and, having seized a strong place in Messenia, made it their base and overran Laconia.

[123875] 64.2. The Spartiates, having recourse to the aid from the Athenians, received from them a force; and none the less, gathering forces from the other allies too, they became a match for the enemy. And at first they greatly surpassed the enemy, but afterward, a suspicion arising that the Athenians were about to incline to the Messenians, they dismissed their alliance, saying that they had the other allies sufficient for the present danger.

[124317] 64.3. The Athenians, thinking that they had been dishonored, then departed; but after this, being hostilely disposed toward the Lacedaemonians, they ever more kindled their hatred. Therefore they took this as the beginning of their estrangement; and afterward the cities fell out, and, having raised great wars, filled all Greece with great misfortunes. But concerning these things we shall record the particulars in their proper times.

[124755] 64.4. At that time the Lacedaemonians, having campaigned against Ithome with their allies, besieged it. The Helots, having in full force revolted from the Lacedaemonians, fought as allies of the Messenians, and at times conquered, at times were defeated. And as for ten years the war could not be decided, during this time they continued to do one another harm.

[125118] 65.1. After this, at Athens Theagenides was archon, and at Rome the consuls established were Lucius Aemilius Mamercus and Lucius Julius Iulus, and the seventy-eighth Olympiad was celebrated, in which Parmenides of Posidonia won the stadium-race. In their time war arose for the Argives and the Mycenaeans for the following reasons.

[125451] 65.2. The Mycenaeans, because of the ancient dignity of their native land, did not obey the Argives, as did the other cities in the Argolid, but, being ranged independently, paid no heed to the Argives. They disputed also about the temple of Hera, and claimed the right to administer the games of the Nemea themselves; and, in addition, when the Argives voted not to fight as allies at Thermopylae with the Lacedaemonians unless they were granted a share of the leadership, the Mycenaeans alone of those dwelling in the Argolid fought as allies of the Lacedaemonians.

[126020] 65.3. In general the Argives suspected them, lest, having grown stronger, they might dispute the leadership with the Argives because of the ancient spirit of their city. For these reasons, then, being hostilely disposed, they had long been eager to do away with the city, and now they thought they had a suitable opportunity, seeing the Lacedaemonians humbled and unable to come to the aid of the Mycenaeans. Gathering, then, a notable force from Argos and the allied cities, they campaigned against them, and, having conquered the Mycenaeans in battle and shut them up within their walls, besieged the city.

[126630] 65.4. The Mycenaeans for some time defended themselves vigorously against the besiegers; but afterward, being inferior in the war, and the Lacedaemonians being unable to come to their aid because of their own wars and the calamity that had befallen them from the earthquakes, and there being no other allies, in the absence of helpers they were taken by storm.

[126992] 65.5. The Argives, having enslaved the Mycenaeans and consecrated a tithe of them to the god, razed Mycenae. This city, then, which had been prosperous in ancient times and had great men and had accomplished notable deeds, met with such a destruction, and remained uninhabited until our own times. These things, then, were done in this year.

[127335] 66.1. When Lysistratus was archon at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Lucius Pinarius Mamertinus and Publius Furius Phipron. In their time Hieron the king of the Syracusans, having summoned to Syracuse the sons of Anaxilas, who had been tyrant of Zancle, reminded them with great gifts of the benefaction of Gelon toward their father, and advised them, since they were now grown to manhood, to demand an accounting from Micythus, who was their guardian, and to take over the dominion themselves.

[127839] 66.2. When these returned to Rhegium and demanded from the guardian an account of his administration, Micythus, being a good man, gathered the paternal friends of the boys and rendered the account so purely that all who were present admired both his justice and his fidelity, and the boys, repenting of what had been done, asked Micythus to take over the rule again and, having the authority and rank of a father, to administer the affairs of the dominion.

[128297] 66.3. Micythus, however, did not consent, but, having handed over everything accurately and put his own property aboard a vessel, sailed out from Rhegium, escorted by the goodwill of the crowds. He, then, having come down to Greece, lived out his life at Tegea in Arcadia, being praised.

[128586] 66.4. Hieron the king of the Syracusans died at Catana, and met with heroic honors, as having become the founder of the city. He, then, having ruled eleven years, left the kingship to Thrasybulus his brother, who ruled the Syracusans one year.

[128831] 67.1. When Lysanias was archon at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Appius Claudius and Titus Quintius Capitolinus. In their time Thrasybulus the king of the Syracusans was driven out of his rule; concerning whom, as we record the particulars, it is necessary, going back a little in the chronology, to set forth everything clearly from the beginning.

[129190] 67.2. Gelon the son of Deinomenes, having far surpassed the others in valor and generalship, and having outgeneralled the Carthaginians, conquered the barbarians in a great battle, as has been said before; and, having treated reasonably those whom he had subdued, and in general having behaved benevolently toward all his neighbors, he met with great acceptance among the Sicilians.

[129574] 67.3. He, then, being loved by all because of his gentleness, lived out his life peacefully until his death. Hieron, the eldest of the brothers, succeeding to the kingship, did not rule his subjects in like manner;

[129790] 67.4. for he was both avaricious and violent and, in general, most alien to simplicity and nobility. Therefore several, wishing to revolt, restrained their own impulses because of the glory of Gelon and the goodwill toward all the Sicilians.

[130033] 67.5. But after the death of Hieron, Thrasybulus his brother, taking over the rule, surpassed in baseness the one who had reigned before him. For, being violent and bloodthirsty, he put to death many of the citizens contrary to justice, and not a few he exiled on false slanders and took up their property into the royal treasury; and, in general, hating and being hated by those he wronged, he hired a multitude of mercenaries, preparing a counterforce to the citizen forces.

[130511] 67.6. Becoming ever more hateful to the citizens, and outraging many and putting others to death, he compelled those he wronged to revolt. Therefore the Syracusans, having set leaders over themselves, rushed in full force to the overthrow of the tyranny, and, marshaled by their leaders, held fast to their freedom.

[130828] 67.7. Thrasybulus, seeing the whole city campaigning against him, at first tried by argument to put down the faction; but when he saw the impulse of the Syracusans unceasing, he gathered together from Catana those settled there by Hieron and the other allies, and besides a multitude of mercenaries, so that all together came to about fifteen thousand.

[131182] 67.8. He, then, having seized the part of the city called Achradina and the Island, which was strong, and setting out from these, carried on the war against those who had revolted.

[131364] 68.1. The Syracusans first seized the part of the city called Tyche, and, setting out from this, sent ambassadors to Gela and Acragas and Selinus, and besides to Himera and to the cities of the Sicels lying in the interior, asking them quickly to come together and help to liberate Syracuse.

[131657] 68.2. As all readily obeyed, and quickly sent—some foot and cavalry soldiers, others warships fitted out for a sea-battle—a force adequate for the Syracusans was quickly gathered. Therefore the Syracusans, having equipped their ships and drawn up their land force, showed themselves ready to contend both by land and by sea.

[131983] 68.3. Thrasybulus, being abandoned by his allies and having his hopes in the mercenaries themselves, was master of Achradina and the Island, while the rest of the city the Syracusans held. After this Thrasybulus, sailing with his ships against the enemy, and being defeated in the sea-battle, lost many triremes, and with the rest fled for refuge to the Island.

[132346] 68.4. Likewise also, having led out his land force from Achradina and drawn up in the suburbs, he was defeated, and, having lost many men, was compelled to withdraw again to Achradina. Finally, despairing of the tyranny, he made terms with the Syracusans, and, having agreed about the matters concerning them, departed under truce to Locri.

[132688] 68.5. The Syracusans, having in this way liberated their native land, granted the mercenaries to depart from Syracuse, and, having liberated the other cities that were under tyrannies or held garrisons, restored the democracies to the cities.

[132932] 68.6. From these times, being at peace, the city received much increase toward prosperity, and preserved the democracy for nearly sixty years, until the tyranny of Dionysius.

[133108] 68.7. Thrasybulus, having taken over a well-founded kingship, through his own baseness shamefully lost the rule, and, fleeing to Locri, there lived out the rest of his time as a private citizen.

[133304] 68.8. While these things were being done, at Rome there were then for the first time appointed four tribunes of the people, Gaius Sicinius and Lucius Nemetorius, and besides these Marcus Duillius and Spurius Acilius.

[133522] 69.1. When the annual period had passed, at Athens Lysitheus was archon, and at Rome the consuls established were Lucius Valerius Publicola and Titus Aemilius Mamercus. In their time in Asia Artabanus, a Hyrcanian by birth, but having the greatest power with King Xerxes and commanding the bodyguard, resolved to slay Xerxes and to transfer the kingship to himself. Having communicated the plot to Mithridates the eunuch, who was chamberlain of the king and held the most authoritative trust, and who was also a kinsman and friend of Artabanus, he consented to the plot.

[134094] 69.2. Brought in by him by night into the bedchamber, Artabanus slew Xerxes, and then rushed against the sons of the king. These were three in number: Darius the eldest and Artaxerxes, who were tarrying in the palace, and the third, Hystaspes, who was abroad at that time; for he held the satrapy in Bactra.

[134403] 69.3. Artabanus, then, coming while it was still night to Artaxerxes, said that Darius his brother had become the slayer of their father and was drawing the kingship to himself.

[134582] 69.4. He advised him, therefore, before that man should seize the rule, to see to it that he should not become a slave through carelessness, but should reign, having taken vengeance on the slayer of his father; and he undertook to furnish him the king's bodyguard as helpers.

[134859] 69.5. Artaxerxes being persuaded, and at once having slain his brother Darius with the bodyguard, Artabanus, seeing his design succeeding, and taking his own sons and saying that he had the opportunity to win the kingship, struck Artaxerxes with his sword.

[135117] 69.6. But he, being wounded and suffering nothing fatal from the blow, defended himself against Artabanus, and, dealing him a mortal blow, slew him. Artaxerxes, having unexpectedly been saved and having taken vengeance on the slayer of his father, took over the kingship of the Persians. Xerxes, then, ended his life in the manner described, having reigned over the Persians more than twenty years, and Artaxerxes, succeeding to the rule, reigned forty years.

[135578] 70.1. When Archedemides was archon at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Aulus Verginius and Titus Minucius, and the seventy-ninth Olympiad was celebrated, in which Xenophon the Corinthian won the stadium-race. In their time the Thasians, having revolted from the Athenians over a dispute about mines, were besieged into surrender by the Athenians and compelled again to be ranged under them.

[135977] 70.2. Likewise too the Aeginetans having revolted, the Athenians, intending to subdue Aegina, undertook to besiege it; for this city, often successful in the contests at sea, was full of spirit and was well supplied with money and triremes, and in general was always hostilely disposed toward the Athenians.

[136286] 70.3. Therefore, campaigning against it, they ravaged the country, and, besieging Aegina, were eager to take it by storm. For in general, having advanced far in power, they no longer treated their allies reasonably as before, but ruled them violently and arrogantly.

[136554] 70.4. Therefore most of the allies, being unable to bear the harshness, talked with one another about revolt, and some, despising the common council, ranged themselves independently.

[136738] 70.5. While these things were being done, the Athenians, holding command of the sea, sent ten thousand settlers to Amphipolis, enrolling some from the citizens, others from the allies; and, having apportioned the land by lot, for a time they prevailed over the Thracians, but afterward, having gone up into Thrace, it came about that all who invaded the country of the Thracians were destroyed by those called the Edonians.

[137163] 71.1. When Tlepolemus was archon at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Titus Quintius and Quintus Servilius Structus. In their time Artaxerxes the king of the Persians, having just recovered the kingship, first punished those who had shared in the slaying of his father, and then arranged the affairs of the kingdom advantageously for himself.

[137513] 71.2. For of the existing satraps he removed those hostilely disposed toward him, and, choosing the suitable men from among his own friends, handed over the satrapies. He took thought also of the revenues and the preparation of his forces, and, in general, administering the whole kingdom reasonably, met with great acceptance among the Persians.

[137861] 71.3. The inhabitants of Egypt, learning of the death of Xerxes and of the whole attack and confusion in the kingdom of the Persians, resolved to lay claim to their freedom. At once, then, gathering a force, they revolted from the Persians, and, having expelled the Persian tax-collectors of Egypt, established as king the man called Inaros.

[138204] 71.4. He at first enrolled soldiers from the natives, and after this, gathering mercenaries also from the foreign peoples, prepared an adequate force. He sent ambassadors also to the Athenians about an alliance, promising them that, if they should liberate the Egyptians, he would grant them a share of the kingdom and would render them many times the favors in return for the benefaction.

[138595] 71.5. The Athenians, judging it advantageous for themselves both to humble the Persians as far as possible and to make the Egyptians their own against the reverses of fortune, voted to come to the aid of the Egyptians with three hundred triremes.

[138843] 71.6. The Athenians, then, with much zeal were occupied about the preparation of the fleet. Artaxerxes, learning of the revolt of the Egyptians and the preparations for war, resolved that he must surpass the Egyptians in the magnitude of his forces. At once, then, from all the satrapies he enrolled soldiers and built ships, and made provision for all the rest of the preparation. And the affairs in Asia and Egypt were in this state.

[139280] 72.1. In Sicily, the tyranny in Syracuse having just been overthrown and all the cities throughout the island liberated, all Sicily received much increase toward prosperity; for the Sicilians, being at peace and possessing good land, because of the abundance of the crops quickly recovered in their fortunes and filled the country with slaves and cattle and the rest of prosperity, receiving great revenues and spending nothing on their accustomed wars.

[139735] 72.2. But after this they fell again into wars and factions for the following reasons. Having overthrown the tyranny of Thrasybulus, they gathered an assembly, and, deliberating about their own democracy, all unanimously voted to construct a colossal statue of Zeus the Liberator, and each year to sacrifice festivals of freedom and to hold notable games on the same day on which, having overthrown the tyrant, they had liberated their native land; and to sacrifice in the games to the gods four hundred and fifty bulls, and to spend these on the feasting of the citizens.

[140309] 72.3. All the magistracies they assigned to the original citizens; but the foreigners who had been made citizens under Gelon they did not think worthy to share in this honor, either judging them unworthy, or distrusting them, lest, having been brought up under a tyranny and having campaigned with a monarch, they should attempt revolution; which indeed came to pass. For, Gelon having enrolled more than ten thousand foreign mercenaries as citizens, of these more than seven thousand survived at the time in question.

[140829] 73.1. These, being driven from the honor of the elections, bore it with difficulty, and, having taken counsel together, revolted from the Syracusans, and seized of the city both Achradina and the Island, both these places having their own well-built wall.

[141086] 73.2. The Syracusans, having fallen again into confusion, held the rest of the city, and walled off the part of it that faced Epipolae, and prepared for themselves much security; for at once they readily shut off the revolters from going out into the country and quickly made them lack provisions.

[141385] 73.3. The foreigners were inferior in numbers to the Syracusans, but in experience in war far surpassed them; therefore, assaults occurring throughout the city and partial engagements, the foreigners had the advantage in the battles, but, being shut off from the country, were inferior in supplies and were in want of provisions. And the affairs in Sicily were in this state.

[141762] 74.1. When Conon was archon at Athens, at Rome the consular office was held by Quintus Fabius Vibulanus and Tiberius Aemilius Mamercus. In their time Artaxerxes the king of the Persians appointed as general for the war against the Egyptians Achaemenes, the son of Darius and his own uncle; and, having handed over to him cavalry and infantry soldiers, more than three hundred thousand, ordered him to subdue the Egyptians.

[142186] 74.2. He, then, when he had arrived in Egypt, encamped near the Nile, and, having refreshed his force from the journey, prepared the things for the battle; and the Egyptians, having gathered their force from Libya and Egypt, awaited the alliance from the Athenians.

[142453] 74.3. When the Athenians had put in at Egypt with two hundred ships, and, together with the Egyptians, had drawn up against the Persians, a fierce battle took place. And for a while the Persians, being superior in numbers, had the advantage; but after this, the Athenians forcing them back and routing those ranged against them and slaying many, the rest of the multitude of the barbarians rushed to flight.

[142862] 74.4. As there was much slaughter in the flight, finally the Persians, having lost the greater part of their force, fled for refuge to the place called the White Wall, while the Athenians, having gained the victory by their own manly courage, pursued the barbarians together to the aforesaid place, and did not desist from the siege.

[143197] 74.5. Artaxerxes, learning of the defeat of his men, first sent some of his friends with much money to Lacedaemon, and asked the Lacedaemonians to make war on the Athenians, thinking that thus the Athenians who were victorious in Egypt would sail off to Athens to aid their native land;

[143485] 74.6. but, the Lacedaemonians neither receiving the money nor otherwise heeding the requests of the Persians, Artaxerxes, despairing of the aid from the Lacedaemonians, prepared other forces; and, having set over them as commanders Artabazus and Megabyzus, men distinguished in valor, he sent them out to make war on the Egyptians.

[143818] 75.1. When Euthippus was archon at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Quintus Servilius and Spurius Postumius Albinus. In their time in Asia Artabazus and Megabyzus, having been sent out for the war against the Egyptians, set out from Persia, having cavalry and infantry soldiers more than three hundred thousand.

[144138] 75.2. When they came into Cilicia and Phoenicia, they refreshed their land forces from the journey, and ordered the Cyprians and Phoenicians and the inhabitants of Cilicia to build ships. Three hundred triremes having been fitted out, they equipped these with the best marines and with arms and missiles and the other things useful for a sea-battle.

[144489] 75.3. These men, then, were busy about the preparations and made exercises of the soldiers and trained all in the experiences of war, and spent about these things pretty much the whole of the current year;

[144696] 75.4. but the Athenians in Egypt were besieging those who had fled to the White Wall about Memphis; and, the Persians defending themselves vigorously, being unable to take the place, they remained at the siege for the year.

[144921] 76.1. In Sicily the Syracusans, making war on the foreigners who had revolted, made continuous assaults on Achradina and the Island, and in a sea-battle conquered the revolters, but by land were not strong enough to drive them out of the city because of the strength of the places.

[145204] 76.2. After this, a battle taking place in the country, and the combatants on both sides running risks zealously, it came about that not a few fell on both sides, but the Syracusans conquered. After the battle the Syracusans crowned the chosen men, being six hundred, who had been the cause of the victory, giving them as a prize of valor a mina of silver each.

[145567] 76.3. While these things were being done, Ducetius the leader of the Sicels, being bitterly disposed toward the inhabitants of Catana because of the taking away of the land of the Sicels, campaigned against them. Likewise too the Syracusans campaigned against Catana, and these jointly apportioned the land by lot and made war on those settled there by Hieron the ruler; and, the inhabitants of Catana having ranged themselves against them and been worsted in several battles, these were driven out of Catana, and acquired the place now called Aetna, formerly called Inessa, while those who had originally been from Catana recovered their native land after a long time.

[146238] 76.4. These things being done, those who had been driven from their own cities under the dominion of Hieron, having those who fought together with them, returned to their native lands, and drove out of the cities those who had unjustly taken the cities of others; among these were the Geloans and the Acragantines and the Himeraeans.

[146573] 76.5. Likewise too the Rhegians together with the Zanclaeans drove out the sons of Anaxilas who held dominion and liberated their native lands. After this the Geloans, having originally settled Camarina, apportioned it by lot; and the cities, nearly all of them, having rushed to the ending of the wars and made a common decree, came to terms with the foreigners settled among them, and, having received back the exiles, restored the cities to the original citizens, while to the foreigners who, because of the dominations, held cities not their own, they conceded to carry off their own property and that all should dwell in Messenia.

[147210] 76.6. The factions, then, and disturbances in the cities of Sicily were ended in this way, and the cities, having cast off the foreign constitutions, nearly all apportioned their own lands by lot to all the citizens.

[147428] 77.1. When Phrasiclides was archon at Athens, the eightieth Olympiad was celebrated, in which Toryllas the Thessalian won the stadium-race, and the Romans appointed as consuls Quintus Fabius and Titus Quintius Capitolinus. In their time, in Asia the generals of the Persians, having crossed into Cilicia, built three hundred ships well equipped for warlike use, and, taking the land army, advanced by land through Syria and Phoenicia; and, the fleet sailing alongside the land army, they came to Memphis in Egypt.

[147943] 77.2. And at first they raised the siege of the White Wall, having dismayed the Egyptians and the Athenians; but after this, deliberating prudently, they avoided drawing up face to face, but were ambitious to end the war by stratagems. Therefore, as the Attic ships were lying at anchor in the island called Prosopitis, by cutting off with trenches the river that flowed around it they made the island mainland.

[148356] 77.3. The ships suddenly settling on the dry land, the Egyptians, dismayed, abandoned the Athenians and came to terms with the Persians; but the Athenians, being bereft of allies and seeing their ships rendered useless, burned these, in order that they might not fall into the hands of the enemy, while they themselves, not dismayed at the severity of the situation, exhorted one another to do nothing unworthy of the contests previously accomplished.

[148809] 77.4. Therefore, surpassing in valor those who died at Thermopylae for Greece, they were ready to fight it out against the enemy. But the generals of the Persians, Artabazus and Megabyzus, seeing the surpassing daring of the enemy and reckoning that it was not possible to destroy these men without losing many myriads of their own, made a truce with the Athenians, by which they were to depart without danger from Egypt.

[149232] 77.5. The Athenians, then, through their own valor having met with safety, departed from Egypt, and, going through Libya to Cyrene, were unexpectedly saved into their native land.

[149413] 77.6. While these things were being done, in Athens Ephialtes the son of Sophonides, being a popular leader and having provoked the multitude against the Areopagites, persuaded the people by a decree to diminish the council of the Areopagus and to abolish the ancestral and far-famed customs. But he did not escape unpunished, having attempted such great lawlessness, but, being slain by night, met with an obscure end of his life.

[149846] 78.1. When the annual period had passed, at Athens Philocles was archon, and at Rome the consular office was succeeded to by Aulus Postumius Regulus and Spurius Furius Mediolanus. In their time, war having arisen for the Corinthians and Epidaurians against the Athenians, the Athenians campaigned against them, and, a fierce battle taking place, the Athenians conquered.

[150218] 78.2. With a great fleet putting in against those called the Halieis, they went up into the Peloponnese and slew not a few of the enemy. As the Peloponnesians formed up and gathered a notable force, a battle took place against the Athenians about the place called Cecryphaleia, in which again the Athenians conquered.

[150537] 78.3. As such successes had come to them, seeing that the Aeginetans were elated by their previous deeds and were hostilely disposed toward them, they resolved to subdue them.

[150714] 78.4. Therefore, the Athenians having sent a notable fleet against them, the inhabitants of Aegina, having great experience and reputation in the contests at sea, were not dismayed at the superiority of the Athenians, but, having sufficient triremes and constructing others besides, fought at sea, and, being worsted, lost seventy triremes; and, broken in spirit because of the magnitude of the calamity, they were compelled to be enrolled into the confederacy of the Athenians. These things, then, Leocrates the general accomplished for the Athenians, having waged the whole war against the Aeginetans for nine months.

[151335] 78.5. While these things were being done, in Sicily Ducetius the king of the Sicels, distinguished in birth and powerful in those times, founded the city Menaenum and apportioned the neighboring land to the settlers; and, having campaigned against a notable city, Morgantina, and subdued it, he won reputation among his fellow-countrymen.

[151675] 79.1. When the annual period had passed, at Athens Bion was archon, and at Rome the consular office was succeeded to by Publius Servilius Structus and Lucius Aebutius Albas. In their time, a dispute having arisen for the Corinthians and Megarians about a bordering territory, the cities fell into war.

[151978] 79.2. At first they continued ravaging one another's land and making small engagements; but, as the difference increased, the Megarians, ever more worsted and fearing the Corinthians, made the Athenians their allies.

[152196] 79.3. Therefore, the cities being again rivals in their forces, and the Corinthians together with the Peloponnesians campaigning with a notable force into the Megarian territory, the Athenians sent an alliance to the Megarians, of which Myronides, a man admired for his virtue, was in command; and, a fierce line of battle taking place for a long time, and the manly courage of each side being equal, finally the Athenians conquered and slew many of the enemy.

[152658] 79.4. The Phocians began a war against the Dorians, the ancestors of the Lacedaemonians, who inhabited three cities, Cytinium and Boeum and Erineum, lying below the ridge called Parnassus.

[152848] 79.5. At first, then, having subdued the Dorians by force, they held their cities; but after this the Lacedaemonians sent Nicomedes the son of Cleomenes to come to the aid of the Dorians because of kinship; and he had fifteen hundred Lacedaemonians, and from the other Peloponnesians ten thousand.

[153147] 79.6. He, then, being guardian of Pleistonax, who was a child king, with so great a force came to the aid of the Dorians, and, having conquered the Phocians and recovered their cities, reconciled the Phocians and Dorians.

[153370] 80.1. The Athenians, learning that the Lacedaemonians had ended the war against the Phocians and were about to make their return home, resolved to attack the Lacedaemonians on their march. They campaigned, then, against them, taking along the Argives and Thessalians; and, with fifty ships and fourteen thousand soldiers, setting upon them, they occupied the passes about Geraneia.

[153753] 80.2. The Lacedaemonians, learning the matters concerning the Athenians, came to Tanagra in Boeotia. As the Athenians came into Boeotia and a line of battle took place, a fierce battle was joined; and, the Thessalians in the battle going over to the Lacedaemonians, but the Athenians and the Argives none the less fighting it out, not a few fell on both sides, and, night coming on, they were parted.

[154155] 80.3. After this, much provision being conveyed to the Athenians from Attica, the Thessalians, resolving to attack it, and having taken their evening meal at that very hour, by night went to meet those who were conveying the provisions.

[154393] 80.4. As the guarding Athenians were ignorant and received the Thessalians as friends, it came about that many and varied contests took place over the provisions. For at first the Thessalians, being received by the enemy because of their ignorance, slew those they met, and, being in formation against men in confusion, engaging, slew many.

[154735] 80.5. The Athenians in the encampment, learning of the attack of the Thessalians, came in haste, and, having routed the Thessalians at the first onset, made much slaughter.

[154909] 80.6. As the Lacedaemonians came to the aid of the Thessalians with their force in formation, and a line of battle of the whole armies took place, it came about, because of the rivalry that had arisen, that many were slain on both sides. Finally, the battle taking an indecisive end, it came about that both the Lacedaemonians disputed about the victory and the Athenians. Then, as night came on and the victory was indecisive, they sent embassies to one another and made a four-month truce.

[155402] 81.1. When the annual period had passed, at Athens Mnesitheides was archon, and at Rome the consuls established were Lucius Lucretius and Titus Veturius Cichorinus. In their time the Thebans, being humbled because of the alliance they had made with Xerxes, sought a way by which they might recover their ancestral strength and glory.

[155737] 81.2. Therefore, all the Boeotians despising them and no longer paying heed to the Thebans, they asked the Lacedaemonians to help win for their city the whole leadership of Boeotia; and they undertook, in return for this favor, to make war privately on the Athenians, so that there would be no necessity for the Spartiates to lead a land force outside the Peloponnese.

[156107] 81.3. The Lacedaemonians . . . judging that they spoke advantageously, and thinking that Thebes, if they should increase it, would be a sort of rival to that of the Athenians; therefore, having then at Tanagra a ready and great army, they made the circuit of the city of the Thebans greater, and compelled the cities in Boeotia to be subject to the Thebans.

[156466] 81.4. The Athenians, eager to thwart the design of the Lacedaemonians, mustered a notable force and chose as general Myronides the son of Callias. He, having enrolled enough of the citizens, gave them orders, appointing a day on which he intended to make the departure from the city.

[156751] 81.5. When the appointed time came, and some of the soldiers had not arrived at the designated muster, taking those who had come he advanced into Boeotia. Some of the commanders and friends said that it was necessary to await the latecomers, but Myronides, being a prudent and at the same time vigorous general, said that he would not wait; for he declared that those who voluntarily came late to the expedition would in the battle behave ignobly and timorously, and on this account would not even withstand the dangers for their native land, while those who had been ready and present on the appointed day were clearly such as would not abandon their post in the war; which indeed came to pass.

[157448] 81.6. For, leading forward few soldiers, and these the best in manly courage, he drew up in Boeotia against many times more, and by storm overcame those ranged against him.

[157622] 82.1. This deed seems to fall short of none of the lines of battle that had taken place in earlier times among the Athenians; for neither the victory that took place at Marathon, nor the success against the Persians at Plataea, nor the other far-famed deeds of the Athenians seem to surpass the battle in which Myronides conquered the Boeotians.

[157969] 82.2. For of those, some were against barbarians, others were accomplished with other allies, but this line of battle the Athenians, having risked it alone, conquered, and contended against the best of the Greeks.

[158184] 82.3. For the Boeotians seem, in their endurance of dangers and in their warlike contests, to fall short of none of the others; at any rate later the Thebans themselves, at Leuctra and Mantineia, ranged alone against all the Lacedaemonians and their allies, both acquired the greatest glory for courage and unexpectedly became leaders of all Greece.

[158535] 82.4. Of the historians, although this battle was distinguished, no one wrote either its manner or its disposition. Myronides, then, having conquered the Boeotians in a distinguished battle, became a rival to the most distinguished leaders before him, Themistocles and Miltiades and Cimon.

[158826] 82.5. Myronides, after the victory, having taken Tanagra by siege, demolished its walls, and, going over the whole of Boeotia, cut and destroyed it, and, dividing the spoils among the soldiers, adorned all with abundant gains.

[159054] 83.1. The Boeotians, provoked at the destruction of their country, gathered together in full force, and, campaigning, assembled a great force. A battle taking place at Oenophyta in Boeotia, and both sides vigorously enduring the danger in their spirits, they spent the whole day in the battle; and barely did the Athenians rout the Boeotians, and Myronides became master of all the cities in Boeotia except Thebes.

[159470] 83.2. After this, breaking camp from Boeotia, he campaigned against the Locrians called Opuntians. These, having subdued at the first onset and taken hostages, he invaded the Parnasian country.

[159665] 83.3. Likewise to the Locrians he also subdued the Phocians, and, taking hostages, broke camp into Thessaly, accusing them concerning the treason that had taken place and ordering them to receive back the exiles; and, the Pharsalians not receiving them, he besieged the city.

[159942] 83.4. But since he could not take the city by force, and the Pharsalians endured the siege for a long time, then, despairing of the affairs in Thessaly, he returned to Athens. Myronides, then, having in a short time accomplished great deeds, won a far-famed reputation among the citizens. These things, then, were done in this year.

[160276] 84.1. When Callias was archon at Athens, among the Eleans the eighty-first Olympiad was celebrated, in which Polymnastus the Cyrenaean won the stadium-race, and at Rome the consuls were Servius Sulpicius and Publius Volumnius Amentinus.

[160514] 84.2. In their time Tolmides, who was appointed over the naval force, rivaling the virtue and glory of Myronides, was eager to accomplish something notable.

[160672] 84.3. Therefore, since at that time no one had previously ravaged Laconia, he urged the people to lay waste the country of the Spartiates, and undertook, taking a thousand hoplites aboard the triremes, with these to ravage Laconia and to humble the glory of the Spartiates.

[160947] 84.4. The Athenians having consented, wishing secretly to lead out more hoplites, he contrived something of this sort. The citizens supposed that he would enroll into the army those of the young men who were in the prime of their ages and most vigorous in their bodies; but Tolmides, being eager to lead out for the expedition not only the appointed thousand, going to each of the young men distinguished in strength, said that he was about to enroll him; it would be better, then, he said, to campaign voluntarily rather than to seem to be compelled through the levies.

[161519] 84.5. When by this argument he had persuaded more than three thousand to enroll themselves voluntarily, and saw that the rest were no longer eager, then he enrolled the agreed-upon thousand from the others.

[161727] 84.6. When the other preparations for the expedition were ready, he put out with fifty triremes and four thousand hoplites; and, putting in at Methone in Laconia, he took this place, but, the Lacedaemonians coming to its aid, he broke camp, and, sailing along to Gytheium, the dockyard of the Lacedaemonians, having subdued this city too and burned the docks of the Lacedaemonians, he ravaged the country.

[162134] 84.7. From there, putting out, he sailed from Cephallenia to Zacynthus; and, having subdued this and won over all the cities in Cephallenia, he sailed across to the other side and put in at Naupactus. Likewise too, having taken this at the first onset, he settled in it the notable men of the Messenians, who had been released under truce by the Lacedaemonians;

[162497] 84.8. for about the same time the Lacedaemonians, having warred for a long while against the Helots and Messenians, then prevailing over both, released those from Ithome under truce, as has been said before, and, having punished the authors of the revolt among the Helots, enslaved the rest.

[162790] 85.1. When Sosistratus was archon at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Publius Valerius Publicola and Gaius Clodius Regillus. In their time Tolmides was tarrying about Boeotia, and the Athenians appointed as general Pericles the son of Xanthippus, one of the good men, and, giving him fifty triremes and a thousand hoplites, sent him to the Peloponnese.

[163151] 85.2. He ravaged much of the Peloponnese, and, crossing into Acarnania, won over all the cities except Oeniadae. The Athenians, then, in this year ruled over very many cities, and acquired great glory for courage and generalship.

[163382] 86.1. When Ariston was archon at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Quintus Fabius Vibulanus and Lucius Cornelius Curitinus. In their time a five-year truce came about for the Athenians and Peloponnesians, Cimon the Athenian having arranged it.

[163633] 86.2. In Sicily a war arose for the Egestaeans and Lilybaeans about a territory by the river Mazarus; and, a fierce battle taking place, it came about that many fell on both sides and the cities did not cease from their rivalry.

[163863] 86.3. After the enrollment of citizens that had taken place in the cities and the redistribution of the land, many having been enrolled as citizens at random and as it chanced, the cities were diseased and fell again into political factions and disturbances; and most of all the evil prevailed in Syracuse.

[164171] 86.4. For a certain man named Tyndarides, a man full of audacity and daring, at first took up many of the poor, and, building up their bodies, made them ready bodyguards for himself with a view to a tyranny. After this, being now manifestly one who reached for dominion, he was put on trial for his life and condemned.

[164491] 86.5. As he was being led off to prison, those who had been cared for by him gathered together and laid hands on those leading him off. Confusion arising throughout the city, the most respectable of the citizens gathered together, and, having seized those who were attempting revolution, slew them together with Tyndarides. As this happened several times, and men desiring tyranny, the people were led to imitate the Athenians and to pass a law similar to the one written among them concerning ostracism.

[164997] 87.1. For among the Athenians each of the citizens had to write on a potsherd the name of the citizen who seemed most able to tyrannize over the citizens, but among the Syracusans the most powerful of the citizens was written on an olive leaf, and, the leaves having been counted, the one who received the most leaves had to flee for five years.

[165344] 87.2. For in this way they supposed they would humble the spirits of those most powerful in their native lands; for in general they did not take punishments for wickedness from the lawbreakers, but made a humbling of the power and increase of the men. The Athenians, then, named this kind of legislation, from what had occurred, ostracism, but the Syracusans petalism.

[165714] 87.3. This law continued among the Athenians for a long time, but among the Syracusans was quickly abolished for the following reasons.

[165851] 87.4. As the greatest men were being exiled, the most respectable of the citizens, those able through their own virtue to set right many of the common affairs, withdrew from public business, and, because of the fear from the law, continued to live as private men, and, taking care of their own property, inclined toward luxury; while the most worthless of the citizens and those distinguished in audacity gave thought to public affairs and incited the multitudes to disturbance and revolution.

[166346] 87.5. Therefore, factions arising again, and the many being turned to differences, the city fell again into continuous and great disturbances; for a multitude of demagogues and informers prevailed, and cleverness of speech was practiced by the younger men, and, in general, many exchanged the worthless ways of life for the ancient and serious discipline, and, while they advanced in their fortunes because of the peace, there came to be little thought of concord and of acting justly.

[166833] 87.6. Therefore the Syracusans, having changed their minds, abolished the law concerning petalism, having used it for a short time. And the affairs in Sicily were in this state.

[167012] 88.1. When Lysicrates was archon at Athens, at Rome there were established as consuls Gaius Nautius Rutilus and Lucius Minucius Carutianus. In their time Pericles the general of the Athenians, having disembarked in the Peloponnese, ravaged the country of the Sicyonians.

[167284] 88.2. As the Sicyonians came out against him in full force and a battle took place, Pericles, having conquered and slain many in the flight, shut them up in a siege. Making assaults on the walls and being unable to take the city, and, moreover, the Lacedaemonians having sent aid to the besieged, he broke camp from Sicyon; and, sailing to Acarnania and overrunning the country of the Oeniadae and gathering a quantity of spoils, he sailed away from Acarnania.

[167746] 88.3. After this, coming to the Chersonese, he apportioned the land by lot to a thousand of the citizens. While these things were being done, Tolmides the other general, having gone over to Euboea, divided it and the land of the Naxians among another thousand citizens.

[168017] 88.4. In Sicily, as the Tyrrhenians were plundering the sea, the Syracusans, having chosen as admiral Phayllus, sent him to Tyrrhenia. He, having sailed out, at first plundered the island called Aethaleia, but, having secretly received money from the Tyrrhenians, sailed back to Sicily, having accomplished nothing worth remembering.

[168352] 88.5. The Syracusans, having condemned this man as a traitor and exiled him, appointed another general, Apelles, and sent him out against the Tyrrhenians with sixty triremes. He, having overrun coastal Tyrrhenia, departed for Cyrnus, which was held by the Tyrrhenians in those times; and, having plundered very much of the island and subdued Aethaleia, he returned to Syracuse, bringing a multitude of captives and leading off not a little other booty.

[168806] 88.6. After this Ducetius, the leader of the Sicels, brought all the cities of the same nation, except Hybla, into one and common confederacy; and, being a vigorous man, he reached for greater things, and, having gathered from the common council of the Sicels a notable force, removed Menae, which was his native place, to the plain, and near the precinct of those called the Palici founded a notable city, which he named after the aforesaid gods Palice.

[169262] 89.1. Since we have made mention of these gods, it is not right to pass over the antiquity and the marvelousness concerning the sanctuary, and, in general, the peculiarity concerning the so-called craters. For they relate in legend that this precinct surpasses the others in antiquity and reverence, many marvels being handed down concerning it.

[169609] 89.2. For first there are craters, not great in size on the whole, which throw up extraordinary springs from an unutterable depth, and have a nature much like cauldrons that are heated by much fire and throw up the water boiling hot.

[169844] 89.3. The water that is thrown up has the appearance of being boiling hot, but does not have accurate verification, because no one dares to touch it; for so great is the consternation caused by the welling up of the liquids that it seems that what happens comes about through some divine compulsion.

[170145] 89.4. For the water has the smell of pungent sulfur, and the chasm sends forth a great and terrible roaring; and, what is more marvelous than these things, the liquid neither overflows nor sinks, but has a motion and force of stream lifted up to a height, which is wonderful.

[170422] 89.5. As there is such a sanctity about the precinct, the greatest of oaths are accomplished there, and on those who swear falsely the punishment of the divine power swiftly follows; for some, having been deprived of their sight, make their departure from the precinct.

[170693] 89.6. As there is great superstition, those who have disputes, whenever they are overpowered by some superior force, are judged by the examination through these oaths. This precinct has from certain times been kept inviolate, and to unfortunate servants who have fallen into the hands of harsh masters it furnishes much aid;

[171019] 89.7. for those who take refuge in it the masters have no authority to lead away by force, and they remain unharmed until the masters, having persuaded them on stated humane conditions and given through oaths the pledges concerning the agreements, lead them away.

[171284] 89.8. And no one is recorded who, having given this pledge to servants, transgressed it; for so much does the superstition of the gods make those who have sworn faithful to their slaves. The precinct lies in a plain fit for the gods, and is sufficiently adorned with porticoes and the other lodging-places. Concerning these things, then, let what we have said suffice, and we return to the narrative continuous with what has been recorded before.

[171732] 90.1. For Ducetius, having founded Palice and enclosed it with a notable wall, apportioned the bordering land by lot. It came about that this city, because of the excellence of the land and the multitude of the inhabitants, received quick increase.

[171982] 90.2. But, having flourished for no long time, it was razed, and remained uninhabited until our own times; concerning which we shall record the particulars in their proper times.

[172162] 90.3. And the affairs in Sicily were in this state. In Italy, after the razing of Sybaris by the Crotoniates, fifty-eight years later, Thessalus, having gathered together the survivors of the Sybarites, founded Sybaris anew, lying between two rivers, the Sybaris and the Crathis.

[172443] 90.4. Having good land, they quickly rose in their fortunes. But, having held the city a few years, they were again driven out of Sybaris; concerning which we shall try to record the particulars in the following book.

[172662] 91.1. When Antidotus was archon at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Lucius Postumius and Marcus Horatius. In their time Ducetius, the Sicel who held the leadership, seized Aetna, having treacherously murdered its ruler, and, breaking camp into the country of the Acragantines with his force, besieged Motyum, which was garrisoned by the Acragantines; and, the Acragantines and Syracusans coming to its aid, joining battle and gaining the advantage, he drove both out of their camps.

[173153] 91.2. And then, as winter set in, they parted to their own lands; and the Syracusans condemned the general Bolcon, who was the cause of the defeat and was reputed secretly to be cooperating with Ducetius, as a traitor and put him to death. As the summer was beginning, they appointed another general, to whom, giving a notable force, they ordered to subdue Ducetius.

[173521] 91.3. He, having marched with his force, caught Ducetius encamped about Nomae; and, a great line of battle taking place, and many falling on both sides, barely did the Syracusans, forcing the Sicels, rout them, and in the flight slew many. Of those who escaped, the greater part were saved into the forts of the Sicels, while a few chose to share the same hopes with Ducetius.

[173899] 91.4. While these things were being done, the Acragantines took by siege the fort Motyum, which was held by the Sicels with Ducetius, and, having led off their force to the Syracusans who had already conquered, encamped together with them. Ducetius, broken in his whole affairs because of the defeat, and his soldiers some abandoning him and others plotting against him, came into the uttermost despair.

[174304] 92.1. Finally, seeing that his remaining friends were about to lay hands on him, anticipating them and slipping away by night, he rode off to Syracuse. While it was still night he came into the marketplace of the Syracusans, and, sitting down at the altars, became a suppliant of the city, and handed over both himself and the country of which he was master to the Syracusans.

[174682] 92.2. As the multitude, because of the unexpectedness, streamed together into the marketplace, the magistrates gathered an assembly and put before it a deliberation about Ducetius, what they ought to do.

[174887] 92.3. Some, then, of those accustomed to address the people advised punishing him as an enemy and inflicting the fitting punishment for his errors; but the most respectable of the elders, coming forward, declared that they ought to save the suppliant and to regard the fortune and the vengeance of the gods; for they ought to consider not what Ducetius deserved to suffer, but what it befitted the Syracusans to do; for to slay a man who had fallen by fortune was not fitting, but to preserve at once their piety toward the gods and the suppliant was worthy of the magnanimity of the people.

[175480] 92.4. The people, as with a single voice, cried out from every side to save the suppliant. The Syracusans, then, having released Ducetius from punishment, sent him off to Corinth, and, ordering him to live out his life there, sent along with him a sufficient provision.