WORK: Historical Library  (slug: diodorus-siculus-historical-library-3031ad)

CHAPTER: 06-book-6



[109964] 55.3. And once at the symposium, noticing that Satyrus the actor was gloomy, he asked why he alone thought fit to share in none of his kindness; and when he said that he wished to obtain from him a certain gift, but feared lest, having revealed the request he had in hand, he should fail of it, the king, becoming exceedingly glad, affirmed that he would grant whatever he should ask. And he said that two maidens, of marriageable age, the daughters of a certain guest-friend of his, were among the captives; these, then, he wished to take, not in order to gain any profit from obtaining the gift, but in order that, having provided dowries for both, he might marry them off and not look on while they suffered anything unworthy of their age.

[110708] 55.4. After this Philip, gladly accepting the request, straightway gave the maidens to Satyrus. And scattering many other benefactions and gifts of every kind, he reaped rewards many times greater than the favour; for many, drawn on by the hopes of his beneficence, hastened, one before another, to give themselves over to Philip and to hand over their native lands.

[111076] 56.1. In the archonship of Themistocles at Athens, in Rome the consular office was held by Gaius Cornelius and Marcus Popilius. In their time the Boeotians, having ravaged much of the country of Phocis, defeated the enemy near the city called Hya and struck down about seventy of them.

[111363] 56.2. After this the Boeotians, engaging the Phocians about Coroneia, were defeated and lost many. Then, when the Phocians held some considerable cities in Boeotia, the Boeotians, marching out and destroying the grain from the enemy's country, were defeated on their return.

[111639] 56.3. While these things were going on, Phalaecus the general of the Phocians, accused of having stolen much of the sacred treasures, was driven from his office; and three generals having been chosen in his stead, Deinocrates and Callias and Sophanes, there was an inquiry into the sacred treasures, and the Phocians demanded an account from those who had handled them; and the one who had administered most was Philon.

[112060] 56.4. He, being unable to render the account, was condemned, and being put to the torture by the generals, denounced those who shared in the theft, and himself, falling into the utmost tortures, had an end of his life befitting his impiety.

[112302] 56.5. Those who had embezzled the treasures gave back what was saved and remaining of the theft, and were themselves put to death as temple-robbers. Of the former generals, the first to rule, Philomelus, had kept his hands off the offerings; but the second, called Onomarchus, the brother of Philomelus, expended very much of the god's treasures; and the third, Phayllus the brother of Onomarchus, as general, cut up not a little of the offerings for the mercenaries' pay.

[112776] 56.6. For the golden bricks dedicated by Croesus the king of the Lydians, being a hundred and twenty, each of two talents, he cut up into coin, and three hundred and sixty golden bowls, each of two minae, and a golden lion and a golden woman, all coming to a weight of thirty talents of gold; so that the whole of the gold cut up, when the treasures were reckoned into silver value, was found to be four thousand talents; and of the silver offerings, both those dedicated by Croesus and all the rest, the generals together had expended more than six thousand talents, and with the golden offerings added, it exceeded ten thousand talents.

[113416] 56.7. Some of the historians say that what was plundered was not less than that gained by Alexander from the Persian treasuries. The generals about Phalaecus undertook also to dig up the temple, someone having said that in it there was a treasure containing much silver and gold; and they eagerly dug up the area about the hearth and the tripod. The one who reported the treasure produced as witness the most notable and most ancient of the poets, Homer, in the words: "nor all that the stone threshold of the Archer encloses within, Phoebus Apollo's, in rocky Pytho."

[113986] 56.8. As the soldiers undertook to dig about the tripod, great earthquakes occurred and struck fear into the Phocians, and the gods openly signifying beforehand the punishment of the temple-robbers, they desisted from the works. The leader of this lawlessness, the aforesaid Philon, quickly paid to the divine power the fitting penalties.

[114326] 57.1. The Phocians, then, bore the whole charge of the destruction of the sacred treasures, but the Athenians and Lacedaemonians shared in the choice, having allied themselves with the Phocians and having taken pay not in proportion to the number of soldiers sent out.

[114596] 57.2. So far did this time bring the Athenians to sin against the divine that, a little before the Delphic events, while Iphicrates was tarrying about Corcyra with a naval force, and Dionysius the ruler of the Syracusans had sent to Olympia and Delphi images wrought of gold and ivory, Iphicrates, falling in with the ships conveying them and gaining control of them, sent to the people asking what he should do; and the Athenians ordered him not to examine the things of the gods, but to see how he should feed his soldiers.

[115123] 57.3. Iphicrates, then, obeying the decree of his native city, sold as booty the adornment of the gods; whereupon the tyrant, angered at the Athenians, wrote to them a letter of this sort: "Dionysius to the Council and People of the Athenians: to wish you well it is not fitting to write, since you commit sacrilege against the gods both by land and by sea, and the images which were sent by us for dedication to the gods you have taken away and cut up, and have been impious toward the greatest of the gods, Apollo at Delphi and Zeus the Olympian."

[115674] 57.4. The Athenians, then, did such things concerning the divine, and that too while praying that Apollo was their ancestral god and forefather; and the Lacedaemonians, having used the oracle about Delphi, and having through it acquired the constitution admired by all, and even now consulting the god about the greatest matters, dared to share in the lawlessness of those who plundered the temple.

[116074] 58.1. In Boeotia the Phocians, having three fortified cities, Orchomenus and Coroneia and Corsiae, from these made their campaign against the Boeotians. Being well supplied with mercenaries, they both ravaged the country and, in their attacks and engagements, got the better of the natives.

[116366] 58.2. Wherefore the Boeotians, pressed by the war and having lost many of their soldiers, and being short of money, sent envoys to Philip asking him to help.

[116525] 58.3. The king, gladly seeing their humbling and wishing to reduce the Leuctrian arrogance of the Boeotians, sent few soldiers, guarding only against seeming to overlook the plundering of the oracle.

[116726] 58.4. The Phocians building a fortress about the place called Abae, where there is a holy temple of Apollo, the Boeotians marched against them. Straightway some of them, fleeing to the nearest cities, were scattered, while others, fleeing to the temple of Apollo, about five hundred, perished.

[117021] 58.5. Now many other divine things befell the Phocians about these times, but most of all that which is about to be told. For those who fled to the temple supposed that they would be saved through the help of the gods, but, on the contrary, by some divine providence they met with the punishment befitting temple-robbers.

[117344] 58.6. For there being much bedding about the temple, and fire having been left behind in the tents of the fugitives, it happened that, the bedding having caught, so great a flame blazed up, beyond expectation, that the temple and the Phocians who had fled into it were burned alive. For it seemed good to the divine power not to grant to temple-robbers the safety conceded by supplication.

[117735] 59.1. In the archonship of Archias at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Marcus Aemilius and Titus Quinctius. In their time the Phocian War, having lasted ten years, was ended in this manner. The Boeotians and Phocians being humbled by the length of the war, the Phocians sent envoys to Lacedaemon about help, and the Spartans sent out a thousand hoplites, putting Archidamus the king in command.

[118138] 59.2. The Boeotians having likewise sent envoys to Philip about an alliance, Philip, taking the Thessalians, came into Locris with a great force. Finding Phalaecus again deemed worthy of the command and having the multitude of mercenaries, he prepared to decide the war by a pitched battle; but Phalaecus, tarrying in Nicaea and seeing that he was no match, sent envoys to the king about a settlement.

[118541] 59.3. An agreement having been made that Phalaecus should depart with his soldiers wherever he wished, he, under a truce, withdrew to the Peloponnese with the mercenaries, who were eight thousand, while the Phocians, crushed in their hopes, surrendered themselves to Philip.

[118817] 59.4. The king, having unexpectedly ended the Sacred War without a battle, sat in council with the Boeotians and Thessalians. He resolved, then, to gather the council of the Amphictyons and to entrust to it the decision about the whole matter.

[119062] 60.1. It seemed good, then, to the councillors to give to Philip and his descendants a share in the Amphictyony and to have two votes, which the conquered Phocians had previously held; and to pull down the walls of the three Phocian cities, and that there should be no share for the Phocians in the temple or in the Amphictyonic council; and that it should not be permitted them to acquire either horses or arms, until they should pay back to the god the money that had been plundered; and that those of the Phocians and the others who had shared in the sacrilege who had fled should be accursed and liable to seizure everywhere;

[119693] 60.2. and that all the cities of the Phocians should be razed and resettled into villages, none of which should have more than fifty houses, nor should the villages stand less than a furlong apart from one another; and that the Phocians should hold the country and bring each year to the god a tribute of sixty talents, until they should pay back the money recorded according to the sacrilege; and that Philip with the Boeotians and Thessalians should hold the contest of the Pythian games, because the Corinthians had shared with the Phocians in the lawlessness against the divine;

[120277] 60.3. and that the Amphictyons and Philip should hurl down with stones the arms of the Phocians and the mercenaries and burn the remains of them and sell the horses. In accordance with these things the Amphictyons arranged the matters concerning the care of the oracle and all the other things pertaining to piety and the common peace and concord of the Greeks.

[120640] 60.4. After this Philip, having helped to establish the decrees of the Amphictyons and having behaved graciously toward all, returned to Macedonia, having gained not only a reputation for piety and military excellence, but having also made great preparations beforehand for the increase of power that was to come to him.

[120962] 60.5. For he desired to be appointed general with full powers of Greece and to carry the war against the Persians; which also came to pass. But concerning these matters we shall record the details in their proper times; now we shall turn to the continuous course of the history.

[121242] 61.1. We think it just first to record the punishment that came from the gods upon those who transgressed against the oracle; for in general not only upon the perpetrators of the sacrilege, but also upon all who merely touched the lawlessness, an inexorable vengeance followed from the divine power.

[121543] 61.2. For the architect of the seizure of the temple, Philomelus, in a certain warlike circumstance, cast himself down; and his brother Onomarchus, succeeding to the command of the desperate men, with the Phocians and mercenaries who fought beside him in Thessaly, was cut down and crucified.

[121837] 61.3. The third, Phayllus, who cut up most of the offerings, being sick of a long disease, could not even be quickly released from his punishment. And last of all Phalaecus, taking up the remnants of the sacrilege, lived for a considerable time in wanderings and great fears and dangers, not in order that he might become more blessed than those who had been impious with him, but in order that, being tortured for a longer time and becoming, through his misfortune, known to many, he might have a calamity that was talked of everywhere.

[122376] 61.4. For he, after his flight according to the agreement, at first tarried with the mercenaries about the Peloponnese, holding the soldiers together out of the remnants of the temple-plunder, and after this, hiring at Corinth large freight ships and having four light galleys, he prepared for the voyage to Italy and Sicily, thinking that in these regions he would either seize some city or obtain mercenary service; for there happened to be a war between the Lucanians and the Tarentines. And to those sailing with him he said that he was sailing by summons from those in Italy and Sicily.

[122969] 62.1. When he had sailed out and was on the open sea, certain of the soldiers conveyed in the largest ship, in which Phalaecus himself sailed, fell to talking with one another, suspecting that no one had summoned them; for they neither saw commanders from those who summoned them sailing with them, nor was the voyage a short one, but a long and difficult one lay before them.

[123347] 62.2. Wherefore, distrusting what was said and fearing the overseas campaign, they banded together, and especially those of the mercenaries who held commands. At last, drawing their swords and striking terror into both Phalaecus and the helmsman, they compelled them to sail back again. The same thing being done also by those conveyed in the other ships, they sailed back to the Peloponnese.

[123741] 62.3. Gathering at the promontory Malea of Laconia, they found there Cnossian envoys who had sailed from Crete to gather mercenaries; and when these had conferred with Phalaecus and the commanders and given them considerable pay, they all sailed off with them. Putting in at Cnossus in Crete, they straightway, at the first onset, seized the city called Lyctus.

[124104] 62.4. To the Lyctians, who had been driven from their native city, an unexpected and swift help appeared. For about the same time, the Tarentines being at war with the Lucanians and with the Lacedaemonians, their ancestors, and having sent envoys about help, the Spartans, through their kinship, being eager to ally themselves, quickly gathered a land and naval force, and appointed as general of it Archidamus the king; and as they were about to set out for Italy, the Lyctians asked them first to help them; and the Lacedaemonians, persuaded and sailing to Crete, defeated the mercenaries and saved for the Lyctians their native city.

[124742] 63.1. After this Archidamus, sailing to Italy and allying himself with the Tarentines, contended in a certain battle brilliantly and was slain, a man praised both for his generalship and his other life, but blamed only for his alliance with the Phocians, as having been most responsible for the seizure of Delphi.

[125057] 63.2. Archidamus, then, reigned over the Lacedaemonians twenty-three years, and his son Agis, succeeding to the rule, reigned fifteen years. Then the mercenaries of Archidamus, who had shared in the plundering of the oracle, were shot down by the Lucanians, and Phalaecus, driven out of Lyctus, undertook to besiege Cydonia.

[125383] 63.3. When he had constructed siege engines and was bringing them up to the city, thunderbolts falling, these were burned by the divine fire, and many of the mercenaries, coming to the aid of the engines, were destroyed by the fire; among whom was the general Phalaecus.

[125655] 63.4. Some say that he, having given offence to one of the mercenaries, was slain by him. The mercenaries who survived, being taken up by Elean exiles, were conveyed to the Peloponnese, and with them warred against the Eleans.

[125883] 63.5. The Arcadians fighting alongside the Eleans and defeating the exiles in battle, many of the mercenaries were slain, and the survivors, to the number of four thousand, were taken alive. The Arcadians and Eleans dividing the captives, the Arcadians sold as booty all those allotted to them, while the Eleans, because of the lawlessness against the oracle, slaughtered theirs.

[126264] 64.1. Those who shared in the sacrilege, then, were in this manner deemed worthy of punishment by the divine power. And the most notable cities that shared in the lawlessness, being later subdued by Antipater, lost together both their leadership and their freedom.

[126530] 64.2. The wives of the Phocian leaders, putting on the golden necklaces from Delphi, met with a punishment befitting their impiety; for one of them, wearing that which had belonged to Helen, fell into the shame of a courtesan and offered her beauty to those who chose to outrage her; while another, putting on that of Eriphyle, when her house was set on fire in madness by the eldest of her sons, was burned alive together with it. Those, then, who dared to despise the divine power were in the manner described deemed worthy of punishment by the gods;

[127084] 64.3. but Philip, who came to the aid of the oracle, from this time ever increasing more and more, was at last, because of his piety toward the divine, appointed leader of all Greece and acquired for himself the greatest kingdom in Europe. Now that we have sufficiently gone through the Sacred War, we return to the events of another kind.

[127425] 65.1. For in Sicily the Syracusans, being in strife with one another and compelled to be slaves to many and various tyrannies, sent envoys to Corinth, asking them to send a general who would take charge of the city and put down the greed of those who set out to be tyrants.

[127700] 65.2. They, judging it just to help their colonists, voted to send as general Timoleon the son of Timaenetus, the foremost of the citizens in courage and military intelligence and, in general, adorned with all the virtues. A peculiar thing happened to befall the man, which helped him toward the choice of the generalship.

[128024] 65.3. For Timophanes his brother, who excelled the Corinthians in wealth and audacity, had long been openly grasping at tyranny, and at that time, taking up the poor and equipping himself with suits of armour and having the most worthless men with him, went about the market-place, not pretending that he was a tyrant, but performing the deeds of tyranny.

[128381] 65.4. Timoleon, being most hostile to monarchy, at first tried to persuade his brother to give up his design, but when he would not obey, but ever more strained at the audacity, being unable to set him right by argument, he slew him as he walked about the market-place.

[128652] 65.5. An uproar arising and the citizens running together, both because of the strangeness and the dreadfulness of the deed, there was strife. For some said that Timoleon, having committed kindred murder, ought to receive the punishment of the laws, while others, on the contrary, declared that the man ought to be praised as a tyrannicide.

[128994] 65.6. The senate sitting in the council-chamber, and the dispute about the deed being referred to the council, the enemies of Timoleon accused him, while the more well-disposed, speaking on his behalf, advised saving the man.

[129221] 65.7. The inquiry still being undecided, the envoys from Syracuse sailed in, and revealing their instructions to the senate, asked them to send the general as quickly as possible.

[129402] 65.8. It seemed good, then, to the council to send Timoleon, and for the accomplishment of the deed they set before him strange and surprising conditions; for they affirmed that, if he should rule the Syracusans well, they would judge him a tyrannicide, but if too greedily, the murderer of his brother.

[129707] 65.9. And Timoleon, not so much because of the fear hanging over him from the senate as because of his virtue, presided well and beneficially over the affairs in Sicily; for he subdued the Carthaginians, and restored the Greek cities razed by the barbarians to their original condition, and freed all Sicily, and in general, taking over Syracuse and the other Greek cities desolate, made them surpass in populousness. But concerning these matters we shall record the details a little later in their proper times; now we shall transfer our account to the continuous course of the history.

[130296] 66.1. For in the archonship of Eubulus at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Marcus Fabius and Servius Sulpicius. In their time Timoleon the Corinthian, having been chosen by the citizens for the generalship in Syracuse, prepared for the voyage to Sicily.

[130558] 66.2. He hired seven hundred mercenaries, and manning four triremes and three swift-sailing vessels with soldiers, set sail from Corinth. On the voyage, taking on three ships from the Leucadians and Corcyraeans, he crossed with ten ships the so-called Ionian passage.

[130827] 66.3. A peculiar and strange thing happened to befall Timoleon on the voyage, the divine power taking part in the undertaking and signifying beforehand the future renown about him and the brilliance of his deeds; for through the whole night a torch went before him, burning in the heaven, until the fleet put in to Italy.

[131150] 66.4. Timoleon had heard beforehand in Corinth from the priestesses of Demeter and Kore that, in their sleep, the goddesses had foretold to them that they would sail along with Timoleon's company on the voyage to their sacred island.

[131385] 66.5. Wherefore Timoleon and those sailing with him were exceedingly glad, as if the goddesses were cooperating with them. And dedicating the best of the ships to the goddesses, Timoleon named it "Sacred to Demeter and Kore." The fleet having put in without danger to Metapontium in Italy, a Carthaginian trireme sailed in after it, carrying Carthaginian envoys.

[131749] 66.6. These, meeting with Timoleon, solemnly charged him not to begin a war nor to set foot in Sicily. But Timoleon, the Rhegians calling upon him and promising to ally themselves, straightway sailed out of Metapontium, eager to outstrip the report about him;

[132010] 66.7. for he was very wary lest the Carthaginians, being masters of the sea, should prevent him from crossing to Sicily. He, then, hastily accomplished the voyage to Rhegium.

[132186] 67.1. The Carthaginians, a little before these times, learning of the magnitude of the war that was to be in Sicily, behaved humanely toward the cities allied to them in Sicily, and, putting an end to their quarrel with the tyrants in the island, made friendship with them, and especially with Hicetas the ruler of the Syracusans, because he was the strongest;

[132548] 67.2. and they themselves, having prepared a great naval and land force, transported it to Sicily, putting Hanno in command. They had a hundred and fifty warships, fifty thousand foot soldiers, three hundred chariots, more than two thousand two-horse teams, and besides these, arms and missiles of every kind and a vast number of siege engines, and an insurpassable quantity of grain and other provisions.

[132955] 67.3. Coming first to the city of the Entellini, they both ravaged the country and shut up the natives in a siege. The Campanians who inhabited the city, dismayed at the magnitude of the force, sent to the other cities that were hostile to the Carthaginians about help. Of the others, none responded, but those who inhabited the city of Galeria sent them a thousand hoplite soldiers. These the Phoenicians, meeting and surrounding with their numbers, cut down to a man.

[133426] 67.4. The Campanians who inhabited Aetna at first prepared to send an alliance to Entella because of their kinship, but afterward, hearing of the calamity of the Galerians, resolved to keep quiet.

[133624] 68.1. Dionysius being master of Syracuse, Hicetas, having about him a considerable force, marched against Syracuse, and at first, throwing up a palisade about the Olympieium, carried on the war against the tyrant who held the city.

[133857] 68.2. The siege lasting long and the provisions failing, Hicetas withdrew to Leontini (for from this city he set out); and Dionysius, following them and overtaking the rearguard, joined battle.

[134052] 68.3. Hicetas, turning back upon Dionysius, joined battle, and slaying more than three thousand of the mercenaries, compelled the rest to flee. Using a swift pursuit and bursting in with the fugitives into the city, he gained mastery of Syracuse except the Island. And the affairs of Hicetas and Dionysius were in this state.

[134379] 68.4. Timoleon, three days after the capture of Syracuse, put in to Rhegium and anchored near the city.

[134484] 68.5. When the Carthaginians too had sailed up with twenty triremes, and the Rhegians, cooperating with Timoleon, had gathered a common assembly in the city and were making speeches about a settlement, the Carthaginians, supposing that Timoleon would be persuaded to make the voyage back to Corinth, were careless about their guard-duties; but Timoleon, giving no indication of flight, himself remained near the speaker's platform, and secretly ordered the nine ships to sail off as quickly as possible.

[134989] 68.6. The Carthaginians being distracted in their minds about the Rhegians who were speaking at length as a set-up, Timoleon, unobserved, slipped away to the one ship that had been left and quickly sailed out. The Carthaginians, having been outgeneralled, set out to pursue Timoleon's company.

[135284] 68.7. But those having gotten a considerable lead, and night coming on, Timoleon's company succeeded in sailing off to Tauromenium.

[135417] 68.8. The ruler of this city, who throughout had favoured the Syracusans, Andromachus, graciously received the pursued and contributed much to their safety.

[135575] 68.9. After this Hicetas, taking the best of his soldiers, five thousand, marched against the Adranitae who opposed him, and encamped near the city; while Timoleon, taking on soldiers from the Tauromenitae, set out from Tauromenium, having all together no more than a thousand.

[135854] 68.10. Setting out at the beginning of the night and accomplishing the march to Adranum on the second day, he unexpectedly attacked Hicetas's men as they were taking their supper; and bursting into the camp and slaying more than three hundred, and taking alive about six hundred, he gained mastery of the camp.

[136166] 68.11. To this stratagem adding another, he straightway set out for Syracuse, and accomplishing the road at a run, fell unexpectedly upon Syracuse, outstripping those fleeing from the rout. These things, then, were done in this year.

[136401] 69.1. In the archonship of Lyciscus at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Marcus Valerius and Marcus Popilius, and the hundred and ninth Olympiad was held, in which Aristolochus the Athenian won the foot-race. In their time the Romans had their first treaty with the Carthaginians.

[136689] 69.2. In Caria Idrieus the ruler of the Carians died after ruling seven years, and his sister and wife Ada, succeeding to the rule, governed four years.

[136843] 69.3. In Sicily Timoleon, having taken the Adranitae and Tyndaritae into alliance, received from them not a few soldiers; and in Syracuse great confusion held the city, Dionysius holding the Island, Hicetas being master of Achradina and the New City, Timoleon having taken over the rest of the city, and the Carthaginians having sailed in with a hundred and fifty triremes to the great harbour and encamped with fifty thousand foot soldiers. Wherefore, while Timoleon's company was dismayed at the multitude of the enemy, an unreasonable and surprising change took place;

[137416] 69.4. for first Marcus the tyrant of the Catanaeans, having a considerable force, went over to Timoleon, then many of the fortresses, longing for freedom, inclined to him, and finally the Corinthians, manning ten ships and providing money, sent them to Syracuse.

[137680] 69.5. These things having been done, Timoleon took courage, while the Carthaginians, taking fright, sailed unreasonably out of the harbour and withdrew with their whole force to their own dominion.

[137879] 69.6. Hicetas being left alone, Timoleon, getting the better of the enemy, gained mastery of Syracuse. Straightway too he recovered Messene, which had gone over to the Carthaginians.

[138063] 69.7. And the affairs in Sicily were in this state. In Macedonia Philip, having inherited an ancestral enmity toward the Illyrians and having an unalterable quarrel, broke into Illyria with a great force. Ravaging the country and subduing many of the towns, he returned to Macedonia with much booty.

[138364] 69.8. After this, coming into Thessaly and driving the tyrants out of the cities, he made the Thessalians his own through his benefactions; for he hoped, having these as allies, easily to draw the Greeks too into goodwill; which also came to pass. For straightway the neighbouring Greeks, agreeing with the judgment of the Thessalians, eagerly made alliance with him.

[138733] 70.1. In the archonship of Pythodotus at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Gaius Plautius and Titus Manlius. In their time Timoleon, having struck Dionysius the tyrant with terror, persuaded him to hand over the citadel and, laying aside his rule, to depart to the Peloponnese under a truce, keeping his own money.

[139055] 70.2. He, then, through unmanliness and lowness of spirit, abandoned in the manner described the celebrated tyranny, which had been bound fast, as they said, with adamant, and lived out his life in poverty at Corinth; and his own life and his change became an example to those who boast foolishly over their good fortunes;

[139379] 70.3. for he who had four hundred triremes, a little later sailed in a small round vessel to Corinth, conspicuous for the excess of his change.

[139524] 70.4. Timoleon, taking over the Island and the fortresses that had previously obeyed Dionysius, razed the citadels and tyrant's quarters on the Island, but restored to the fortresses their freedom.

[139723] 70.5. Straightway too he began to make laws, setting up democratic laws and the rights concerning private contracts, and arranging accurately all the rest, taking very great thought for equality.

[139920] 70.6. He established also the most honoured annual office, which the Syracusans call the priesthood of Olympian Zeus; and Callimenes the son of Alcadas was chosen first priest of Olympian Zeus, and thereafter the Syracusans continued to date their years by these officials, down to the time of the writing of these histories and the change in their constitution; for the Romans having given the Sicilian Greeks a share in their citizenship, the office of the priests was lowered, having lasted more than three hundred years. And the affairs in Sicily were in this state.

[140492] 71.1. In Macedonia Philip, wishing to call into goodwill the Greek cities on the coast of Thrace, marched against Thrace. For Cersobleptes the king of the Thracians continued to subdue the cities on the Hellespont bordering on Thrace and to lay waste the country.

[140757] 71.2. Wishing, then, to check the impulse of the barbarians, he marched against them with a great force. Defeating the Thracians in several battles, he ordered the conquered barbarians to pay tithes to the Macedonians, and himself, founding considerable cities in opportune places, stopped the audacity of the Thracians. Wherefore the cities of the Greeks, freed from their fears, most eagerly enrolled in the alliance of Philip.

[141188] 71.3. Among the historians, Theopompus of Chios in his Philippic history included three books containing Sicilian affairs; beginning from the tyranny of Dionysius the elder, he went through a period of fifty years and brought it to a close at the expulsion of Dionysius the younger. The books are three, from the forty-first to the forty-third.

[141534] 72.1. In the archonship of Sosigenes at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Marcus Valerius and Marcus Gnaeus Publius. In their time Arymbas the king of the Molossians died after ruling ten years, leaving a son Aeacides the father of Pyrrhus; and Alexander the brother of Olympias succeeded to the rule, with the cooperation of Philip the Macedonian.

[141890] 72.2. In Sicily Timoleon marched against Leontini; for into this city Hicetas had fled with a considerable force. At first, then, he attacked the so-called New City; but after this, many soldiers being shut up in the city and easily defending themselves from the walls, being unsuccessful, he raised the siege.

[142202] 72.3. Coming to the city Engyum, which was under the tyranny of Leptines, he made continual assaults, wishing both to drive Leptines out of the city and to restore to the Engyini their freedom.

[142397] 72.4. While Timoleon was about this, Hicetas, marching out in full force from Leontini, besieged Syracuse, but losing many of his soldiers, quickly returned to Leontini.

[142568] 72.5. Timoleon, having struck Leptines with terror, sent him under a truce to the Peloponnese, displaying to the Greeks the expulsions of the conquered tyrants. And as the city of the Apolloniatae too was under Leptines, taking over Apollonia, he restored to it and to the city of the Engyini their independence.

[142882] 73.1. Being short of money for the pay of the mercenaries, he sent out a thousand soldiers with the most distinguished commanders into the dominion of the Carthaginians. These, ravaging much country and bringing back a quantity of spoils, handed them over to Timoleon. He, selling the booty as plunder and gathering a quantity of money, gave the mercenaries their pay for a longer time.

[143270] 73.2. He gained mastery too of Entella, and putting to death fifteen of those who most favoured the Carthaginians, granted freedom to the rest. As Timoleon increased both in power and in glory of generalship, all the Greek cities in Sicily eagerly submitted to Timoleon, because he restored to all their independence, and many cities of the Sicels and Sicanians and the others ranged under the Carthaginians sent envoys, eager to be received into the alliance.

[143732] 73.3. The Carthaginians, seeing that their generals in Sicily were conducting the war ignobly, resolved to send out others with great forces. Straightway, then, they enrolled the best of the citizens for the campaign and levied the suitable of the Libyans, and besides these, having got ready a quantity of money, hired as mercenaries Iberians and Celts and Ligurians; and they built warships and gathered many freighters and made their other preparation insurpassable.

[144203] 74.1. In the archonship of Nicomachus at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Gaius Marcius and Titus Manlius Torquatus. In their time Phocion the Athenian subdued Cleitarchus the tyrant of Eretria, who had been set up by Philip.

[144437] 74.2. In Caria Pixodarus, the younger of the brothers, drove Ada out of the dominion and ruled five years, until the crossing of Alexander into Asia. Philip, ever increasing more, marched against Perinthus, which opposed him and inclined toward the Athenians. Organizing a siege and bringing engines up to the city, he assaulted the walls day after day in relays.

[144802] 74.3. Constructing towers eighty cubits high, far overtopping the towers about Perinthus, he wore down the besieged from the higher ground; and likewise, shaking the walls with the rams and undermining them by sapping, he threw down a great part of the wall. The Perinthians defending themselves stoutly and quickly building another wall in its stead, marvellous struggles and wall-fightings took place.

[145207] 74.4. Great ambition being shown on both sides, the king, having many sharp-firing engines of all kinds, through these destroyed those who fought on the battlements, while the Perinthians, losing many each day, received an alliance and missiles and catapults from the Byzantines.

[145488] 74.5. Being thus again made equal to the enemy, they took courage and audaciously endured the dangers for their native city. The king, however, did not cease from his ambition, but dividing his forces into several parts, fought continuously, in relays, at the walls both by day and by night. Having thirty thousand soldiers and a quantity of missiles and siege engines, and moreover insurpassable other engines, he wore down the besieged.

[145928] 75.1. The siege lasting long, and many in the city being slain and not a few wounded, and the provisions failing, the capture of the city was expected. Fortune, however, did not overlook the safety of those in danger, but contrived for them an unexpected help. For the increase of the king being noised abroad throughout Asia, the King, viewing with suspicion the power of Philip, wrote to the satraps on the coast to help the Perinthians with all their might.

[146390] 75.2. Wherefore the satraps, taking thought together, sent to Perinthus a multitude of mercenaries and abundant money and sufficient grain and missiles and all the other things needed for the war. Likewise the Byzantines too sent out the best of their commanders and soldiers. The forces being made evenly matched and the war renewed, the siege again took on an insurpassable ambition.

[146777] 75.3. For Philip, striking the walls with the rams, continually threw them down, and warding off with the sharp-firing engines those on the battlements, partly burst in through the fallen walls in a mass with his soldiers, and partly mounted by the ladders to the stripped parts of the walls; wherefore, the fighting being hand to hand, some died, and others fell into many wounds. The prizes of victory called forth the valour of the combatants;

[147225] 75.4. for the Macedonians, hoping to plunder a prosperous city and to be honoured with gifts by Philip, through the hope of profit held firm amid the terrors, while the besieged, having before their eyes the terrors of capture, bravely endured the danger for their safety.

[147499] 76.1. The nature of the city contributed much to the besieged toward victory in the whole struggle. For Perinthus lies by the sea on a certain high neck of a peninsula, the neck being a furlong across, and it has its houses packed close and outstanding in height.

[147764] 76.2. These, in their buildings, ever rise above one another along the ascent to the hill and give the shape of the whole city the form of a theatre. Wherefore, though the walls were continually thrown down, they were in no way at a disadvantage; for, walling up the lanes, they used the ever-lowest houses as so many strong walls.

[148097] 76.3. Wherefore Philip, having with many toils and dangers gained mastery of the wall, found the wall formed automatically by the houses to be stronger. Moreover, all the things useful for war being readily supplied from Byzantium, he divided his forces into two parts, and left half of the soldiers at the siege, putting over them the best commanders, while himself, taking the others, suddenly fell upon Byzantium and organized a strong siege.

[148544] 76.4. The Byzantines, their soldiers and missiles and other useful things being with the Perinthians, fell into great perplexity. And the affairs of the Perinthians and Byzantines were in this state.

[148745] 76.5. Among the historians, Ephorus of Cyme here brought his history to a close at the siege of Perinthus; he embraced in his work the deeds both of the Greeks and the barbarians, beginning from the return of the Heracleidae; and he comprised a period of about seven hundred and fifty years and wrote thirty books, setting a preface before each.

[149092] 76.6. Diyllus the Athenian made the beginning of his second composition the end of Ephorus's history and strung together the subsequent deeds, both those of the Greeks and the barbarians, down to the death of Philip.

[149310] 77.1. In the archonship of Theophrastus at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Marcus Valerius and Aulus Cornelius, and the hundred and tenth Olympiad was held, in which Anticles the Athenian won the foot-race.

[149526] 77.2. In their time, Philip besieging Byzantium, the Athenians judged that Philip had broken the peace concluded with them; and straightway they sent out a considerable naval force to aid the Byzantines. Likewise the Chians and Coans and Rhodians and certain others of the Greeks sent an alliance to the Byzantines.

[149843] 77.3. Wherefore Philip, dismayed at the concourse of the Greeks, raised the siege of the cities and made peace with the Athenians and the other Greeks who opposed him.

[150012] 77.4. In Sicily the Carthaginians, having made great preparations for the war, transported their forces to Sicily. They had in all, together with those already in the island, foot more than seventy thousand, horse and chariots and two-horse teams no fewer than ten thousand, warships two hundred, and freighters carrying the horses and missiles and grain and the rest, more than a thousand.

[150404] 77.5. Timoleon, learning of the magnitude of the enemy's force, was not dismayed at the barbarians, although reduced to few soldiers. Having a war against Hicetas, he made a settlement with him, and taking on his soldiers, increased his own force not moderately.

[150668] 78.1. It seemed good to him to set up the struggle against the Phoenicians in the dominion of the Carthaginians, in order that he might keep the country of the allies unharmed, and ravage that under the barbarians.

[150884] 78.2. Straightway, then, gathering the mercenaries and Syracusans and the other allies, and calling a common assembly, he urged on the multitude with fitting words to the struggle for everything; and all approving his words and shouting to lead them as quickly as possible against the barbarians, he advanced, having all together no more than twelve thousand.

[151245] 78.3. When he was already in the territory of Acragas, unexpectedly confusion and strife fell upon the army. For a certain one of the mercenaries, named Thrasius, who had plundered the temple at Delphi with the Phocians, and was outstanding in recklessness and audacity, performed a deed in keeping with his former daring.

[151569] 78.4. For while almost all the others who had shared in the lawlessness against the oracle had met with the fitting punishment from the divine power, as we recorded a little before, he alone, having escaped the notice of the divine, undertook to incite the mercenaries to revolt.

[151850] 78.5. For he said that Timoleon, being out of his mind, was leading the soldiers to acknowledged destruction; for the Carthaginians being sixfold in number and insurpassable in all their preparations, he promised to defeat them, gambling away the lives of the mercenaries, and not even having paid the pay owed for a long time because of his poverty.

[152202] 78.6. He advised, then, to turn back to Syracuse and demand the pay, and not to follow on a hopeless campaign.

[152314] 79.1. The mercenaries gladly receiving his words and trying to make a mutiny, Timoleon, scarcely, after many entreaties and promising gifts, stopped the disturbance. Nevertheless, a thousand having followed Thrasius, he postponed their punishment to another time, and writing to his friends in Syracuse to receive them graciously and pay them, he wholly quenched all the disturbance, but took away from those who disobeyed the glory that came from the victory.

[152776] 79.2. He himself, restoring the rest by humane intercourse to their former goodwill, advanced against the enemy, who were encamped not far off. Gathering the soldiers into an assembly and through his words instilling courage into the multitude, he went through the unmanliness of the Phoenicians and reminded them of the success of Gelon.

[153116] 79.3. All shouting, as if with one voice, to attack the barbarians and begin the battle, mules happening to be bringing parsley for the bedding, Timoleon said that he accepted the omen of victory; for the Isthmian crown is made of parsley.

[153357] 79.4. The soldiers, at Timoleon's order, plaiting crowns of the parsley and putting them about their heads, advanced with joy, as if the gods were signifying victory to them beforehand; which also came to pass.

[153569] 79.5. For they got the better of the enemy, beyond hope, not only through their own valour, but also through the cooperation of the gods. For Timoleon, drawing up his force, came down from certain hills to the river Crimisus, and ten thousand having already crossed, he dashed against these at the first onset, himself stationed in the middle of the phalanx.

[153929] 79.6. A fierce battle taking place, and the Greeks being superior both in valour and in skill of hand, there was great slaughter of the barbarians. As those who had crossed were now fleeing, the whole force of the Carthaginians, crossing the stream, set right the defeat of their own men.

[154219] 80.1. The battle being renewed, and the Phoenicians by their numbers encompassing the Greeks, suddenly a great storm of rain broke from the surrounding sky, and a quantity of large hail, and lightnings and thunders with great winds swooped down; and all these things being driven by the storm against the backs of the Greeks but the faces of the barbarians, Timoleon's men easily endured the occurrence, while the Phoenicians, unable to bear the magnitude of the circumstance, and at the same time the Greeks pressing upon them, took to flight.

[154765] 80.2. As all turned toward the river, cavalry and foot mingled together, and the chariots confounded along with these, some, trampled by one another and pierced by the swords and spears of their own allies, had a calamity past help; while others, driven in droves by the enemy cavalry into the river's stream and receiving their wounds in the back, died.

[155121] 80.3. And many were destroyed without an enemy's blow, the bodies being heaped up through fear and the multitude and the difficulties in the stream. But the greatest thing was that, the rains having become violent, the river, borne down with a more forcible current, submerged many and destroyed them as they swam across with their arms.

[155460] 80.4. At last, of the Carthaginians, those who filled the Sacred Band, being in number two thousand five hundred, and being foremost all of them in valour and reputation, and moreover in property, fighting brilliantly, were cut down.

[155695] 80.5. Of the others who campaigned with them, there died more than ten thousand, and there were taken captive no fewer than fifteen thousand. Of the chariots, most were shattered in the struggle, and two hundred were taken; and the baggage-carriers and the teams and the multitude of the waggons fell into the hands of the Greeks.

[156027] 80.6. Of the arms, most were destroyed by the river, but to Timoleon's tent a thousand breastplates and more than ten thousand shields were carried off. Of these, some were later dedicated in the temples in Syracuse, some divided among the allies, and some Timoleon sent to Corinth, ordering that they be dedicated in the temple of Poseidon.

[156370] 81.1. Much money too having been taken, because the Carthaginians had a quantity of silver and gold drinking-cups and, moreover, surpassing other adornment because of the magnitude of their wealth, he granted to the soldiers to keep all of it as prizes of their valour.

[156641] 81.2. Of the Carthaginians, those who escaped the danger in the battle scarcely got safe to Lilybaeum. So great a dismay and fear held them that they did not dare to embark on the ships nor sail off to Libya, supposing that, through the gods' enmity toward them, they would be swallowed up by the Libyan sea.

[156951] 81.3. Those in Carthage, learning of the magnitude of the calamity, were crushed in their spirits and supposed that Timoleon would speedily come against them with his force. Straightway they brought back Gescon the son of Hanno, who had been banished, and appointed him general, because he seemed to excel in audacity and generalship.

[157287] 81.4. And they themselves resolved not to risk citizen persons, but to gather foreign mercenaries and especially Greeks; and they supposed that many would respond to them for the campaign because of the magnitude of the pay and the wealth of Carthage. To Sicily they sent suitable envoys, ordering them to make peace on whatever terms might be possible.

[157642] 82.1. This year having passed, Lysimachides was archon at Athens, and in Rome consuls had been appointed, Quintus Servilius and Marcus Rutilius. In their time Timoleon, returning to Syracuse, first drove out of the city all the mercenaries who had abandoned him, those with Thrasius, as being traitors.

[157946] 82.2. These, crossing into Italy and seizing a certain place by the sea in Bruttium, plundered it. The Bruttii, provoked, straightway marched against them with a great force, and taking the place by siege, shot them all down. The mercenaries, then, who abandoned Timoleon, met with such a calamity as the reward of their own lawlessness.

[158285] 82.3. Timoleon, having arrested Postumius the Tyrrhenian, who plundered those sailing with twelve pirate vessels and had sailed in to Syracuse as a friend, put him to death. He received also graciously the settlers sent out by the Corinthians, being five thousand in number. After this the Carthaginians, sending envoys and entreating much, he granted them peace, on terms that all the Greek cities should be free, and that the river called Lycus should be the boundary of the dominions of both; and that the Carthaginians should not be permitted to help the tyrants who warred against the Syracusans.

[158888] 82.4. After this, having subdued Hicetas, he put him to death, and besieging the Campanians in Aetna, destroyed them. And Nicodemus the tyrant of the Centoripini, having struck him with terror, he drove out of the city, and Apolloniades the ruler of the Agyrinaeans, putting an end to his tyranny, made the freed men Syracusans. In general, having rooted out all the tyrants in the island and freed the cities, he received them into the alliance.

[159336] 82.5. When he had proclaimed throughout Greece that the Syracusans were giving land and houses to those who wished to share in the citizenship in Syracuse, many Greeks came to the allotment; and at last settlers were appointed, to the undivided Syracusan territory forty thousand, and to the territory of Agyrium ten thousand, because of the magnitude and beauty of the country.

[159716] 82.6. Straightway too he corrected the existing laws in Syracuse, which Diocles had drawn up. And those concerning private contracts or inheritances he left unchanged, but those legislated concerning public matters he corrected, with a view to his own purpose, as seemed at the time to be advantageous.

[160020] 82.7. The overseer and corrector of the legislation was Cephalus the Corinthian, a man esteemed for education and intelligence. After these things he resettled the Leontines in Syracuse, and, adding settlers to the Camarinaean territory, enlarged the city.

[160278] 83.1. In general, having peacefully settled all the affairs in Sicily, he made the cities quickly take on great increase toward prosperity. For from long ago, because of the strife and the civil wars, and moreover the multitude of tyrants ever rising up, the cities were desolate of inhabitants, and the lands, through neglect, had become wild and barren of cultivated crops; but then, because of the multitude of settlers that flowed in, and because of the long-continued peace that had supervened, they were tamed by cultivation and brought forth many crops of every kind. These the Sicilian Greeks, selling profitably to the merchants, quickly rose again in their fortunes.

[160956] 83.2. Accordingly, because of the abundance from these things, many great offerings were constructed in those times; in Syracuse the building near the Meson, called of the sixty couches, which surpassed in size and construction the works in Sicily, which Agathocles the ruler constructed, but which, because of the weight of the works overtopping the temples of the gods, met with a sign of displeasure from the divine power, being struck by lightning; and the towers by the small harbour, having their inscriptions of stones of different kinds, signifying the name of the one who constructed them, Agathocles; and likewise to these, a little later, by Hieron the king, both the Olympieium in the market-place and the altar near the theatre, a furlong in length, and having its height and breadth in proportion to this.

[161777] 83.3. And in the smaller cities, among which the city of the Agyrinaeans is counted, which shared in the allotment of that time because of the aforesaid abundance from the crops, it constructed a theatre, the most beautiful in Sicily after that of the Syracusans, and temples of the gods and a council-house and a market-place, and moreover considerable constructions of towers and tombs of many great pyramids, distinguished in their workmanship.

[162226] 84.1. In the archonship of Charondas at Athens, the consular office was held by Lucius Aemilius and Gaius Plotius. In their time Philip the king, having brought most of the Greeks into friendship, was ambitious also, having struck the Athenians with terror, to hold the leadership of Greece undisputed.

[162530] 84.2. Wherefore, suddenly seizing the city of Elateia and gathering his forces into it, he resolved to make war upon the Athenians. As they were unprepared because of the peace concluded, he hoped easily to win the victory; which also was accomplished. For Elateia having been seized, some came by night reporting the capture of the city and that Philip would speedily come with his force into Attica.

[162933] 84.3. The generals of the Athenians, dismayed at the strangeness of the affair, sent for the trumpeters and ordered them to sound the alarm through the whole night. The report being spread to every house, the city was on edge through fear, and the whole people, at daybreak, ran together to the theatre before the magistrates summoned them, as was the custom.

[163294] 84.4. When the generals came and brought forward the informant, and he had spoken, silence and fear held the theatre, and of those accustomed to address the people none dared to give counsel; and though the herald repeatedly called for those who would speak about the common safety, no one came forward as counsellor.

[163613] 84.5. There being, then, great perplexity and consternation, the multitude looked toward Demosthenes. He, coming down and urging the people to take courage, declared that they ought straightway to send envoys to Thebes and urge the Boeotians to set up jointly the struggle for freedom; for the occasion did not permit sending embassies to the other allies about an alliance. For within two days the king was expected to come into Attica, and as the march was through Boeotia, the alliance of the Boeotians alone was left, it being clear that Philip, being a friend and ally of the Boeotians, would try, on his way, to take them along into the war against the Athenians.

[164284] 85.1. The people approving the speech, and the decree about the embassy having been written by Demosthenes, the people sought the most capable to speak; and Demosthenes readily responded to the need. At last, swiftly going as envoy and persuading them, he returned to Athens. The people, having doubled their existing force by the alliance of the Boeotians, took courage in their hopes.

[164672] 85.2. Straightway too they appointed as generals Chares and Lysicles, and sent the soldiers in full force, with their arms, into Boeotia. All the young men eagerly going to the struggle, these, marching in haste, came to Chaeronea in Boeotia; and the Boeotians, marvelling at the swiftness of the Athenians' coming, and themselves falling short in no zeal, came out with their arms, and encamping jointly, awaited the enemy's approach.

[165109] 85.3. Philip at first sent envoys to the council of the Boeotians, of whom the most notable was Python. For he, famed for his power of speech, and compared among the Boeotians with Demosthenes in the speech about the alliance, surpassed all the others, but appeared inferior to him.

[165393] 85.4. And Demosthenes himself, as having accomplished some great thing, in the speeches written by him takes pride in his oration against this orator, in which he says: "Then I did not give way to Python, who was bold and flowing in full stream against you."

[165653] 85.5. After this Philip, having failed of the alliance of the Boeotians, nonetheless resolved to contend against both; wherefore, having waited for the laggard allies, he came into Boeotia, having foot more than thirty thousand and horse no fewer than two thousand.

[165920] 85.6. Both sides being ready for the battle, in spirit and eagerness, and moreover in valour they were evenly matched, but in numbers and in excellence of generalship the king had the advantage.

[166116] 85.7. For having contended in many and varied pitched battles and having been victorious in most of his battles, he had great experience in the works of war. But among the Athenians the best of their generals had died, Iphicrates and Chabrias, and also Timotheus, and of those remaining, Chares, though the foremost, differed in no way from ordinary private men in his energy and counsel in generalship.

[166521] 86.1. At daybreak, the forces being drawn up, the king stationed his son Alexander, who was but a boy in age, but conspicuous for his courage and the swiftness of his energy, on one of the wings, placing beside him the most notable of the commanders; and he himself, having the picked men with him, held the command of the other part, and arranged the several divisions fittingly to the present occasion.

[166927] 86.2. The Athenians, making the division of their array by nations, handed over one part to the Boeotians, and themselves held the command of the rest. A fierce battle taking place for a long time, and many falling on both sides, for a while the struggle held the hopes of victory in doubt.

[167219] 86.3. After this, as Alexander was ambitious to display his own valour to his father, and left no excess of ambition behind, and likewise many brave men fought beside him, he was first to break the unbroken line of the enemy's array, and striking down many, wore down those drawn up against him.

[167516] 86.4. The same being done also by those who stood beside him, the unbroken line of the array was ever being broken through. And many corpses being heaped up, Alexander's men, first forcing those drawn up against them, routed them. After this the king himself too, risking himself in the forefront and not yielding even to Alexander the credit of the victory, first thrust out by force those ranged against him, and then, compelling them to flee, became the author of the victory.

[167997] 86.5. Of the Athenians there fell in the battle more than a thousand, and there were taken no fewer than two thousand.

[168117] 86.6. Likewise too of the Boeotians many were slain, and not a few taken alive. After the battle Philip, setting up a trophy and granting the dead for burial, sacrificed victory-offerings to the gods and honoured according to their worth those who had distinguished themselves.

[168396] 87.1. Some say that, having drunk much unmixed wine during the drinking, and holding with his friends a victory-revel, he walked through the midst of the captives, outraging with words the misfortunes of the unlucky. Demades the orator, who at that time was among the captives, used freedom of speech and uttered a saying able to check the king's wantonness.

[168756] 87.2. For they say he said: "O King, when fortune has cast about you the role of Agamemnon, are you not ashamed to do the deeds of Thersites?" And Philip, moved by the aptness of the rebuke, so changed his whole disposition that he cast away his crowns, and put off the symbols of his wantonness that accompanied the revel, and admired the man who had used freedom of speech, and releasing him from captivity, took him to himself with honour.

[169200] 87.3. And at last, charmed by Demades with Attic graces, he released all the captives without ransom, and, wholly laying aside the arrogance that came from the victory, sent envoys to the people of the Athenians and made with them friendship and alliance, but, putting a garrison into Thebes, granted peace to the Boeotians.

[169526] 88.1. The Athenians, after the defeat, condemned to death the general Lysicles, on the accusation of Lycurgus the orator. For he, having the greatest dignity of the orators of that time, and having administered the revenues of the city for twelve years in praiseworthy fashion, and having lived a life celebrated for virtue, was a most bitter accuser in his speeches.

[169895] 88.2. One may know the worth and bitterness of his speeches in the words in which, accusing Lysicles, he says: "You were general, O Lysicles, and when a thousand citizens had died, and two thousand had become captives, and a trophy stood over the city, and all Greece was enslaved, and all these things having come to pass while you led and commanded, you dare to live and to behold the light of the sun and to thrust yourself into the market-place, having become a memorial of shame and reproach to your native land."

[170415] 88.3. A peculiar thing happened to occur in the period under consideration. For at the very time when the battle about Chaeronea took place, another pitched battle was joined in Italy, on the same day and hour, the Tarentines warring against the Lucanians, and Archidamus the king of the Lacedaemonians fighting alongside the Tarentines, when it happened that Archidamus himself too was slain.

[170810] 88.4. He, then, ruled the Lacedaemonians twenty-three years, and his son Agis, succeeding to the kingship, ruled nine years.

[170936] 88.5. While these things were going on, Timotheus the tyrant of Heracleia in Pontus died after ruling fifteen years, and his brother Dionysius, succeeding to the tyranny, ruled thirty-two years.

[171132] 89.1. In the archonship of Phrynichus at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Titus Manlius Torquatus and Publius Decius. In their time Philip the king, elated by the victory at Chaeronea and having struck with terror the most notable cities, was ambitious to become leader of all Greece.

[171425] 89.2. Spreading abroad a report that he wished to take up war against the Persians on behalf of the Greeks and to exact from them justice for the lawlessness committed against the temples, he made the Greeks his own in their goodwill. Behaving graciously toward all, both privately and publicly to the cities, he declared that he wished to confer about matters of common advantage.

[171808] 89.3. Wherefore, a common council being gathered at Corinth, conferring about the war against the Persians and holding out great hopes, he urged the councillors to war. At last the Greeks, having chosen him general with full powers of Greece, he made great preparations for the campaign against the Persians. Having assigned to each city the number of soldiers for the alliance, he returned to Macedonia. And the affairs of Philip were in this state.

[172260] 90.1. In Sicily Timoleon the Corinthian, having set right all things for the Syracusans and the Sicilian Greeks, died, having been general eight years. The Syracusans, having greatly esteemed the man both for his virtue and the magnitude of his benefactions, buried him magnificently, and at his funeral, the multitude being gathered, Demetrius, who was the loudest-voiced of the heralds of that time, proclaimed this decree: "The people of the Syracusans has voted to bury this Timoleon the son of Timaenetus the Corinthian at a cost of two hundred minae, and to honour him for all time with musical and equestrian and gymnastic contests, because, having overthrown the tyrants and subdued the barbarians and resettled the greatest of the Greek cities, he became the author of freedom for the Sicilian Greeks."

[173073] 90.2. About the same time Ariobarzanes died after reigning twenty-six years, and Mithridates, succeeding to the kingdom, ruled thirty-five years. The Romans, arrayed against the Latins and Campanians about the city of Suessa, were victorious and took away part of the land of the defeated. And Manlius the consul, who had won the battle, celebrated a triumph.

[173434] 91.1. In the archonship of Pythodorus at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Quintus Publius and Tiberius Aemilius Mamercus, and the hundred and eleventh Olympiad was held, in which Cleomantis of Cleitor won the foot-race.

[173662] 91.2. In their time Philip the king, having been appointed leader by the Greeks and having begun the war against the Persians, sent Attalus and Parmenion ahead into Asia, giving them a part of his force and ordering them to free the Greek cities, while he himself, being eager to undertake the war with the consent of the gods, asked the Pythia whether he would conquer the king of the Persians. She gave him this oracle: "The bull is wreathed, the end is at hand, there is one who will sacrifice."

[174162] 91.3. Philip, then, the oracle being ambiguous, interpreted the saying to his own advantage, as if the oracle were foretelling that the Persian would be sacrificed in the manner of a victim; but the truth was not so, but on the contrary it signified that, in a festal assembly and at the sacrifices of the gods, Philip, like the bull, wreathed, would be slaughtered.

[174530] 91.4. Nevertheless, thinking that the gods were allied with him, he was exceedingly glad, as if Asia were to be a captive under the Macedonians. Straightway, then, he performed magnificent sacrifices to the gods and celebrated the marriage of his daughter Cleopatra, by Olympias, marrying her to Alexander the king of the Epirotes, who was the full brother of Olympias.

[174901] 91.5. And, together with the honours to the gods, wishing as many of the Greeks as possible to share in the feasting, he held magnificent musical contests and brilliant banquets for his friends and guests.

[175108] 91.6. Wherefore, from all Greece he summoned his personal guest-friends, and ordered his own friends to bring along as many as possible of their acquaintances from abroad. For he was very ambitious to behave graciously toward the Greeks and, in return for the honours of the whole leadership given him, to repay them with the appropriate intercourse.

[175460] 92.1. At last, many flocking together from all sides to the festival, and the contests and the marriage being celebrated in Aegae of Macedonia, not only individually did the notable men crown him with golden crowns, but also most of the considerable cities, among which was that of the Athenians too.

[175762] 92.2. As this crown was being proclaimed by the herald, it said at the end that, if anyone, having plotted against King Philip, should flee to the Athenians, he should be given up. By the self-prompted utterance, as by some divine providence, the divine power signified the plot that was to come straightway against Philip.

[176087] 92.3. In keeping with these, certain other voices too, as if inspired, occurred, foreshowing the catastrophe of the king. For at the royal drinking-party Neoptolemus the tragic actor, foremost in loudness of voice and in repute, when Philip ordered him to recite some of his successful poems and especially those pertaining to the campaign against the Persians, the artist, judging that the poem would be taken as fitting to Philip's crossing, and wishing to rebuke the prosperity of the Persian king, great and celebrated though it was, in order that it might one day, by fortune, change to its opposite, began to speak this poem: "Your thoughts now reach higher than the upper air, and the cornfields of great plains, your thoughts overpass house upon house, in your folly marking out your life to stretch far ahead. But one comes, treading the swift-footed dark path, and suddenly, unseen, draws near, taking away the long hopes of mortals: many-toiling Hades."

[177053] And he strung together the lines that follow these, all tending to the same thought.

[177139] 92.4. Philip, pleased at what was recited, was wholly and utterly carried away in his mind toward the catastrophe of the Persian king, and at the same time reckoned up the Pythian oracle, having a thought similar to those spoken by the tragic actor.

[177390] 92.5. At last the drinking-party broke up, and the contests beginning on the next day, the multitude, while it was still night, ran together to the theatre, and at daybreak, the procession taking place, along with the other magnificent furnishings, images of the twelve gods were carried in procession, wrought with extraordinary craftsmanship and marvellously adorned with the brilliance of wealth; and along with these a thirteenth, god-fitting image of Philip himself was carried in procession, the king displaying himself enthroned together with the twelve gods.

[177958] 93.1. The theatre being filled, Philip himself came, wearing a white cloak, and having ordered the bodyguards, standing far off from him, to follow; for he showed to all that, being guarded by the common goodwill of the Greeks, he had no need of the guard of bodyguards.

[178230] 93.2. Such being the height of his pre-eminence, and all praising and at the same time felicitating the man, a surprising and wholly unexpected plot and death against the king appeared.

[178417] 93.3. But that the account of these things may be clear, we shall set forth beforehand the causes of the plot. Pausanias was by birth a Macedonian, from the region called Orestis, and a bodyguard of the king, and through his beauty had become a friend of Philip.

[178681] 93.4. This man, seeing that another Pausanias, of the same name as himself, was beloved by the king, used reproachful words to him, saying that he was a hermaphrodite and readily received the loves of any who wished.

[178899] 93.5. He, not bearing the insult from the abuse, kept silent for the present, but having communicated with a certain Attalus, one of his friends, about what he intended to do, voluntarily and surprisingly removed himself from life.

[179132] 93.6. For a few days later, Philip contending against Pleurias the king of the Illyrians, Pausanias, standing before the king, received in his own body all the blows that were borne against him, and died.

[179338] 93.7. The deed being noised abroad, Attalus, who was one of those of the court and very powerful with the king, invited Pausanias to dinner, and filling him with much unmixed wine, handed over his body to the muleteers for outrage and drunken wantonness such as a harlot suffers.

[179619] 93.8. He, sobering from his drunkenness and being grievously pained at the outrage to his body, accused Attalus before the king. Philip was provoked at the lawlessness of the deed, but because of his connection with Attalus and his usefulness for the present, did not wish to take action against him.

[179921] 93.9. For Attalus was a nephew of Cleopatra, the woman the king had married, and had been appointed general over the force sent ahead into Asia, and was brave in the struggles of war. Wherefore the king, wishing to soften the just anger of Pausanias arising from his suffering, bestowed on him considerable gifts and advanced him with honour in the bodyguard.

[180282] 94.1. But Pausanias, keeping his anger unalterable, was eager to take vengeance not only from the perpetrator, but also from the one who did not avenge him. Most of all the sophist Hermocrates contributed to this resolve. For Pausanias, being his pupil, and during the lecture asking how one might become most famous, the sophist answered: "If he should slay the one who has done the greatest deeds; for, by the memory of him, the one who made away with him would be included as well."

[180769] 94.2. Referring the saying to his own anger, and, through his passion, making no postponement of the resolution, he set up the plot in the very contests then taking place, in some such manner as this.

[180971] 94.3. Stationing horses at the gates, he came to the entrances of the theatre, having a Celtic dagger concealed. When Philip ordered the friends who attended him to go on ahead into the theatre, and the bodyguards were standing apart, seeing the king alone, he ran up, and dealing a thrust through the ribs, stretched out the king a corpse, and himself ran toward the gates and the horses prepared for the flight.

[181386] 94.4. Straightway some of the bodyguards rushed to the body of the king, while others poured out in pursuit of the murderer, among whom were Leonnatus and Perdiccas and Attalus. Pausanias, having got a lead of the pursuit, would have outstripped it by leaping onto his horse, had not his sandal caught about a certain vine and he fell. Wherefore Perdiccas and his men, overtaking him as he was rising from the ground, ran him through and slew him.

[181835] 95.1. Philip, then, having become the greatest of the kings in Europe in his time, and through the magnitude of his rule having counted himself enthroned together with the twelve gods, met with such an end of his life, having ruled twenty-four years.

[182087] 95.2. This king is held to have taken over the slenderest resources for the monarchy, but to have acquired the greatest of the monarchies among the Greeks, and to have increased his leadership not so much through valour in arms as through intercourse and graciousness in words.

[182366] 95.3. And they say that Philip himself prided himself more on his shrewdness in generalship and on his successes through intercourse than on his courage in battles;

[182532] 95.4. for of the successes in the struggles all who campaigned shared, but of the successes that came through intercourse he alone received the credit.

[182685] 95.5. But we, since we have arrived at the death of Philip, shall here close this book, according to the purpose set forth at the beginning, and shall make the next the starting-point of the following.