WORK: Historical Library  (slug: diodorus-siculus-historical-library-3031ad)

CHAPTER: 02-book-2



[110213] 68.3. It having often been fought over, Brasidas was eager to become master of the city. Therefore, having campaigned against it with a notable force and encamped near the bridge, at first he took the suburb of the city, and on the next day, having dismayed the Amphipolitans, he took the city by agreement, so that it was permitted to anyone who wished to depart from the city, taking his own property.

[110618] 68.4. At once he won over also many of the neighboring cities, among which the most notable were Oesyme and Galepsus, both colonies of the Thasians, and Myrcinus, an Edonian town. He undertook also to build more triremes on the river Strymon, and summoned soldiers both from Lacedaemon and from the other allies.

[110932] 68.5. He prepared also many suits of armor and distributed these to the unarmed of the young men, and made preparations of missiles and grain and all the others. When everything had been prepared for him, he broke camp from Amphipolis with the force, and, arriving at the place called Acte, encamped. In this were five cities, of which some were Greek, colonies of the Andrians, and others had a crowd of bilingual Bisaltic barbarians.

[111369] 68.6. Having subdued these, he campaigned against the city Torone, a colony of the Chalcidians but held by the Athenians. Some betraying the city, brought in by these by night, he gained control of Torone without dangers. The affairs concerning Brasidas, then, advanced thus far in this year.

[111663] 69.1. While these things were being done, at Delium there took place a line of battle in Boeotia between the Athenians and the Boeotians for the following reasons. Some of the Boeotians, dissatisfied with the constitution then in force and eager to establish democracies in the cities, conversed about their own purpose with the Athenian generals Hippocrates and Demosthenes, and undertook to hand over the cities in Boeotia.

[112090] 69.2. The Athenians having gladly accepted, and the generals having divided the force for the management of the attack, Demosthenes, taking up most of the army, invaded Boeotia, and, finding the Boeotians forewarned of the betrayal, departed without accomplishing anything; Hippocrates, having led the Athenians in full force to Delium, seized the place, and, anticipating the onset of the Boeotians, fortified Delium. This place lies near the Oropia and the borders of Boeotia.

[112570] 69.3. Pagondas, who held the generalship of the Boeotians, having summoned soldiers from all the cities in Boeotia, came to Delium with a great force; for he had foot-soldiers not much short of twenty thousand and cavalry about a thousand.

[112811] 69.4. The Athenians exceeded the Boeotians in number, but were not armed like the enemy; for they had come out of the city suddenly and quickly, and because of their haste were unprepared.

[113001] 70.1. Both having set out zealously, the forces were arrayed in the following manner. Among the Boeotians the Thebans were stationed on the right wing, the Orchomenians on the left, and the Boeotians filled the middle of the phalanx; before all fought the so-called charioteers and side-men among them, three hundred picked men. The Athenians, while still arraying their force, were compelled to join battle.

[113411] 70.2. The line of battle being violent, at first the cavalry of the Athenians, fighting brilliantly, compelled the cavalry opposing them to flee; but afterward, the foot fighting it out, the Athenians stationed against the Thebans, being forced, were routed, while the rest, having routed the other Boeotians and slain many, pursued them over a considerable distance.

[113780] 70.3. The Thebans, surpassing in bodily strength, turned back from the pursuit, and, falling upon the pursuing Athenians, compelled them to flee; and, having conquered in a distinguished battle, won great glory for courage.

[114005] 70.4. Of the Athenians some fled to Oropus, others to Delium, some made their way to the sea to their own ships, others were scattered in various places as it chanced. Night coming on, there fell of the Boeotians not more than five hundred, and of the Athenians many times these. If, then, the night had not anticipated them, most of the Athenians would have died; for this, intervening, checked the impulses of the pursuers and saved the fugitives.

[114456] 70.5. Nevertheless, so great was the multitude of the slain that the Thebans, from the value of the spoils, constructed the great portico in the marketplace and adorned it with bronze statues, and overlaid with bronze the temples and the porticoes in the marketplace with the arms nailed up from the spoils; and they instituted the celebration of the festival of the Delia from this money.

[114847] 70.6. After the battle the Boeotians, making assaults on Delium, took the place by storm; and of those guarding Delium, most died fighting nobly, two hundred were captured, and the rest fled to the ships and were conveyed with the others to Attica. The Athenians, then, having plotted against the Boeotians, fell into such a calamity.

[115183] 71.1. In Asia Xerxes the king died, having ruled a year, or, as some write, two months; and his brother Sogdianus, succeeding to the kingdom, ruled seven months. Darius, having slain him, reigned nineteen years.

[115396] 71.2. Of the historians, Antiochus of Syracuse brought his history of Sicilian affairs to a close at this year, beginning from Cocalus the king of the Sicanians, in nine books.

[115574] 72.1. When Ameinias was archon at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Gaius Papirius and Lucius Junius. In their time the Scionaeans, despising the Athenians because of the defeat at Delium, revolted to the Lacedaemonians and handed over the city to Brasidas, who was general of the Lacedaemonians on Thrace.

[115888] 72.2. In Lesbos, after the capture of Mytilene by the Athenians, those who had fled from the capture, being many in number, had long been attempting to return to Lesbos, and now, having formed up, seized Antandros, and, setting out from there, waged war against the Athenians holding Mytilene.

[116183] 72.3. Provoked at this, the people of the Athenians sent out generals against them with a force, Aristides and Symmachus. These, having sailed to Lesbos and made continuous assaults, took Antandros, and of the exiles slew some and cast others out of the city, and themselves, leaving a garrison to guard the place, sailed off from Lesbos.

[116523] 72.4. After this Lamachus the general, having ten triremes, sailed to the Pontus, and, anchoring at Heraclea on the river called Cales, lost all his ships; for great rains having burst forth, and the river having made the descent of its stream violent, the vessels, dashing against some rough places on the land, were destroyed.

[116853] 72.5. The Athenians made a one-year truce with the Lacedaemonians on these terms, that each should hold what they then were masters of. Coming together often into conference, they thought it necessary to end the war and to cease altogether from their rivalry with one another; but the Lacedaemonians were eager to recover the captives taken on Sphacteria.

[117210] 72.6. The treaties having been completed in the said manner, concerning the other matters all was agreed for them, but about Scione both disputed. Great rivalry arising, they broke off the treaties, and about Scione waged war against one another.

[117458] 72.7. At this time also the city Mende revolted to the Lacedaemonians and made the rivalry over Scione stronger. Therefore Brasidas, having removed children and women and the other most useful things from Mende and Scione, secured the cities with notable garrisons,

[117725] 72.8. while the Athenians, provoked at what had happened, voted to slaughter all the Scionaeans who had reached manhood, whenever they should be captured, and sent out a naval force against them of fifty triremes; of these Nicias and Nicostratus had the command.

[117989] 72.9. These, having sailed first to Mende, gained control of the city, some betraying it; and Scione they walled around, and, sitting down to the siege, made continuous assaults.

[118169] 72.10. The garrison in Scione, being many in number and having an abundance of missiles and grain and the other supplies, easily defended themselves against the Athenians, and, having the higher ground, wounded many. These things, then, were done in this year.

[118431] 73.1. After this at Athens Alcaeus was archon, and in Rome the consuls were Opiter Lucretius and Lucius Sergius Fidenas. In their time the Athenians, accusing the Delians of secretly making an alliance with the Lacedaemonians, expelled them from the island and held the city themselves. To the expelled Delians Pharnaces the satrap gave the city Adramyttium to inhabit.

[118802] 73.2. The Athenians, having appointed Cleon the demagogue as general and given him a notable land force, sent him to the places on Thrace. He, having sailed to Scione and there taken on soldiers from those besieging the city, sailed off and put in at Torone; for he knew that Brasidas had departed from these places, and that the soldiers left at Torone were not a match for him.

[119183] 73.3. Having encamped near Torone and besieged it at once by land and by sea, he took the city by storm, and enslaved the children and women, and the men and those guarding the city he took captive, bound, and sent to Athens; and, leaving a sufficient garrison of the city, he sailed out with the force, and put in on Thrace at the river Strymon. Having encamped near the city Eion, distant from Amphipolis about thirty stadia, he made assaults on the town.

[119642] 74.1. Learning that Brasidas with a force was tarrying about the city Amphipolis, he broke camp against him. Brasidas, when he heard that the enemy were approaching, having drawn up his force, met the Athenians; a great line of battle taking place, and both armies fighting brilliantly, at first the battle was evenly balanced, but afterward, each of the commanders being ambitious to decide the battle by himself, it came about that many notable men were slain, the generals putting themselves into the battle and bringing unsurpassable ambition for the victory.

[120207] 74.2. Brasidas, then, having proved bravest and slain very many, heroically ended his life; and likewise, Cleon too having fallen in the battle, both forces were thrown into confusion because of the lack of leaders, but in the end the Lacedaemonians conquered and set up a trophy. The Athenians, having taken up the dead under truce and buried them, sailed off to Athens.

[120580] 74.3. When some came to Lacedaemon from the battle and announced both the victory and the death of Brasidas, the mother of Brasidas, learning of what had happened in the battle, asked what sort of man Brasidas had been in the line of battle. When they answered that he was the best of all the Lacedaemonians, the mother of the dead man said that Brasidas her son was a good man, but inferior, however, to many others.

[120999] 74.4. These words being spread throughout the city, the ephors publicly honored the woman, because she preferred the praise of her native land to the glory of her child.

[121170] 74.5. After the said battle the Athenians resolved to make with the Lacedaemonians a fifty-year peace on these terms: that the captives on both sides be released, and that the cities taken in the war be given back.

[121386] 74.6. The Peloponnesian War, then, having lasted down to the times in question for ten years, was ended in the said manner.

[121511] 75.1. When Aristion was archon at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Titus Quintius and Aulus Cornelius Cossus. In their time, the Peloponnesian War having just been ended, again disturbances and warlike movements occurred in Greece for the following reasons.

[121777] 75.2. The Athenians and Lacedaemonians, having in common with their allies made treaties and settlements, apart from the allied cities made an alliance. By doing this they came under suspicion as having made a private alliance for the enslavement of the other Greeks.

[122046] 75.3. Therefore the greatest of the cities sent embassies to one another and conferred about concord and alliance against the Athenians and Lacedaemonians. The cities standing at the head of this were the four most powerful, Argos, Thebes, Corinth, Elis.

[122302] 75.4. The cities were reasonably suspected of conspiring against Greece because there had been added to the common treaties: "It shall be permitted to the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, whatever may seem good to these cities, to add to the treaties and to take away from the treaties." And apart from this, the Athenians by a decree gave ten men authority to deliberate about what was advantageous to the city; and the Lacedaemonians having done the like, it came about that the grasping ambition of the two cities became evident.

[122833] 75.5. As many cities heeded the call to common freedom, and the Athenians were despised because of the disaster at Delium, and the Lacedaemonians were humbled in reputation because of the capture of those on the island of Sphacteria, many cities banded together, and they advanced the city of the Argives to the leadership.

[123158] 75.6. For this city had great dignity because of its ancient deeds; for before the descent of the Heraclidae nearly all the greatest of the kings were from the Argolid; and besides this, having been at peace for a long time, it received the greatest revenues, and had a quantity not only of money but also of men.

[123473] 75.7. The Argives, thinking that the whole leadership would be conceded to them, picked out a thousand of the younger of the citizens, those especially strong in their bodies and in their property; and, having released them from the other public services and furnishing them public maintenance, they ordered them to train in continuous exercises. These, then, because of the maintenance and the continuous training, quickly became athletes of warlike works.

[123932] 76.1. The Lacedaemonians, seeing the Peloponnese banding together against them and foreseeing the magnitude of the war, secured the matters of their leadership as far as was possible. And first they freed the Helots, a thousand in number, who had campaigned with Brasidas on Thrace; and after this they released from disgrace the captive Spartiates taken on the island Sphacteria, whom they had surrounded with disgrace as having made Sparta less reputable.

[124391] 76.2. Consistently with these, by praises and honors for those in the war they urged men to surpass their previous deeds of valor in the coming struggles; and they behaved more reasonably toward the allies, and by their humanity treated the most estranged of them.

[124657] 76.3. The Athenians, on the contrary, wishing by fear to dismay those under suspicion of revolt, displayed to all as an example the punishment of the Scionaeans; for, having taken them by siege and slaughtered all who had reached manhood, they enslaved the children and women, and gave the island to dwell in to the Plataeans, who because of them had been driven from their native land.

[125045] 76.4. About the same time, in Italy, the Campanians, having campaigned against Cyme with a great force, conquered the Cumaeans in battle and cut down most of those ranged against them. Sitting down to the siege and making more assaults, they took the city by storm. Having plundered it and enslaved those captured, they appointed enough settlers from among themselves.

[125415] 77.1. When Astyphilus was archon at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Lucius Quintius and Aulus Sempronius, and the Eleans celebrated the ninetieth Olympiad, in which Hyperbius of Syracuse won the stadium-race. In their time the Athenians, according to a certain oracle, gave back the island to the Delians, and the Delians dwelling in Adramyttium returned to their native land.

[125801] 77.2. The Athenians not having given back Pylos to the Lacedaemonians, again these cities fell out with one another and were hostile. Learning of this, the people of the Argives persuaded the Athenians to make a friendship with the Argives.

[126043] 77.3. As the difference increased, the Lacedaemonians persuaded the Corinthians to abandon the common assembly and to ally with the Lacedaemonians. Such disturbance having arisen and there being anarchy, the affairs in the Peloponnese were in this state.

[126299] 77.4. In the regions outside, the Aenianians and Dolopians and Malians, having taken counsel together, campaigned with notable forces against Heraclea in Trachis. The Heracleans having drawn up against them and a fierce battle taking place, the inhabitants of Heraclea were defeated. Having lost many soldiers and fled together within their walls, they summoned aid from the Boeotians. The Thebans having sent them a thousand picked hoplites, with these they defended themselves against the invaders.

[126801] 77.5. While these things were being done, the Olynthians, having campaigned against the city Mecyberna, which was garrisoned by the Athenians, cast out the garrison and themselves held the city.

[126997] 78.1. When Archias was archon at Athens, the Romans appointed as consuls Lucius Papirius Mugilanus and Gaius Servilius Structus. In their time the Argives, accusing the Lacedaemonians of not having given the sacrificial victims to Pythian Apollo, declared war on them; at which time Alcibiades the general of the Athenians invaded the Argolid with a force.

[127355] 78.2. The Argives, having taken these on, campaigned against Troezen, a city allied to the Lacedaemonians, and, having plundered the country and burned the country houses, departed to their home. The Lacedaemonians, provoked at the lawless acts against the Troezenians, resolved to make war on the Argives; therefore, having gathered a force, they appointed Agis the king as commander.

[127742] 78.3. He with the force campaigned against the Argives, and ravaged the country, and, leading the force near the city, challenged the enemy to battle.

[127894] 78.4. The Argives, having taken on three thousand soldiers from the Eleans and from the Mantineans not much fewer than these, led the army out of the city. A line of battle being about to take place, the generals on both sides, having exchanged embassies, agreed to a four-month truce.

[128181] 78.5. The armies having returned home without accomplishing anything, both cities were angry with the generals who had made the truce. Therefore the Argives, throwing stones at the leaders, attempted to kill them, and barely amid much entreaty conceded them their lives, but, having confiscated their property, razed their houses.

[128513] 78.6. The Lacedaemonians undertook to punish Agis, but, when he undertook to set right his error by noble deeds, barely conceded; and for the rest of the time, having chosen ten of the most intelligent men, they set them beside him as counselors and ordered him to do nothing without their consent.

[128813] 79.1. After this the Athenians having sent by sea to Argos a thousand picked hoplites and two hundred cavalry, of whom Laches and Nicostratus were generals; with these was also Alcibiades, being a private citizen, because of the friendship with the Eleans and Mantineans; all having taken counsel together, it seemed best to dismiss the truce and to set out for the war.

[129185] 79.2. Therefore each general urged his own men on to the contest, and, all readily obeying, they encamped outside the city. It seemed best to them, then, first of all to campaign against Orchomenus in Arcadia. Therefore, having gone into Arcadia and sitting down before the city, they made assaults each day on the walls.

[129508] 79.3. Having subdued the city, they encamped near Tegea, having resolved to besiege this too. The Tegeans asking the Lacedaemonians to come to their aid quickly, the Spartiates, taking along all their own men and the allies, came to Mantineia, thinking that, this being attacked, the siege of Tegea would be lifted.

[129825] 79.4. The Mantineans, having taken on the allies, and themselves campaigning in full force, drew up against the Lacedaemonians. A fierce battle taking place, the picked men of the Argives, a thousand in number, well trained in the things of war, routed those ranged against them first, and, pursuing, made much slaughter.

[130148] 79.5. The Lacedaemonians, having routed the other parts of the army and slain many, turned back against those very men, and, encircling them with their multitude, hoped to cut them all down.

[130340] 79.6. The picked men being far inferior in number but superior in deeds of valor, the king of the Lacedaemonians, fighting in front, persevered amid the dangers and would have slain them all; for he was eager to fulfill his promises to the citizens, and, having accomplished something great, to set right the disgrace that had occurred; he was not, however, allowed to carry out his purpose. For Pharax the Spartiate, being one of the counselors and having the greatest dignity in Sparta, ordered him to give the picked men a passage, and not, against men who had despaired of life and were running every risk, to make trial of valor in misfortune.

[130990] 79.7. Whence he was compelled, according to the order just stated, to give a passage out according to the judgement of Pharax. The thousand, then, having been released to pass through in the said manner, were saved, while the Lacedaemonians, having conquered in a great battle and set up a trophy, departed to their home.

[131313] 80.1. When the annual period had passed, at Athens Antiphon was archon, and in Rome, instead of consuls, four military tribunes were appointed, Gaius Furius and Titus Quintius, and besides Marcus Postumius and Aulus Cornelius. In their time the Argives and Lacedaemonians, having exchanged embassies with one another, made peace and an alliance.

[131660] 80.2. Therefore the Mantineans, having lost the aid from the Argives, were compelled to submit to the Lacedaemonians. About the same time, in the city of the Argives, the thousand chosen by selection from the citizens came to an agreement, and resolved to overthrow the democracy and to establish an aristocracy of themselves.

[131988] 80.3. Having many fellow-workers, because they excelled the citizens in property and in deeds of valor, at first they seized and slew those accustomed to demagoguery, and, having dismayed the others, abolished the laws and managed public affairs through themselves. Having held this constitution for eight months, they were overthrown, the people having banded together against them; therefore, these having been slain, the people recovered the democracy.

[132445] 80.4. There was also another movement in Greece; for the Phocians, having quarreled with the Locrians, were judged by a line of battle, because of their own courage; for the Phocians conquered, slaying more than a thousand of the Locrians.

[132686] 80.5. The Athenians, Nicias being general, took two cities, Cythera and Nisaea; and, having taken Melos by siege, they slaughtered all who had reached manhood, and enslaved the children and women.

[132884] 80.6. And the affairs among the Greeks were in this state. In Italy the Fidenates, ambassadors having come to their city from Rome, slew these on small pretexts.

[133047] 80.7. At this the Romans, provoked, voted to make war, and, having mustered a notable force, chose as dictator Anius Aemilius and, with him according to custom, Aulus Cornelius as master of the horse.

[133249] 80.8. Aemilius, having prepared the things for the war, broke camp with the force against the Fidenates. The Fidenates having drawn up against him, a battle took place, fierce for a long time, and, many having fallen on both sides, the contest became evenly balanced.

[133518] 81.1. When Euphemus was archon at Athens, in Rome there were appointed, instead of consuls, military tribunes, Lucius Furius, Lucius Quintius, Aulus Sempronius. In their time the Lacedaemonians, with the allies, having campaigned into the Argolid, took the place Hysiae, and, having slain the inhabitants, razed the fort; and they themselves, learning that the Argives had built long walls down to the sea, attacking, razed the walls that had been constructed, and made their return home.

[134008] 81.2. The Athenians, having chosen Alcibiades as general and given him twenty ships, ordered him to help the Argives establish their constitution; for they were still in disturbances because many of those who chose the aristocracy had been left.

[134255] 81.3. Alcibiades, then, having arrived at the city of the Argives and taken counsel with those preferring the democracy, picked out those of the Argives who seemed most to choose the cause of the Lacedaemonians; and, having removed these from the city and firmly established the democracy, sailed off to Athens.

[134568] 81.4. As this year was ending, the Lacedaemonians, invading the Argolid with a great force, and ravaging much of the country, settled the exiles of the Argives at Orneae; and, having fortified this place against the Argolid and left a sufficient garrison, ordered them to harm the Argives.

[134859] 81.5. The Lacedaemonians having departed from the Argolid, the Athenians sent as an alliance to the Argives forty triremes and twelve hundred hoplites; and the Argives, having campaigned with the Athenians against Orneae, took the city by storm, and of the garrison and exiles slew some and cast others out of Orneae. These things, then, were done in the fifteenth year of the Peloponnesian War.

[135256] 82.1. In the sixteenth, among the Athenians Arimnestus was archon, and in Rome, instead of consuls, four military tribunes were appointed, Titus Claudius and Spurius Nautius, and besides Lucius Sentius and Sextus Julius. In their time, among the Eleans the ninety-first Olympiad was celebrated, in which Exaenetus of Acragas won the stadium-race.

[135604] 82.2. The Byzantines and Calchedonians, having taken along Thracians, campaigned into Bithynia with great multitudes, and ravaged the country and, having taken by siege many of the small towns, accomplished deeds distinguished for cruelty; for, having taken many captives, men and women and children, they slaughtered all.

[135928] 82.3. About the same time, in Sicily, the Egestaeans made war on the Selinuntians about disputed land, a river bounding the country of the disputing cities.

[136086] 82.4. The Selinuntians, having crossed the stream, at first by force held the riverside, and afterward, having cut off much of the adjacent country, despised those they had wronged.

[136269] 82.5. The Egestaeans, provoked, at first attempted by speeches to persuade them not to set foot on foreign land; but when no one paid heed to them, they campaigned against those holding the country, and, casting all out of the fields, themselves held the country.

[136534] 82.6. A great difference having arisen for both cities, having gathered soldiers, they made the decision by arms. Therefore, both having drawn up, a fierce battle took place, in which the Selinuntians, conquering, slew not a few of the Egestaeans.

[136783] 82.7. The Egestaeans, humbled and not being a match by themselves, at first tried to persuade the Acragantines and Syracusans to ally with them; failing of these, they sent ambassadors to Carthage, begging it to come to their aid; and, as it paid no heed to them, they sought some overseas alliance; in this chance worked with them.

[137117] 83.1. For the Leontines having been removed from their city by the Syracusans and having lost both the city and the country, their exiles, having formed up, resolved again to take on the Athenians, who were their kinsmen, as allies.

[137351] 83.2. Having conferred about these things with the Egestaeans, they took counsel together and in common sent ambassadors to the Athenians, asking them to come to the aid of their cities, which were being wronged, and undertaking to help them establish their affairs in Sicily.

[137629] 83.3. The ambassadors having arrived at Athens, and the Leontines putting forward their kinship and the pre-existing alliance, and the Egestaeans undertaking both to give a quantity of money for the war and to ally against the Syracusans, it seemed best to the Athenians to send out some of their best men and to examine the affairs in the island and the Egestaeans.

[137997] 83.4. These, then, having arrived at Egesta, the Egestaeans displayed a quantity of money, partly from home, partly borrowed from the neighbors for the sake of show.

[138164] 83.5. The ambassadors having returned and announced the wealth of the Egestaeans, the people came together about these things. The deliberation having been set forth about campaigning against Sicily, Nicias the son of Niceratus, admired for his virtue among the citizens, advised not to campaign against Sicily;

[138477] 83.6. for it was not possible at once to wage war against the Lacedaemonians and to send out great forces overseas, and, being unable to gain the leadership of the Greeks, to hope to acquire the greatest of the islands in the inhabited world; and the Carthaginians, having the greatest dominion and having often fought over Sicily, had not been able to gain control of the island, while the Athenians, far inferior in power to the Carthaginians, would make the strongest of the islands a spear-won possession.

[138988] 84.1. He having discussed many other things suited to the matter before them, Alcibiades, standing at the head of the opposite opinion, the most distinguished of the Athenians, persuaded the people to take up the war; for this man was the cleverest of the citizens at speaking, and renowned for nobility and wealth and generalship.

[139321] 84.2. At once, then, the people prepared a sufficient fleet, taking thirty triremes from the allies and fitting out a hundred of their own.

[139462] 84.3. Having adorned these with all the things useful for war, they enrolled hoplites to the number of five thousand, and elected three generals for this expedition, Alcibiades and Nicias and Lamachus.