WORK: Historical Library  (slug: diodorus-siculus-historical-library-3031ad)

CHAPTER: 05-book-5



[107563] 59.1. About the same times Lycomedes the Tegeate persuaded the Arcadians to be ranged into one confederacy and to have a common assembly composed of ten thousand men, and that these should have authority to deliberate about war and peace. 59.2. A great faction occurring among the Arcadians, and those at variance being decided by arms, many were slain, and more than fourteen hundred fled, some to Sparta, others to Pallantium. 59.3. These, then, given up by the Pallantians, were slaughtered by the victors; and those who fled to Sparta persuaded the Lacedaemonians to campaign into Arcadia. 59.4. Therefore Agesilaus the king, with a force and the exiles, invaded the country of the Tegeates, because these seemed to have been the cause of the faction and the flight. Ravaging the country and making assaults on the city, he struck dismay into those of the Arcadians who acted against him. 60.1. At the same time as these things were being done, Jason the tyrant of Pherae, distinguished in generalship's understanding and having brought many of the neighbours into alliance, persuaded the Thessalians to lay claim to the leadership of the Greeks; for this, as a kind of prize of valour, lay before those able to dispute it. 60.2. For it came to pass that the Lacedaemonians had fallen into a great calamity at Leuctra, that the Athenians clung only to the rule by sea, that the Thebans were not worthy of the first place, and that the Argives had been humbled because of factions and civil slaughters. Therefore the Thessalians, setting up Jason as leader of the whole, entrusted to him the affairs of the war. Jason, taking over the leadership, brought over certain of the neighbouring peoples and made an alliance with Amyntas the king of the Macedonians. 60.3. Something peculiar occurred in this year; for of those in positions of power three died about the same time. Amyntas the son of Arrhidaeus, reigning over Macedonia, died, having ruled twenty-four years, leaving three sons, Alexander and Perdiccas and Philip; his son Alexander succeeded to the kingdom and ruled a year. 60.4. Likewise also Agesipolis the king of the Lacedaemonians passed away, having ruled a year, and his brother Cleomenes, succeeding to the rule, reigned thirty-four years. 60.5. Third, Jason the Pheraean, chosen leader of Thessaly, and seeming to rule his subjects fairly, was treacherously slain, as Ephorus has written, by certain seven young men who conspired for the sake of glory, but as some write, by Polydorus his brother. This man too, succeeding to the dominion, ruled a year. 60.6. Duris the Samian the historian made the beginning of his Greek history from here. These things, then, were done in this year.

[110273] 61.1. In the archonship at Athens of Lysistratus, among the Romans there occurred faction, some thinking they ought to choose consuls, others military tribunes. For some time, then, anarchy held the faction, but after this it was resolved to choose six military tribunes; and there were appointed Lucius Aemilius and Gaius Verginius and Servius Sulpicius, and besides these Lucius Quinctius and Gaius Cornelius, and besides Gaius Valerius. 61.2. In this year Polydorus the Pheraean, who had ruled the Thessalians, was slain by Alexander his nephew with poison, having been invited to drink; and his nephew Alexander, succeeding to the dominion, ruled eleven years. This man, having acquired the dominion lawlessly and violently, managed the affairs of his rule in accordance with this choice. For while the rulers before him dealt fairly with the multitude, and on this account were loved, this man, ruling violently and harshly, was hated. 61.3. Therefore, fearing his lawlessness, certain of the Larissaeans, those called from their nobility Aleuadae, agreed with one another to overthrow the dominion. Departing from Larissa into Macedonia, they persuaded Alexander the king to help overthrow the tyrant. 61.4. While these were occupied about this, Alexander the Pheraean, learning of the preparation against himself, enrolled the men fit for the campaign, planning to constitute the battle in Macedonia. But the king of the Macedonians, having with him the exiles from Larissa, forestalling the enemy, came with his force to Larissa; brought inside the walls by the Larissaeans, he mastered the city except for the citadel. 61.5. After this he both took the citadel by siege and, bringing over the city Crannon, agreed to give back the cities to the Thessalians; but despising the engagement, and bringing in considerable garrisons, he himself held the cities. The Pheraean Alexander, both pursued and struck with dismay, returned to Pherae. And the affairs in Thessaly were in this state. 62.1. In the Peloponnese the Lacedaemonians sent Polytropus as general into Arcadia, having a thousand citizen hoplites and five hundred exiles of the Argives and Boeotians. He, coming to Arcadian Orchomenus, guarded this city, which was favourably disposed toward the Spartans. 62.2. Lycomedes the Mantinean, being general of the Arcadians, taking the men called the chosen, being five thousand, came to Orchomenus. The Lacedaemonians leading the force out of the city, a fierce battle took place, in which both the general of the Lacedaemonians was slain and of the others about two hundred; the rest were pursued together into the city. 62.3. The Arcadians, although they had conquered, nevertheless were on their guard against the weight of Sparta, and did not suppose they would be able by themselves to fight the war against the Lacedaemonians. Therefore, taking on the Argives and Eleians, at first they sent envoys to Athens, asking them to make an alliance against the Spartans; but when no one heeded them, sending an embassy to the Thebans they persuaded them to conclude an alliance against the Lacedaemonians. 62.4. Immediately, then, the Boeotians led out the force, taking on as allies both Locrians and Phocians. These, then, advanced against the Peloponnese, Epaminondas and Pelopidas being boeotarchs; for to these the other boeotarchs had willingly yielded the generalship, because of the understanding and valour of the men. 62.5. When they came to Arcadia, there came to them in full force both the Arcadians and Eleians and Argives and all the other allies. More than fifty thousand being gathered, their leaders, taking counsel together, resolved to march against Sparta itself and to ravage all Laconia.

[113996] 63.1. The Lacedaemonians, having lost many of their young men in the calamity at Leuctra, and having lost not a few in the other defeats, and in sum being shut up by fortune into few citizen-soldiers, and besides this their allies, some having revolted, some for like causes being short of men, fell into great helplessness. Therefore they were compelled to flee for refuge to the aid of the Athenians, upon whom in former times they had set thirty tyrants, whom they had prevented from rebuilding the walls of their city, and whom they had attempted, by utterly destroying the city, to make Attica a sheep-pasture. 63.2. But indeed nothing is stronger than necessity and fortune, by which the Lacedaemonians were forced to beg of their bitterest enemies. Nevertheless they were not deceived of their hopes. For the people of the Athenians, being magnanimous and humane, were not struck with dismay at the strength of the Thebans, but voted to help the Lacedaemonians, who were in danger of being enslaved, in full force. And at once, appointing Iphicrates general, they sent out the young men on the same day, being twelve thousand. Iphicrates, then, having his soldiers eager, advanced with the force in haste. 63.3. The Lacedaemonians, the enemy encamping on the borders of Laconia, themselves also in full force making their going out from Sparta, advanced against their opponents, humbled in the forces of their soldiers, but confident in the virtues of their souls. 63.4. The men of Epaminondas, seeing the country of the Lacedaemonians hard to invade, did not think it of advantage to make the invasion in a single such great force, but dividing themselves into four parts decided to make the onset at several places. 64.1. The first part, that of the Boeotians, made its march in the middle against the city called Sellasia, and made those dwelling there revolt from the Lacedaemonians. 64.2. The Argives, invading by the borders of the Tegeatid country, joined battle with those guarding the passes, and both slew the leader of the garrison, Alexander the Spartan, and slew of the others about two hundred, among whom were also the exiles of the Boeotians. 64.3. The third part, composed of the Arcadians and having the most soldiers, invaded the country called the Sciritis, which Ischolas, a man distinguished in valour and understanding, was guarding with many soldiers. This man, of the most notable soldiers, accomplished a heroic deed worthy of memory. 64.4. For seeing that because of the multitude of the enemy all who joined battle would be slain, he judged it unworthy of Sparta to leave the post in the passes, but that to save the soldiers would be useful to the fatherland; therefore, unexpectedly he provided for both, and zealously imitated the valour of King Leonidas at Thermopylae of old. 64.5. For having picked out the young men, these he sent to Sparta, to be useful to her who was in danger about the whole; while he himself, with the elders, guarding the post and slaying many of the enemy, surrounded by the Arcadians, was slain with all his men. 64.6. The Eleians, having the fourth part, and going through other regions that were open, came to Hellasia; for to this place all had been ordered to come. The whole force being gathered at Hellasia, they advanced against Sparta itself, ravaging at the same time and burning the country. 65.1. The Lacedaemonians, having kept Laconia unravaged for five hundred years, then seeing it laid waste by the enemy, did not endure, but, rushing forward in their wrath, leaped out of the city; being prevented by the elders from advancing too far from their fatherland, lest someone attack, they were persuaded to keep quiet and to provide safety for the city. 65.2. The men of Epaminondas coming down through Taygetus to the Eurotas, and crossing the river, which was violent in its stream in the winter season, the Lacedaemonians, seeing the force of their opponents thrown into confusion because of the difficulty of the crossing, took a fit opportunity for an attack, and leaving the women and children, and besides the aged, in the city to guard Sparta, they themselves, having arrayed the young men in full force, poured out against the enemy, and falling suddenly upon those crossing, made much slaughter. 65.3. The Boeotians and Arcadians defending and surrounding their opponents by their multitude, the Spartans, having slain many, returned to the city, having manifestly displayed their own bravery. 65.4. After this, the men of Epaminondas attacking the city with the whole force strikingly, the Spartans, having as helper the strength of the places, slew many of those who rashly forced their way; and at last the besiegers, bringing in every zeal, at first hoped to master Sparta by force; but when of those who forced their way some died and some were wounded, the men of Epaminondas recalled the soldiers by the trumpet, and themselves, coming up to the city, challenged the Spartans to battle, or ordered them to agree that they were inferior to the enemy. 65.5. The Spartans answering that, taking a fit opportunity, they would fight it out for the whole, they departed from the city. Having ravaged all Laconia and gathered a countless multitude of booty, they withdrew to Arcadia. 65.6. After this the Athenians, being late for the occasions, returned to Attica, having done nothing worthy of memory; but to the Lacedaemonians there came from the allies four thousand soldiers to help. Besides these, adding the Helots lately freed, a thousand, and of the Boeotian exiles two hundred, and besides sending for not a few from the nearby cities, they prepared a force a match for the enemy. Holding this together in mass and exercising it, they ever took more courage and prepared for the contest about the whole.

[119800] 66.1. Epaminondas, being by nature of great designs and reaching out for eternal glory, advised the Arcadians and the other allies to refound Messene, which had been many years desolate by the Lacedaemonians and had a favourable position against Sparta. All agreeing, he sought out the survivors of the Messenians, and enrolling such of the others as wished into the citizenship, he refounded Messene, making many its inhabitants. Allotting the country to them and rebuilding it, he restored a notable Greek city, and met with great acceptance among all men. 66.2. I think it not foreign, Messene having often been taken and razed, to run over from the beginning the things about it as in a summary. In antiquity, then, the descendants of Neleus and Nestor held it until the Trojan times, and after this Orestes the son of Agamemnon and his descendants until the return of the Heracleidae, and from this Cresphontes received the Messenian portion, and his descendants reigned over it for a time; later, the descendants of Cresphontes losing the kingdom, the Lacedaemonians became masters of it. 66.3. After this, Teleclus the king of the Lacedaemonians having died in a contest, the Messenians were subdued by the Lacedaemonians. This war they say lasted twenty years, the Lacedaemonians having sworn not to return to Sparta unless they took Messene. At that time it came to pass that those named the Partheniae were born and founded the city of the Tarentines. Later, the Messenians being slaves to the Lacedaemonians, Aristomenes persuaded the Messenians to revolt from the Spartans, and he did many evils to the Spartans, at which time also Tyrtaeus the poet was given by the Athenians as leader to the Spartans. 66.4. Some say that Aristomenes lived during the twenty-year war. Their last war occurred when a great earthquake had taken place; and Sparta being almost entirely thrown into confusion and becoming destitute of men, the survivors of the Messenians settled Ithome with the Helots who had revolted with them, Messene having been made desolate for many years. 66.5. Being unfortunate in all the wars, at last, becoming desolate, they settled at Naupactus, the Athenians having given them this city for a dwelling. And some of them were cast out into Cephallenia, and some settled in Sicily Messene, named from them. 66.6. And lastly, in the times in question, the Thebans, Epaminondas having persuaded them and gathered the Messenians from everywhere, settled Messene and restored to them their ancient country. Concerning Messene, then, so many and so great changes came to pass. 67.1. The Thebans, having accomplished all the aforesaid things in eighty-five days, and leaving a considerable guard of Messene, returned home. The Lacedaemonians, having unexpectedly got rid of the enemy, sent as envoys to Athens the most notable of the Spartans, and made the agreements about the leadership, so that the Athenians should rule the sea and the Lacedaemonians the land, and after this in both cities they made the leaderships common. 67.2. The Arcadians, providing Lycomedes as general, and giving him the men called the chosen, being five thousand, campaigned against Pellene in Laconia, and mastering the city by force slew the Lacedaemonian guards left in it, being more than three hundred, and enslaving the city and ravaging the country returned home, forestalling the help from the Lacedaemonians. 67.3. The Boeotians, the Thessalians sending for them for the freeing of the cities and the overthrow of the tyranny of Alexander of Pherae, sent out Pelopidas with a force into Thessaly, giving him instructions to manage the affairs in Thessaly for the advantage of the Boeotians. 67.4. He, coming to Larissa and finding the citadel garrisoned by Alexander the Macedonian, took it over, and going into Macedonia and making an alliance with Alexander the king of the Macedonians, received from him as a hostage his brother Philip, whom he sent to Thebes. Having managed the affairs in Thessaly as seemed to him advantageous to the Boeotians, he returned home.

[123877] 68.1. These things being done, the Arcadians and Argives and Eleians, conspiring together, resolved to campaign against the Lacedaemonians, and sending an embassy to the Boeotians persuaded them to share in the war. They, appointing Epaminondas leader with other boeotarchs, sent out soldiers, seven thousand foot and six hundred horse. The Athenians, learning that the Boeotian army was passing into the Peloponnese, sent out a force and as general over it Chabrias. 68.2. He, coming to Corinth and taking on soldiers also from the Megarians and Pellenians, and besides Corinthians, constituted an army of ten thousand men; after this, the Lacedaemonians and the other allies coming to Corinth, there were gathered in all not fewer than twenty thousand. 68.3. It seemed best to them, then, to fortify the passes and to prevent the Boeotians from invading the Peloponnese. Beginning from Cenchreae as far as Lechaeum, they cut off the place with palisades and deep trenches; the works being quickly completed both because of the multitude of hands and the eagerness of the men, they forestalled the Boeotians, having fortified every place. 68.4. Epaminondas, coming with the force, examined it, and perceiving that the place where the Lacedaemonians were keeping guard was the easiest to approach, at first challenged the enemy to battle, being almost three times their number in multitude; but when no one dared to come out beyond the fortification, but all defended from the palisade, he brought force against the enemy. 68.5. At every place, then, there were fierce assaults, but most of all against the Lacedaemonians, the places being easy of approach and hard to guard. A great rivalry occurring on both sides, Epaminondas, having with him the best of the Thebans, with difficulty forced the Lacedaemonians; and breaking through their guard and leading the force across, he passed into the Peloponnese, having accomplished a deed in no way inferior to those previously achieved. 69.1. Immediately marching against Troezen and Epidaurus, he ravaged the country, but was unable to master the cities because they had considerable garrisons; Sicyon, however, and Phlius and certain other cities, striking them with dismay, he brought over. Campaigning against Corinth, and the Corinthians coming out, conquering them in battle, he pursued them within the walls; but the Boeotians, lifted up by their success, and certain of them rashly daring to force their way through the gate into the city, the Corinthians, fearing, turned to their houses, while Chabrias the general of the Athenians, prudently and at the same time confidently withstanding, both cast them out of the city and laid low many of the Boeotians. 69.2. A rivalry arising, the Boeotians, arraying the whole force, advanced against Corinth strikingly, and Chabrias, taking up the Athenians, advanced out of the city, and seizing the commanding positions withstood the onset of the enemy. 69.3. The Boeotians, then, trusting in the strength of their bodies and the experience from continual wars, hoped by force to master the Athenians, but the men of Chabrias, fighting from commanding positions and many things being supplied from the city, some of those who forced their way they slew, others they wounded. 69.4. The Boeotians, having suffered much, but being able to accomplish nothing, made their withdrawal. Chabrias, then, admired for valour and generalship's understanding, in this manner got rid of the enemy. 70.1. From Sicily Celts and Iberians, two thousand, sailed to Corinth, sent out by Dionysius the tyrant to ally with the Lacedaemonians, having received their pay for five months. The Greeks, wishing to make trial of them, led them forward, and in the encounters and battles, they behaving bravely, many both of the Boeotians and of the allies were slain by them. Therefore, seeming to excel in dexterity and valour and having rendered many services, and being honoured by the Lacedaemonians, at the end of the summer they were sent out to Sicily.

[127910] 70.2. After this Philiscus, sent out by Artaxerxes the King, sailed to Greece, calling on the Greeks to settle their wars and to conclude a common peace. All the others gladly obeyed, but the Thebans, in accordance with their own principle bringing all Boeotia under one confederacy, were not admitted. The common peace being given up, Philiscus, leaving for the Lacedaemonians two thousand chosen mercenaries having received their pay, departed to Asia. 70.3. At the same time as these things were being done, Euphron the Sicyonian, distinguished in boldness and desperation, taking the Argives as cooperators, attempted a tyranny. Mastering his undertaking, he banished forty of the wealthiest of the Sicyonians, confiscating their properties, and becoming master of much money he gathered mercenaries and ruled the city. 71.1. In the archonship at Athens of Nausigenes, at Rome four military tribunes were appointed in place of the consuls, Lucius Papirius, Lucius Menenius, Servius Cornelius, Servius Sulpicius, and among the Eleians the hundred-and-third Olympiad was celebrated, in which Pythostratus the Athenian was victor in the stadion. In this year Ptolemy the Alorite, the son of Amyntas, treacherously slew Alexander his brother, and reigned over Macedonia three years. 71.2. In Boeotia Pelopidas, being a rival of Epaminondas in reputation in war, and seeing that he had advantageously arranged the affairs about the Peloponnese for the Boeotians, was eager to bring over the affairs outside the Peloponnese to the Thebans through himself. Taking Ismenias, a man his own friend and admired for virtue, he went to Thessaly. Coming to Alexander the tyrant of Pherae, he was unaccountably arrested together with Ismenias and given over to prison. 71.3. The Thebans being provoked at what had been done, and quickly sending out into Thessaly eight thousand hoplites and six hundred horse, Alexander, fearing, sent envoys to Athens about an alliance. To him immediately the people sent thirty ships and a thousand soldiers, of whom Autocles was general. 71.4. While this man was sailing round Euboea, the Thebans came to Thessaly. Alexander having gathered an infantry force and having many times more horse than the Boeotians, at first the Boeotians decided to settle the war by battle, having the Thessalians as cooperators; but when these abandoned them, and the Athenians and certain other allies came to Alexander, and food and drink and all else failed the Boeotians, the boeotarchs resolved to make their return home. 71.5. As they broke camp, and the march being through a plain country, Alexander followed with many horsemen and attacked those in the rearguard. Of the Boeotians some, being shot down continually, died, others fell in with wounds, and at last, being allowed neither to remain nor to advance, they fell into great helplessness, since the necessaries also were scarce. 71.6. They now despairing of their safety, Epaminondas, being a private man at that time, was appointed general by the soldiers. Immediately, picking out the light-armed and the horsemen, these he himself took, and being stationed in the rearguard, through these he held off the pursuing enemy and provided much safety for the hoplites leading the way; and making battles by turning back and using a skilful order, he saved the army. 71.7. Ever increasing his own good repute through his successes, he met with great acceptance both among the citizens and the allies. The Thebans, condemning those who had then been boeotarchs, fined them a sum of money. 72.1. The cause being sought, how such a man, being a private person, campaigned with those sent to Thessaly, the proper account of the explanation must be given. In the battle about Corinth Epaminondas, breaking through the guard of the Lacedaemonians on the outwork, and being able to slay many of the enemy, was content with the advantage and desisted from further battle. 72.2. A sufficient suspicion arising about him, as having spared the Lacedaemonians for the sake of a private favour, those who envied his reputation took an opportunity for a plausible slander. Bringing therefore against him a charge of treason, the multitude, provoked, removed him from the boeotarchy, and making him a private man sent him out with the others. But when by the outcomes he wiped out the slanders against himself, then the people restored him to his former good repute. 72.3. A little time later, a great battle occurred for the Lacedaemonians against the Arcadians, in which the Lacedaemonians conspicuously conquered. For after the defeat at Leuctra this was the first unexpected good fortune for them; for there fell of the Arcadians above ten thousand, and of the Lacedaemonians none. The priestesses of Dodona had foretold to them that this war would be tearless for the Lacedaemonians. 72.4. After the battle the Arcadians, fearing the invasions of the Lacedaemonians, founded on a certain strategic place the city named Megalopolis (the Great City), throwing together into it twenty villages of the Arcadians called Maenalians and Parrasians. And the affairs of the Greeks were in this state.

[133062] 73.1. In Sicily Dionysius the tyrant, having considerable forces, and seeing the Carthaginians not well disposed toward the war both because of the pestilential disease that had occurred among them and the revolt of the Libyans, resolved to campaign against them. Not having a notable pretext for the quarrel, he pretended that the Phoenicians in his dominion had set foot upon the country under him. 73.2. Having prepared thirty thousand foot, three thousand horse, three hundred triremes, and the supply fitting for this force, he invaded the country under the Carthaginians. He immediately brought over Selinus and Entella, and ravaging the whole country and becoming master of the city of the Erycini, he besieged Lilybaeum; but there being many soldiers in it, he raised the siege. 73.3. Hearing that the dockyards of the Carthaginians had been burned, and thinking that their whole fleet had been destroyed, he was contemptuous, and of his own triremes he sent the best hundred and thirty to the harbour of the Erycini, and the rest he sent all to Syracuse. 73.4. The Carthaginians, unexpectedly manning two hundred ships, sailed against those moored in the harbour of the Erycini; the attack being unexpected, they carried off most of the triremes. After this, winter setting in, making a truce, they parted to their own cities, each side. 73.5. A little time later Dionysius, falling into sickness, died, having ruled thirty-eight years; and his son Dionysius, succeeding to the rule, was tyrant twelve years. 74.1. It is not foreign to the present history to relate both the causes of his death and the things that befell this ruler about the end of his life. Dionysius, then, having produced a tragedy at Athens at the Lenaea and won, one of those who sang in the chorus, supposing he would be brilliantly honoured if he were the first to announce the victory, sailed to Corinth. Finding there a ship sailing to Sicily and transferring to it, he had favouring winds, and sailing to Syracuse quickly announced the victory to the tyrant. 74.2. Dionysius honoured this man, and himself became overjoyed, and sacrificing thank-offerings to the gods held drinking-parties and great feasts. Entertaining his friends brilliantly, and at the drinking giving himself rather ambitiously to drunkenness, he fell into a more severe sickness because of the quantity of the liquids he had drunk down. 74.3. Having from the gods an oracle that he would die when he should prevail over his betters, he referred the oracle to the Carthaginians, supposing them to be his betters. Therefore, having often made war on them, he was accustomed in his victories to withdraw and willingly to be defeated, that he might not seem to have become better than the stronger. 74.4. Nevertheless he was unable by his cunning to outwit the necessity from fate, but being a bad poet and judged at Athens he conquered the better poets. Reasonably, then, according to the oracle, through prevailing over his betters he had the end of his life follow. 74.5. Dionysius the younger, succeeding to the tyranny, first gathering the multitude into an assembly, exhorted them with appropriate speeches to keep their hereditary goodwill toward him, then, having buried his father magnificently in the citadel by the gates called the Royal, he secured the affairs of his rule.

[136405] 75.1. In the archonship at Athens of Polyzelus, in Rome there occurred anarchy because of certain political factions, and in Greece Alexander the tyrant of Pherae in Thessaly, having brought certain charges against the city of the Scotussaeans, called them to an assembly, and surrounding them with all his mercenaries slaughtered them, and casting the bodies of the dead into the trench before the walls, plundered the city. 75.2. Epaminondas the Theban, invading the Peloponnese with a force, brought over the Achaeans and certain other cities, and freed Dyme and Naupactus and Calydon, which was garrisoned by the Achaeans. The Boeotians campaigned also into Thessaly, and recovered Pelopidas from Alexander the tyrant of Pherae. 75.3. The Phliasians being warred upon by the Argives, Chares, sent by the Athenians as general with a force, helped; conquering the Argives in two battles and securing safety for the Phliasians, he returned to Athens. 76.1. The annual period having passed, at Athens the archon was Cephisodorus, and at Rome the people appointed four military tribunes in place of the consuls, Lucius Furius, Paulus Manlius, Servius Sulpicius, Servius Cornelius. In this year Themison the tyrant of Eretria seized Oropus. This city, being the Athenians', he lost unaccountably; for when the Athenians campaigned against him and far surpassed him in forces, the Thebans, coming to his aid and receiving the city as a trust, did not give it back. 76.2. At the same time as these things were being done, the Coans removed to the city now inhabited and constructed it considerable; for a multitude of men was gathered into it, and costly walls were built and a considerable harbour. From these times it ever increased more both in public revenues and in the wealth of private persons, and in sum became a rival to the foremost cities. 76.3. At the same time as these things were being done, the King of the Persians, sending envoys, persuaded the Greeks to settle their wars and to conclude a common peace with one another. Therefore the war called both the Laconian and the Boeotian was dissolved, having lasted more than five years, taking its beginning from the events at Leuctra. 76.4. There existed at these times men worthy of memory for education, Isocrates the orator and his pupils, and Aristotle the philosopher, and besides Anaximenes of Lampsacus and Plato the Athenian, and besides, of the Pythagorean philosophers the last, and Xenophon who wrote the histories, being in extreme old age; for he mentions the death of Epaminondas which occurred a little time later; and Aristippus and Antisthenes, and besides these Aeschines of Sphettus the Socratic.

[139084] 77.1. In the archonship at Athens of Chion, at Rome military tribunes were appointed in place of the consuls, Quintus Servilius and Gaius Vetorius and Aulus Cornelius, and besides these Marcus Cornelius and Marcus Fabius. In this year, there being peace throughout all Greece, again beginnings of wars arose for certain of the cities and an unaccountable innovation of new affairs. For the exiles of the Arcadians, setting out from Elis, seized in the country called Triphylia a strong stronghold, which is named Lasion. 77.2. For many years the Arcadians and Eleians had disputed about Triphylia, and according to the superiority of each in the changes they alternately mastered the country; but at the times in question, the Arcadians holding Triphylia, the Eleians, with the pretext of the exiles, took it away from the Arcadians. 77.3. Therefore the Arcadians, being provoked, at first, sending out envoys, demanded back the stronghold; but when no one heeded them, they sent for an alliance from the Athenians and with this campaigned against Lasion. The Eleians coming to the aid of the exiles, a battle occurred near Lasion, and the Arcadians being many times more, the Eleians were defeated and lost more than two hundred soldiers. 77.4. This being the beginning of the war, it came to pass that the difference advanced further for the Arcadians and the Eleians; for immediately the Arcadians, lifted up by their advantage, campaigned against Elis, and took the cities Margana and Cronion, and besides Cyparissia and Coryphasium. 77.5. At the same time as these things were being done, in Macedonia Ptolemy the Alorite was treacherously slain by his brother Perdiccas, having reigned three years; and Perdiccas, succeeding to the rule, reigned over Macedonia five years. 78.1. In the archonship at Athens of Timocrates, at Rome three military tribunes were appointed in place of the consuls, Titus Quinctius and Servius Cornelius and Servius Sulpicius, and the Olympiad was celebrated by the Pisatans and Arcadians, the hundred-and-fourth, in which Phocides the Athenian was victor in the stadion. 78.2. In this year the Pisatans, renewing the ancient dignity of their fatherland and using certain mythical and ancient proofs, declared that the conduct of the Olympic festival belonged to them. Judging the present occasion fit to dispute the contest, they made an alliance with the Arcadians, who were enemies of the Eleians; and taking these as fellow-fighters, they campaigned against the Eleians who were just then holding the contest. 78.3. The Eleians withstanding in full force, a fierce battle took place, the Greeks present at the festival, crowned and at leisure, watching the battle without danger and signalling the bravery on each side. At last the Pisatans, conquering, held the contest, and this Olympiad the Eleians did not afterward record, because it seemed to have been conducted by force and unjustly. 78.4. At the same time as these things were being done, Epaminondas the Theban, having the greatest dignity of the citizens, an assembly being gathered, discoursed to the citizens, urging them to lay hold of the leadership by sea. Setting forth a speech long pondered, he showed this undertaking to be both advantageous and possible, both bringing forward other things and that for those who prevail on land it is easy to acquire the rule of the sea; for the Athenians too, in the war against Xerxes, manning two hundred ships of their own, had been subject to the Lacedaemonians who furnished ten. Having appropriately discoursed many other things toward this purpose, he persuaded the Thebans to lay hold of the rule by sea.

[142742] 79.1. Immediately, then, the people voted to build a hundred triremes and dockyards equal in number to these, and to urge the Rhodians and Chians and Byzantines to help the undertakings. He himself, sent out with a force to the aforesaid cities, struck dismay into Laches the general of the Athenians, who had a considerable fleet and had been sent to hinder the Thebans, and compelling him to sail away, made the cities the Thebans' own. 79.2. If, then, this man had lived a longer time, by common acknowledgement the Thebans would have acquired, in addition to the leadership by land, the rule of the sea; but since a little time later, in the battle about Mantinea, having won for his fatherland a most brilliant victory, he died heroically, immediately also the affairs of the Thebans died together with his death. But concerning these things we shall set forth the particulars accurately a little later. 79.3. At that time it seemed best to the Thebans to campaign against Orchomenus for some such causes as these. Certain of the exiles, wishing to change the constitution at Thebes into an aristocratic order, persuaded the horsemen of the Orchomenians, being three hundred, to share in the undertaking. 79.4. These, being accustomed to meet with the Thebans on an appointed day for the review under arms, agreed to make the attack on this. Many others sharing in the design and rushing forward, they met at the appointed time. 79.5. Those who had constituted the deed, repenting, made the attack known to the boeotarchs, betraying their fellow-conspirators, and through this service procured for themselves safety. The magistrates seizing the horsemen of the Orchomenians and bringing them into the assembly, the people voted to slaughter these and to enslave the Orchomenians and raze the city. For from ancient times the Thebans were ill disposed toward these, having paid tribute to the Minyae in the heroic times, and later having been freed by Heracles. 79.6. The Thebans, then, thinking they had an opportunity and having taken plausible pretexts for vengeance, campaigned against Orchomenus; mastering the city, they slew the men, and enslaved the children and women. 80.1. About the same times the Thessalians, being at war with Alexander the tyrant of Pherae, and being defeated in several battles and having lost many of their soldiers, sent envoys to the Thebans, asking them to help them and to send out Pelopidas as their general. For they knew this man, because of the arrest by Alexander, to be most ill disposed toward the ruler, and at the same time distinguished in valour and renowned for generalship's understanding. 80.2. The common assembly of the Boeotians being gathered, and the envoys having discoursed about the things of which they had instructions, the Boeotians granted everything to the Thessalians, and giving to Pelopidas up to seven thousand soldiers, ordered him to help quickly those who asked; but as Pelopidas was quickly going out with the force, it came to pass that the sun was eclipsed. 80.3. Many being suspicious of what had occurred, certain of the seers declared that because of the going out of the soldiers the sun of the city had been eclipsed. And through these words foretelling the death of Pelopidas, nonetheless Pelopidas broke camp for the campaign, being led by fate. 80.4. When he came to Thessaly and found Alexander having forestalled him in occupying the commanding positions and having more than twenty thousand soldiers, he encamped against the enemy, and taking on allies from the Thessalians joined battle with his opponents. 80.5. Alexander, because of the superiority of the places, having the advantage, Pelopidas, eager to decide the battle through his own valour, rushed against Alexander himself. The ruler withstanding with his chosen men, a fierce battle took place, in which Pelopidas, fighting bravely, strewed all the place about him with corpses; and at last, ending the danger and routing the enemy, he won the victory, but lost his own life, falling in with many wounds and giving up his life heroically.

[146833] 80.6. Alexander, defeated in a second battle and crushed entirely, was compelled by agreement to give back to the Thessalians the cities he had subdued, and to deliver over the Magnetes and the Phthiotic Achaeans to the Boeotians, and for the rest, ruling Pherae alone, to be an ally to the Boeotians. 81.1. The Thebans, having carried off a renowned victory, said to all that they had been defeated because of the death of Pelopidas; for having lost a considerable man, they reasonably judged the victory to be less than the life of Pelopidas. For he had rendered many and great services to his fatherland, and contributed most to the increase of the Thebans. For in the return of the exiles, in which they recovered the Cadmeia, by common acknowledgement all assign to him the first place in the success. And this success came to be the cause of all the goods that occurred afterward. 81.2. In the battle about Tegyra Pelopidas alone of the boeotarchs conquered the Lacedaemonians, who were strongest of the Greeks, when, because of the magnitude of the victory, the Thebans first set up a trophy over the Lacedaemonians. In the battle at Leuctra he led the sacred band, with which, charging first against the Spartans, he became the author of the victory. In the campaigns against Lacedaemon he led seventy thousand, and by Sparta itself he set up a trophy over the Lacedaemonians, who all the time before had been unravaged. 81.3. Sending an embassy to the King of the Persians, in the common agreements he secured Messene privately, which, being desolate for three hundred years, the Thebans restored. At the end, fighting it out against Alexander, who had a force many times greater, he not only conspicuously conquered, but also had a death renowned for valour. 81.4. Toward the citizens he was so well disposed that from the return of the exiles to Thebes until his own death he continued boeotarch all the time, no other of the citizens having been deemed worthy of this honour. Pelopidas, then, having been deemed worthy of acceptance by all because of his own virtue, let him have also from us the praise through history. 81.5. About the same times Clearchus, being by descent from Heraclea on the Pontus, attempted a tyranny; mastering his undertaking, he emulated the way of life of Dionysius the tyrant of the Syracusans, and being tyrant of the Heracleotes ruled conspicuously twelve years. 81.6. At the same time as these things were being done, Timotheus the general of the Athenians, having an infantry and naval force, besieged and took Torone and Potidaea, and helped the Cyzicenes, who were being besieged.

[149462] 82.1. This year having passed, at Athens the archon was Charicleides, and at Rome were appointed as consuls Lucius Aemilius Mamercus and Lucius Sextius Lateranus. In this year the Arcadians with the Pisatans had jointly held the contest of the Olympics, and were masters of the temple and the money in it. The Mantineans having taken into their private uses not a few of the dedications, those who had committed the lawlessness were eager to keep on the war against the Eleians, that they might not in peace give an account of what had been spent. 82.2. The other Arcadians wishing to conclude the peace, they stirred up factions against their countrymen. Two parties arising, it came to pass that the one had the Tegeates as leaders, the other the Mantineans. 82.3. The difference being greatly increased, they came to the decision by arms, and the Tegeates, sending an embassy to the Boeotians, persuaded them to help; the Boeotians, appointing Epaminondas general and giving him a considerable force, sent him out to help the Tegeates. 82.4. The Mantineans, struck with dismay at the force from Boeotia and the reputation of Epaminondas, sending envoys to the bitterest enemies of the Boeotians, the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, persuaded them to ally themselves. Both quickly sending strong forces, many and great contests arose in the Peloponnese. 82.5. Immediately, then, the Lacedaemonians, dwelling near, campaigned into Arcadia, while Epaminondas at this time, advancing with the force and being not far from Mantinea, learned from the natives that the Lacedaemonians in full force were ravaging the country of the Tegeates. 82.6. Supposing, then, that Sparta was empty of soldiers, he undertook to accomplish some great thing, but had fortune working against him. For he himself set out by night against Sparta, but the king of the Lacedaemonians, Agis, suspecting the quickness of wit of Epaminondas, prudently guessed the future, and sent certain Cretan day-runners, through whom, forestalling Epaminondas, he made known to those left in Sparta that the Boeotians would shortly come against Lacedaemon to plunder the city, and that he himself, as quickly as he could, would come with the force to help his fatherland. He bade those in Sparta guard the city, struck with dismay at nothing; for quickly he would appear and help. 83.1. The Cretans quickly doing what was ordered, unexpectedly the Lacedaemonians escaped the capture of their fatherland; for, the attack not being foretold, Epaminondas would have burst into Sparta unobserved. The device of both generals one might justly approve, but might consider the generalship of the Laconian the more prudent. 83.2. Nevertheless, Epaminondas, having stayed awake the whole night and hastily accomplished the distance of the road, at daybreak advanced against Sparta. Agesilaus, who had been left on guard, having a little before heard the particulars from the Cretans, immediately with much zeal took care of the city. 83.3. The eldest of the boys and the aged he sent up onto the roofs of the houses, and ordered them from these to defend against those who forced their way into the city, while he himself, arraying those in the prime of their ages, divided them into the difficult places and passes before the city, and blocking all the places able to receive a passage, awaited the onset of the enemy. 83.4. Epaminondas, dividing the soldiers into several parts and falling upon every place at the same time, when he saw the array of the Spartans, immediately knew that the deed had been betrayed; nevertheless, fighting against all in detail and being at a disadvantage in the difficult places, he came to close quarters. 83.5. Suffering and doing much, he did not desist from his ambition, until the army of the Lacedaemonians returned to Sparta; many coming to the aid of the besieged, and night coming on, he raised the siege. 84.1. Learning from the prisoners that the Mantineans in full force were present helping the Lacedaemonians, then, withdrawing a little from the city, he encamped; and ordering them to make their supper, leaving some of the horsemen, he ordered these until the morning watch to burn fires in the camp, while he himself, setting out with the force, hastened suddenly to fall upon those left in Mantinea. 84.2. On the next day, having accomplished a long road, he suddenly and unexpectedly dashed against the Mantineans, yet did not master his undertaking, although he had forethought everything by generalship, but, having fortune working against him, unexpectedly lost the victory. For just as he was drawing near the city, empty of men, there came to the other side of Mantinea the soldiers sent by the Athenians for the alliance, being six thousand, having as general Hegesileus, a man at that time praised among the citizens. This man, bringing the sufficient men into the city, drew up the rest of the force as if to be decided by battle. 84.3. Immediately also the Lacedaemonians and Mantineans appeared, and all prepared for the decision about the whole and sent for their allies from everywhere. 84.4. To the Mantineans, then, there came to help the Eleians and Lacedaemonians and Athenians and certain others, of whom the whole number was foot more than twenty thousand, and horse about two thousand; while with the Tegeates were allied the most and best of the Arcadians and Achaeans and Boeotians and Argives and certain others of the Peloponnesians and of the allies from outside; and all were gathered, foot above thirty thousand, and horse not fewer than three thousand.

[155046] 85.1. Both sides eagerly going down to the contest about the whole, and the armies being drawn up, the seers on both sides, having sacrificed, declared that the victory was foreshown by the gods. 85.2. In the array the Mantineans with the other Arcadians held the right wing, having as comrades and fellow-fighters the Lacedaemonians, and continuous with these were the Eleians and Achaeans, and of the others the inferior held the middle array; the left wing the Athenians filled. The Thebans themselves were stationed on the left wing, having the Arcadians as comrades, and the right they gave to the Argives; the rest of the multitude filled the middle array, Euboeans and Locrians and Sicyonians, and besides these Messenians and Malians and Aenianians, and besides Thessalians and the rest of the allies. The horsemen on each of the wings both sides divided. 85.3. The armies being arrayed in this manner, when they were now near one another, the trumpets signalled the battle-cry, and the forces raised the war-shout and by the magnitude of the shout signalled the victory. And at first they constituted a cavalry battle on the wings, in which they surpassed one another in their rivalries. 85.4. For the horsemen of the Athenians, riding against those of the Thebans, were worsted, not so much by the excellences of the horses nor by their own courage nor by their experience in horsemanship—for in all these the cavalry of the Athenians was not inferior—but in the multitude and equipment of the light-armed and in the generalship's array they fell far behind their opponents. For they themselves had few javelin-throwers, while the Thebans had three times as many slingers and javelin-throwers sent from the regions about Thessaly. 85.5. These, having from childhood especially emulated the battle in these, were accustomed to make a great turn in battles because of their experience in them. Therefore the Athenians, being wounded by the light-armed and worn down by their opponents, all turned to flight. 85.6. Making their flight outside the wings, they corrected the defeat; for, in their withdrawal, they at once did not throw their own phalanx into disorder, and at the same time, falling in with Euboeans and certain mercenaries sent to seize the nearby hills, joining battle with them they slew them all. 85.7. The horsemen of the Thebans did not pursue the fleeing, but riding against the phalanx of those arrayed against them, were ambitious to outflank the infantry. A fierce battle taking place, and the Athenians being worn down and rushing to flight, the cavalry-commander of the Eleians, stationed in the rearguard, came to the aid of the fleeing, and laying low many of the Boeotians turned the battle the other way. 85.8. The horsemen of the Eleians, then, having in this manner appeared on the left wing, corrected the defeat that had occurred to the allies; while on the other wing, the horsemen dashing against one another, the battle remained for a brief time even, but after this, through the multitude and the valour of the Boeotian and Thessalian horsemen, those with the Mantineans were forced back, and losing many fled to their own phalanx. 86.1. The cavalry battle on both sides, then, had such an end; but the infantry forces, when they came to close quarters with the enemy, constituted great and wonderful contests. For never, when Greeks fought against Greeks, was so great a multitude of men arrayed, nor were there leaders more notable in their dignities, nor men more capable in displaying their bravery in dangers. 86.2. For those most able to fight on foot at the times in question, the Boeotians and Lacedaemonians, standing against one another in the array, first joined battle, making no sparing of life. And at first striking one another with their spears, and because of the density of the blows breaking most of them, they came to the contest of the sword. 86.3. Grappling with their bodies and working all manner of dispositions of wounds, they did not in their fury cease; and for a long time holding out in the terrors, because of the excess of the bravery on both sides, the battle took no turn; for each, despising to suffer anything terrible, and eager to do something brilliant, nobly received death for the sake of glory. 86.4. The battle being fierce for a long time and the danger taking no turn, Epaminondas, supposing that the victory required his own valour, resolved to decide the danger through himself. Immediately, then, taking up the best and with these locking shields together, he charged into the midst of the enemy; leading the way of his battalion, and first hurling his javelin, he struck the leader of the Lacedaemonians. 86.5. Immediately, as the others too came to close quarters, slaying some and striking dismay into others, he broke through the phalanx of the enemy. The Lacedaemonians, struck with dismay at the dignity of Epaminondas and the weight of the battalion about him, withdrew from the battle; the Boeotians pressing upon them and ever slaying the hindmost, a multitude of corpses was heaped up.

[160136] 87.1. The Lacedaemonians, seeing Epaminondas pressing forward too eagerly in his fury, ran together against him. Many and thick missiles being hurled, some he avoided, some he warded off, and some, pulling out of his body, with these he defended against the assailants. Fighting heroically for the victory, he received a mortal blow in the breast. The spear being broken, and the iron left in his body, he immediately fell, overcome by the blow. A rivalry arising about the body, and many being slain on both sides, with difficulty the Thebans, surpassing in the strength of their bodies, wore down the Lacedaemonians. 87.2. A flight occurring, the Boeotians, pursuing for a brief time, turned back, considering it most necessary to become masters of the dead. The trumpeters recalling the soldiers, all desisted from the battle, and both sides, setting up trophies, disputed the victory. 87.3. For the Athenians, having conquered the Euboeans and mercenaries about the hill, were masters of the dead, while the Boeotians, having defeated the Lacedaemonians by force and being masters of those who had fallen, assigned the victory to themselves. 87.4. For some time, then, neither side sent an embassy about the taking up of the dead, lest they should seem to give up the first place; but after this, the Lacedaemonians first sending a herald about the taking up of the dead, both sides buried their own. 87.5. Epaminondas, still living, was carried to the camp, and the physicians who were summoned declaring that wholly, when the spear was drawn out of his breast, it would come to pass that death would follow, he made the end of his life most courageously. 87.6. For first, summoning his shield-bearer, he asked whether he had saved the shield. He saying yes and placing it before his sight, he asked again which side had conquered. The boy declaring that the Boeotians had conquered, "It is time," he said, "to die," and ordered them to draw out the spear. His friends present crying out, and one of them saying, "You die childless, Epaminondas," and weeping, "No, by Zeus," he said, "but I leave behind two daughters, the victory at Leuctra and that at Mantinea." And the spear being drawn out, without any disturbance he breathed his last. 88.1. We, being accustomed to add to the ends of good men their own praise, in no way think it fitting to pass over unmarked the death of so great a man. For he seems to me to have surpassed not only those of his own time in generalship's understanding and experience, but besides this in fairness and magnanimity. 88.2. For during the age of this man there have been notable men, Pelopidas the Theban and Timotheus and Conon, and besides Chabrias and Iphicrates the Athenians, and besides these Agesilaus the Spartan, a little earlier in time; and in the times before, in the days of the Median and before the Persian times, Solon and Themistocles and Miltiades, and besides Cimon and Myronides and Pericles and certain others among the Athenians, and in Sicily Gelon the son of Deinomenes and certain others. 88.3. But nevertheless, if one should compare the virtues of these with the generalship and reputation of Epaminondas, one would find the virtue about Epaminondas far surpassing. For in each of the others one would find a single superiority of reputation, but in this man all the virtues gathered. For in strength of body and cleverness of speech, and besides in brilliance of soul and hatred of money and fairness, and the greatest thing, in valour and generalship's understanding, he far excelled all. 88.4. Therefore his fatherland, while he lived, acquired the leadership of Greece, but at his death was deprived of it and made trial of an ever-worsening change, and at last, through the folly of its leaders, made trial of enslavement and razing. Epaminondas, then, having a virtue renowned among all, met with such an end of life.

[164032] 89.1. The Greeks, after the battle having the victory disputed, and being matched in bravery, and besides worn down by the continuity of the dangers, were reconciled with one another. Concluding a common peace and alliance, they ranged in the alliance also the Messenians. 89.2. The Lacedaemonians, because of their irreconcilable estrangement toward these, did not choose to share in the treaties, and alone of the Greeks remained excluded from the treaty. 89.3. Of the historians, Xenophon the Athenian closed his work on Greek affairs at this year, at the death of Epaminondas; and Anaximenes of Lampsacus wrote the first of his Greek histories, beginning from theogony and from the first race of men, and closed at the battle of Mantinea and the death of Epaminondas; he embraced almost all the deeds both of the Greeks and barbarians in twelve books. And Philistus thus closed his work concerning Dionysius the younger, traversing five years in two books. 90.1. In the archonship at Athens of Molon, at Rome were appointed as consuls Lucius Genucius and Quintus Servilius. In this year those dwelling on the coast of Asia revolted from the Persians, and certain of the satraps and generals, rising up, brought war upon Artaxerxes. 90.2. Likewise to these also Tachos the king of the Egyptians, resolving to make war on the Persians, both constructed ships and gathered infantry forces. Enlisting many mercenaries from the Greek cities, he persuaded also the Lacedaemonians to ally; for the Spartans were ill disposed toward Artaxerxes because the Messenians, like the other Greeks, had been ranged by the King in the common peace. So great a concourse occurring against the Persians, the King too prepared the things for the war. 90.3. For at the same time he had to make war both against the king of the Egyptians and against the Greek cities in Asia and the Lacedaemonians and their allied satraps and generals, who ruled the maritime regions and had agreed on a common undertaking; of whom the most notable were Ariobarzanes the satrap of Phrygia, who, Mithridates having died, had become master of his kingdom; Mausolus ruling Caria and master of many strongholds and notable cities, of which the hearth and mother-city was Halicarnassus, having a considerable citadel and the royal seat of Caria; and besides these Orontes the satrap of Mysia, and Autophradates of Lydia; and of the Ionians, besides, Lycians and Pisidians and Pamphylians and Cilicians, and besides Syrians and Phoenicians and almost all the maritime peoples. 90.4. So great a revolt occurring, half the revenues of the King had been cut off, and the rest was not sufficient for the needs of the war. 91.1. Those who had revolted from the King chose Orontes as general for the management of the whole. He, taking over the command and money for enlistment, the annual pay for twenty thousand soldiers, became a betrayer of those who trusted him. For supposing that from the King he would obtain great gifts and would take over the satrapy of the whole coast if he should hand over the rebels to the Persians, first he seized those who had brought the money and sent them to Artaxerxes, and after this he handed over many of the cities and the enlisted soldiers to the leaders sent by the King. 91.2. Likewise to this also in Cappadocia there occurred a betrayal, in which something peculiar and paradoxical came to pass. For Artabazus the general of the King invading Cappadocia with a large force, the satrap of this country, Datames, encamped against him, having gathered many horsemen and having twenty thousand mercenary foot campaigning with him; 91.3. but the son-in-law of Datames, leading the horsemen, wishing to lay up a favour and at the same time providing for his own safety, revolting by night with the horsemen, rode off to the enemy, having agreed with Artabazus the day before about the betrayal. 91.4. Datames, exhorting the mercenaries and promising gifts, set out against the rebels. Finding them already coming to close quarters with the enemy, he himself, falling on together with the men of Artabazus and the horsemen, slew those who came to close quarters. 91.5. Artabazus, at first not knowing the truth, but supposing the man who had revolted from Datames to be making a counter-betrayal, ordered his own men to slay the approaching horsemen. Mithrobarzanes, caught in the middle, the one side defending against him as a traitor and the other punishing him as a counter-traitor, was in helplessness; the helplessness not allowing deliberation, he turned to fighting, and fighting against both made much slaughter. At last, more than ten thousand being slain, Datames, routing the survivors and slaying many, recalled by the trumpet the pursuing soldiers. 91.6. Of the surviving horsemen, some, withdrawing to Datames, asked to obtain pardon, while the rest kept quiet, having nowhere to turn, and at last, being about five hundred, surrounded by Datames, were shot down. 91.7. Datames, then, admired before for generalship, then had the more renowned both his valour and his understanding in generalship; but the King Artaxerxes, learning the generalship of Datames and eager to make away with him, treacherously slew him through a plot.

[169273] 92.1. At the same time as these things were being done, Rheomithres, sent by the rebels to Egypt to King Tachos, and receiving five hundred talents of silver and fifty warships, sailed in Asia to the place called Leucae. Sending for to this city many of the leaders of the rebels, these he seized and bound and sent up to Artaxerxes, while he himself, having become a rebel, by the gifts from his betrayal settled his affairs with the King. 92.2. In Egypt Tachos the king, having prepared the things for the war, had two hundred triremes lavishly adorned, and chosen mercenaries from Greece, ten thousand, and apart from these eighty thousand Egyptian infantry soldiers. The command of the mercenaries he gave to Agesilaus the Spartan, sent by the Lacedaemonians for the alliance with a thousand hoplites, and able to lead soldiers and admired both for valour and generalship's understanding; 92.3. and the generalship of the fleet he entrusted to Chabrias the Athenian, not sent publicly by his fatherland, but privately persuaded by the king to campaign with him. He himself, having the command of the Egyptians and being general of the whole force, did not heed Agesilaus, who advised remaining in Egypt and managing the war through his generals, although he advised well. For the force having advanced further and encamping about Phoenicia, the general appointed over Egypt revolted from the king, and sending word to the king's son Nectanebos and persuading him to lay hold of the kingdom in Egypt, kindled a great war; 92.4. for Nectanebos, appointed by the king leader of the soldiers from Egypt, and sent from Phoenicia to besiege the cities in Syria, becoming agreeable to the designs of his father, urging the leaders by gifts and the soldiers by promises, persuaded them to become fellow-fighters. 92.5. At last, Egypt being seized by the rebels, Tachos, struck with dismay, dared to go up through Arabia to the King, and asked to be given pardon for his offences; and Artaxerxes not only released him from the charges, but also appointed him general of the war against the Egyptians. 93.1. A little later the King of the Persians died, having ruled forty-three years, and the kingdom was succeeded by Ochus, who was renamed Artaxerxes, and he reigned twenty-three years; for, Artaxerxes having reigned nobly and become wholly peaceful and fortunate, they renamed those who reigned after him and ordered them to have his appellation. 93.2. King Tachos having returned to Agesilaus and his men, Nectanebos, having gathered more than ten myriads of soldiers, came against Tachos, and challenged him to fight it out for the kingdom. Agesilaus, seeing the king struck with dismay and not daring to risk it, exhorted him to take courage; for the victory comes not to those superior in multitude, but to those first in bravery; but he not heeding, Agesilaus was compelled to make his withdrawal with him to a certain large city. 93.3. The Egyptians at first besieged those shut up; but when they lost many in the assaults on the walls, they enclosed the city with a wall and a trench. The works being quickly completed because of the multitude of hands, and the provisions being exhausted, Tachos despaired of safety, but Agesilaus, exhorting the soldiers and attacking the enemy by night, unexpectedly saved all the soldiers. 93.4. The Egyptians pursuing, and the places being level, the Egyptians supposed that by their multitude they had surrounded the enemy and would utterly destroy all; but Agesilaus, seizing a place which had on each side an artificial canal of a river, awaited the onset of the enemy. 93.5. Arraying the force appropriately to the places, and fortifying the army by the streams of the river, he joined battle. The multitude of the Egyptians being useless, the Greeks, surpassing in their virtues, slew many of the Egyptians and forced the rest to flee. 93.6. After this Tachos easily recovered the kingdom in Egypt, and Agesilaus, as alone having set right the kingdom, was honoured with fitting gifts. Returning to his fatherland through Cyrene, he died, and his body being conveyed in honey to Sparta, he obtained royal burial and honour. And the affairs in Asia advanced up to this point in this year. 94.1. In the Peloponnese, a common peace having come for the Arcadians after the battle at Mantinea, they remained by their oaths only a year and again established the war. For in the oaths it had been written that each should depart to his own fatherland after the battle, but into Megalopolis the surrounding cities had been removed and were bearing ill the removal from their fatherland. Therefore, when these returned to their former cities, the Megalopolitans tried to compel them to leave their fatherlands. 94.2. A difference arising for this cause, those from the small towns asked the Mantineans and certain of the other Arcadians to help them, and besides the Eleians and the others who had shared in the alliance with the Mantineans; while the Megalopolitans called upon the Thebans to ally themselves. These quickly sent three thousand hoplites and three hundred horse, of whom Pammenes had the generalship. 94.3. He, coming to Megalopolis, and of the small towns plundering some and striking dismay into others, compelled them to remove to Megalopolis. And the affairs about the union of the cities, having come to such a degree of disturbance, met with a settlement as far as was possible. 94.4. Of the historians, Athanas the Syracusan, beginning from here the deeds about Dion, wrote thirteen books, and in one book took up beforehand the unrecorded time of seven years from the work of Philistus, and traversing the deeds in summary made his history continuous.

[174989] 95.1. In the archonship at Athens of Nicophemus, the consular office at Rome was held by Gaius Sulpicius and Gaius Licinius. In this year Alexander the tyrant of Pherae, sending piratical ships against the Cyclades islands, took some by siege and gained possession of many persons, and, disembarking mercenary soldiers at Peparethos, besieged the city. 95.2. The Athenians coming to the aid of the Peparethians, and leaving Leosthenes as general, he attacked the Athenians; these happened to be watching those of Alexander's soldiers staying at Panormus. The men of the ruler attacking unexpectedly, a paradoxical success came about for Alexander. For not only did he save those sent to Panormus from the greatest dangers, but he also took five Attic triremes and one Peparethian, and gained possession of six hundred persons. 95.3. The Athenians, provoked, condemned Leosthenes to death as a traitor and confiscated his property, and choosing Chares general and giving him a naval force, sent him out. He continued, on the one hand being on his guard against the enemy, and on the other wronging the allies. For sailing to Corcyra, an allied city, he stirred up great factions in it, from which it came to pass that there were many slaughters and plunderings, through which it happened that the people of the Athenians were slandered among the allies. Chares, then, committing other such lawless deeds, accomplished nothing good, but slanders for his fatherland. 95.4. Of the historians, Dionysodorus and Anaxis the Boeotians closed their works on Greek history at this year. We, having traversed the deeds before Philip the king, in accordance with our purpose at the beginning conclude this book here, and the following one, beginning from the accession of Philip to the kingdom, we shall go through all the deeds of this king down to his death, including also the other deeds that occurred in the known parts of the inhabited world.