WORK: Antiquitates Romanae  (slug: dionysius-of-halicarnass-antiquitates-romanae-97af98)

CHAPTER: 10-book-10



[110266] 45.6. Having answered the consul thus and wept and greeted all his familiars, he went off leading the eight hundred men, downcast and in tears as men going to death; and all the rest of the army too took the matter with pity, as no longer to see the men.

[110522] 46.1. But Siccius, turning to another road, not the one Romilius supposed, led them along the flank of the mountain. Then—for there was a thicket with deep wood—leading the men into this, he halts and says: By the commander we have been sent, as you see, to perish; for he thought we would go by the flank road, ascending which it was impossible not to be seen by the enemy. But I will lead you by a road unseen by the foe, and I have much hope of finding some paths which will lead us down upon the camp from above; and you have good hopes.

[111065] 46.2. Saying this, he led through the thicket, and having gone a long way, he finds, by some providence, a man departing from a field somewhere, whom, ordering the youngest to seize, he makes guide of the road. And he, leading them around the mountain, after much time, sets them on the hill lying near the camp,

[111379] 46.3. from which there was a swift and easy road down to it. While these things were happening, the forces of the Romans and Aequians came to grips and, standing, fought, being well-matched in number and arms and showing the same zeal; and they remained long evenly balanced, now advancing upon one another, now withdrawing, horse against horse and foot against foot, and on both sides distinguished men

[111784] 46.4. fell. Then the war takes a decisive turn. For Siccius and those with him, when they came near the camp of the Aequians, finding that part of the camp unguarded—for to the other side, toward the parts turned to those fighting, the whole force guarding it had turned to watch the contest—falling upon it with much ease, come down upon the heads of the guards.

[112149] 46.5. Then, raising the war-cry, they ran upon them; and these, thrown into confusion by the unexpected danger and thinking them not so many but the other consul come leading his force, hurled themselves out of the camp, most not even keeping their arms. Those about Siccius, slaying such as they caught, and mastering the camp, advanced upon those in the plain.

[112513] 46.6. The Aequians, perceiving the capture of the camp from the flight and the outcry of their own, and seeing not long after the enemy coming upon them from behind, no longer showed any nobility, but, breaking their ranks, saved themselves, each by different roads; whereupon the greatest slaughter of them occurred. For the Romans did not relent until night, pursuing and killing those they caught.

[112915] 46.7. He who destroyed most of them and performed the most brilliant deeds was Siccius, who, when he saw the enemy's affairs at an end, it being already dark, leading his cohort to the camp mastered by them, returned, full of great joy and much pride.

[113168] 46.8. And those about him, all unscathed and unharmed, not only suffering none of what they expected, but also having won the most brilliant repute, naming him father and saviour and god and all the most honoured names, were insatiable of greetings of the man and other kindnesses. Meanwhile the rest of the Roman phalanx too, with the consuls, returned from the pursuit to its own camp.

[113557] 47.1. It was now midnight, and Siccius, bearing a grudge against the consuls for the sending to death, conceives the design of robbing them of the glory of the success. Communicating to those about him the intent he had, when it seemed right to all, and there was none who did not admire the man's prudence and daring, taking up his arms and bidding the rest take theirs, first he cut down all the men of the Aequians whom he found in the camp, and the horses and the other beasts of burden; then he kindled the tents, full of arms and grain and clothing and the things needful for war and the other property, of which they had brought very much from the Tusculan booty.

[114229] 47.2. When all had been effaced by the fire, about dawn he departed, carrying nothing but arms, and, accomplishing the road in haste, came to Rome. When men were seen armed and singing the paean and going in haste, smeared with much blood, there was running and much eagerness of those wishing both to see them and to hear what had been done.

[114573] 47.3. They, coming as far as the forum, made plain to the tribunes what had happened, and these, gathering an assembly, bade them speak to all. A great throng gathering, Siccius, coming forward, made plain to them the victory and set forth the manner of the contest, and that through his own valour and that of the eight hundred elders with him, whom the consuls had sent to die, both the camp of the Aequians was taken and the force drawn up against the consuls was forced to flee;

[115057] 47.4. and he thought fit that they feel gratitude for the victory to no other, and at the end he added this speech: We have come saving our lives and our arms, but carrying off nothing else of the conquered, neither greater nor lesser.

[115294] 47.5. The people, hearing the speech, fell into pity and tears, seeing the ages of the men, considering their valour, and being indignant and angry at those who had undertaken to strip the city of such men. And it came about, as Siccius had foreseen, that hatred against the consuls arose from all the citizens.

[115607] 47.6. Nor did the senate take the matter moderately, which neither voted them a triumphal procession nor anything else of the things done for fine contests. Siccius, however, the people, when the time of the elections came, designated tribune, rendering the honour of which it was master. And the most distinguished of the things then done were such as these.

[115968] 48.1. In the year after these consuls Spurius Tarpeius and Aulus Terminius take up the office; who continually courted the people in other ways and deliberated beforehand the decree concerning the tribunes, since they saw nothing more came to the patricians from hindering, but only envy and hatred, and private harms and calamities to those who contended most zealously for them.

[116350] 48.2. But most of all the misfortune of those who had been consul the past year, lately come about, led them into fear—men who had suffered dreadful things from the people and found no aid from the senate. For Siccius, who had taken the Aequian army together with its camp, then designated tribune, as I said, on the first day of his office, having sacrificed the entrance-rites according to law, before doing any other public business, proclaimed in assembly that Titus Romilius come to make defence in a suit for a public crime before the people as judge, appointing the time of the trial.

[116943] 48.3. And Lucius, then aedile, but tribune the year before, summoned the other of the past year's consuls, Gaius Veturius, to a like trial. Much zeal and exhortation arising on both sides in the interval of the contest, the defendants had great hopes in the senate and made light of the hazard, the elders and young men promising them not to allow the contest to be carried out.

[117323] 48.4. But the tribunes, guarding everything long beforehand and reckoning neither entreaties nor threats nor any danger, when the time of the contest came, called the people. And there had earlier streamed in from the fields the day-labouring and self-working throng, and joining the city throng, it filled both the forum and the alleys leading to it.

[117676] 49.1. First, then, the suit against Romilius came on. And Siccius, coming forward, accused the man both in other matters which, as consul, he was thought to have done by force against the tribunes, and at the end went through the plot against himself and his cohort by the general; and he produced as witnesses the most distinguished of those who had campaigned with him, not plebeians but even patricians; among whom was a young man not obscure either in dignity of birth or in his own virtue and very good in war—Spurius Verginius was his name.

[118224] 49.2. He said that Marcus Icilius, son of one of Siccius' cohort, his own age-mate and friend, wishing to release him from the sortie, as going to death with his father, asked Aulus Verginius his own uncle, then a legate serving with them, to come to the consuls,

[118489] 49.3. asking that this favour be granted to them; but the consuls opposing, tears came to himself as he bewailed beforehand the misfortune of his comrade; but the young man, on whose behalf he made the entreaty, learning this, came and, asking leave to speak, said that to those entreating he felt much gratitude, but that he himself would not be content to obtain a favour that would rob him of his piety toward his family, nor would he be left behind by his father, the more so as he was going to die, and all knew it; but, going out with him, do you aid him as much as you can, and he will share the same fortune as that man.

[119119] 49.4. The youth having testified this, there was none who was not somewhat affected at the fortune of the men. And when they too, called to testify, came forward—both the father Icilius and the youth—and told their own part, the more part of the plebeians could no longer restrain their tears.

[119414] 49.5. Romilius having made his defence and gone through a speech neither obsequious nor suited to the occasion, but lofty, and proud over the irresponsibility of his office, the citizens were doubly strengthened in their anger against him. And becoming masters of the votes, they condemned him for wrongdoing so that the man was convicted by all the votes of the tribes. The assessment of the trial was a money fine,

[119832] 49.6. ten thousand asses. And this Siccius seems to me to have done not without forethought, but that both the patricians' zeal for the man might become less—and they might commit no error about the voting, considering that the convicted would be fined in money and nothing else—and the plebeians' impulse toward punishment might be more eager, depriving a consular man neither of life nor of country. Romilius being condemned, not many days after Veturius too was convicted; the assessment fixed for him was also a money one, half again as much as the other's.

[120395] 50.1. Reckoning these things, the consuls in office were greatly afraid and took thought lest they suffer the same from the people after the consulship; so that, no longer concealing their opinions but openly pursuing the people's measures, they continued. First, then, in the centuriate assembly they ratified a law that it be lawful for all the magistrates to fine those who behaved disorderly or unlawfully toward their authority; for before this it was not lawful for all, but for the consuls alone.

[120900] 50.2. The assessment, however, they did not leave to those imposing the fine, how great it should be, but themselves fixed the amount, declaring the greatest limit of the fine to be two oxen and thirty sheep. And this law remained long observed among the Romans.

[121164] 50.3. Then, concerning the laws which the tribunes were zealous to write as common to all the Romans and to be observed for all time, they gave the decision to the senate. Many speeches, then, were made by the best men toward both conceding and hindering; but the opinion of Titus Romilius prevailed, which brought in the more popular before the oligarchic, contrary to the expectation of all, both

[121564] 50.4. the patricians and the plebeians. For they supposed the man would think and say everything contrary to the plebeians, having lately been convicted in the trial before the people; but he, rising when it was his turn, asked his opinion according to his rank—he was among the middling in dignity and age—said:

[121878] 51.1. What I have suffered from the people, senate, and that for no wrong, but for my goodwill toward you, I should be tedious telling among those who know it exactly; but I make mention of them for necessity's sake, that you may know that I will say what is profitable not from flattery of the plebeians, who are my enemy, but from the best motive. Let none marvel that, having often before, and when consul, held the other policy, I have now suddenly changed; nor suppose either of two things—that I then deliberated badly, or that I now retract what was resolved not rightly.

[122458] 51.2. For I, senate, as long as I thought your affairs strong, as one ought, increasing the aristocracy, despised the plebeians; but since, chastened by my own ills with great penalties, I learned that your power is less than your will, and that you have already overlooked many who took up the contest for you snatched off by the people, yielding to necessity, I am no longer

[122836] 51.3. of the same mind. I should most of all have wished that neither I nor my colleague had met with these things, for which you all feel for us. But since our affairs are at an end, and the rest may be amended and one may provide that others not suffer the same, both in common and each one privately I exhort you to settle the present well. For best is that city governed which adapts to circumstances, and the best counsellor is he who declares his opinion not toward private enmity or favour, but toward the common good; and they deliberate best about the future who make the past examples of what is to come.

[123452] 51.4. For you, senate, as often as some dispute and contention arose against the people, it ever befell you to come off worse—now by being ill spoken of, now by being penalized with the deaths and outrages and banishments of distinguished men. And yet what greater misfortune could there be for a city than that the best of its men be cut off, and that not justly? Whom I advise you to spare, and neither, having thrown the present magistrates into manifest danger, then to repent forsaking them in their straits, nor any other

[123981] 51.5. of whom there is even some small benefit to the commonwealth. The sum of what I advise you is to choose envoys, some to the Greek cities in Italy, others to Athens; who, asking of the Greeks the best laws and those most fitting to our lives, will bring them here. When they come, let the consuls then in office set before the senate the consideration what legislators it will be needful to choose, and what office they shall hold and for how long, and the rest, as may seem to it to be profitable; and let us no longer be at faction with the plebeians nor take on calamities one upon another, especially contending about laws, which, if nothing else, have at least a fair show of dignity.

[124677] 52.1. When Romilius had said this, both consuls supported the opinion, going through many things composed by design, and many of the other senators; and those joining this opinion became the more part.

[124880] 52.2. As the preliminary decree was about to be written, the tribune Siccius—who had brought the suit against Romilius—rose and went through a long speech on behalf of the man, praising the change of his opinion and that he did not let his private enmities become stronger than the common good, but, from an upright mind, declared what was profitable;

[125233] 52.3. in return for which, he said, I give him this honour and favour: I release him from the fines for the trial and am reconciled for the future; for he conquers us by being good. The other tribunes too, coming forward, agreed to the same. Romilius, however, would not consent to take this favour, but, praising the tribunes for their zeal, said he would pay the fine; for it was now sacred to the gods, and he did neither just nor holy things in robbing the gods of what the law gives them;

[125728] 52.4. and so he did. The preliminary decree being written, and after this the people ratifying it, there were appointed as envoys to obtain the laws from the Greeks Spurius Postumius and Servius Sulpicius and Aulus Manlius; for whom triremes were prepared from the public treasury and other adornment sufficient for the display of the dominion. And the year came to an end.

[126103] 53.1. In the eighty-second Olympiad, in which Lycus the Thessalian from Larisa won the stadium-race, Chaerephanes being archon at Athens, three hundred years being completed from the founding of Rome, Publius Horatius and Sextus Quintilius having succeeded to the consular office, a pestilential sickness fell upon Rome, the greatest of those remembered from the former time; by which the slaves nearly all perished, and of the other citizens about half were destroyed, the physicians no longer sufficing to aid the sick,

[126626] 53.2. nor kinsmen or friends rendering the necessary services. For those wishing to help others' calamities, by touching sick bodies and living with them, took on the same diseases as those, so that many households were left desolate for want of those to care for them. And not the least of the city's evils, and a cause of the sickness not quickly abating, was what happened about the casting out of the dead.

[127038] 53.3. For at first, both from shame and from abundance of the things needful for burial, they burned the dead and gave them to the earth; but at last, some from neglect of decency, others not having the means, casting many of the deceased into the sewers of the alleys, threw them out, and far more they cast into the river; from which the greatest harm came about the banks and shores.

[127426] 53.4. For as the bodies were washed ashore, a heavy and foul exhalation, falling upon even those still in health, brought swift changes upon their bodies; and the water brought from the river was no longer good to drink, both from the strangeness of the smell and from making the digestion of food bad.

[127730] 53.5. And not only in the city were the dreadful things, but also in the fields; and not least the farming throng suffered, being filled with the sickness, the sheep and other four-footed beasts living together with them. As long, then, as the many had some hope that the god would help them, all turned to sacrifices and purifications; and many novelties not customary were introduced among the Romans concerning the honours of the gods, unseemly practices.

[128190] 53.6. But when they perceived no regard or pity coming from the divine power, they desisted even from the service of the gods. In this calamity one of the consuls dies, Sextus Quintilius, and the one designated consul after him, Spurius Furius, and four of the tribunes,

[128462] 53.7. and many good men of the senators. The Aequians, then, undertook, while the city was in the sickness, to lead an army against them, and sent embassies to the other nations that were hostile to the Romans, calling them to the war. They did not, however, get their force out of the cities in time. For while they were still preparing, the same sickness fell upon the cities.

[128842] 53.8. And it passed through not only the Aequians', but also the Volscians' and Sabines' land, and greatly afflicted the people. From this it came about that the country too, left untilled, joined famine to the pestilence. Under these consuls, then, nothing was done by the Romans, neither in war nor in civic affairs, worthy to come into a historical account, on account of the sicknesses.

[129234] 54.1. For the next year there were designated consuls Lucius Menenius and Publius Sestius; and the sickness wholly abated. And after this thank-offerings to the gods were performed publicly, and distinguished games furnished at very brilliant expense, and the city was in good cheer and festivity, as was likely; and all the winter time was spent on these things.

[129599] 54.2. At the beginning of spring much grain was brought from many places, the greater part bought up publicly, but some also imported by private merchants. For the people suffered not least in the scarcity of food, the land being left fallow because of the sicknesses and the destruction of the farmers.

[129904] 54.3. At the same time the envoys arrived from Athens and the Greek cities in Italy, bringing the laws. And after this the tribunes approached the consuls, thinking fit that they appoint the legislators according to the decree of the senate. But they, having no way to rid themselves of the men who sat by and entreated them, vexed at the matter and not thinking fit under their own office to dissolve the aristocracy, put forward a fair pretext, saying the time of the elections was at hand, and that the consuls themselves must first be designated,

[130456] 54.4. and they would do this before long, and, the consuls being designated, would bring up with them the decision concerning the legislators to the council. The tribunes consenting, holding the elections much sooner than was the former custom, they designated as consuls Appius Claudius and Titus Genucius, and after this, laying aside all care for the common affairs, as though others now ought to consider them, they gave the tribunes no further heed, but planned to steal away the rest of the time of the consulship.

[130978] 54.5. It chanced that one of them, Menenius, was seized by some chronic illness. Some, indeed, said that grief and despondency falling upon the man wrought a wasting disease hard to be rid of. Taking this for a pretext, Sestius, as being unable to do anything alone, rejected the tribunes' entreaties and bade them turn to the new magistrates.

[131323] 54.6. They, having no way to act, were forced to take refuge again with those about Appius who had not yet taken up the power, partly entreating in the assemblies, partly meeting them privately; and at last they brought the men over, holding out great hopes to them, if they took up the people's affairs, of honour and power.

[131650] 54.7. For a certain desire came upon Appius to invest himself with an extraordinary office and to establish laws for his country and to be the author of concord and peace and of all regarding the city as one to his fellow citizens. He did not, however, remain good when adorned with great office, but at last fell into an unyielding love of office, corrupted by the magnitude of the power, and came near driving on to tyranny. About which I will speak at the proper occasion.

[132127] 55.1. Then, indeed, having deliberated these things from the best motive and persuaded his colleague, when the tribunes often called him to the assembly, coming forward he went through many kindly speeches; and the main heads of his harangue were these: that the laws be appointed and the citizens cease being at faction over equality seemed to him and his colleague of all things most desirable, and they declared their opinion plainly; but to appoint the legislators they themselves had no power, not yet having taken up the office, while they would not only not oppose the consuls about Menenius in doing what the senate resolved, but would even cooperate and feel much gratitude.

[132812] 55.2. But if they drew back, putting forward as pretext the new magistracy, that it was not permitted them to appoint other magistrates who would take up consular power when we are already ratified as consuls, nothing on their own part would be an obstacle to them; for they would willingly stand aside from the consulship for those chosen in their place, if this too seemed good to the

[133200] 55.3. senate. The people praising both the men's zeal and all pressing in throngs to the council, Sestius, forced to convene the senate alone—since Menenius was unable to be present through sickness—set before it to speak about the laws. Many speeches, then, were made even then by both sides—those advising to govern by laws, and those thinking fit to keep the ancestral customs.

[133582] 55.4. But the opinion of those about to be consul next year prevailed, which Appius Claudius, asked first, declared: that ten men be chosen, the most distinguished from the senate; that these rule for a year from the day they should be designated, having authority over all the affairs of the city which the consuls had and before them the kings; that all the other magistracies be dissolved, until the

[133986] 55.5. ten should have their office. And that these men, choosing from both the ancestral customs and the Greek laws which the envoys brought the best and fitting for the city of the Romans, should legislate. And that what was written by the ten men, if the senate should approve and the people ratify, be valid for all time, and that the magistrates, as many as should later be appointed, judge the private contracts and administer the public affairs according to these laws.

[134463] 56.1. Taking this decree, the tribunes came forward into the assembly, and reading it among the people, went through much praise of the senate and of Appius who had proposed the opinion. When the time of the elections came, the tribunes, gathering an assembly, thought fit that the designated consuls come and make good to the people their promises, and they, coming forward, abdicated the consulships.

[134867] 56.2. The people continued to praise and admire them, and, since the legislators had to be voted on first, chose them before the rest; and there were designated in the elections by the centuriate assembly Appius Claudius and Titus Genucius, who were to have held office the next year, and Publius Sestius who was consul that year, the three who had brought the laws from the Greeks, Spurius Postumius and Servius Sulpicius and Aulus Manlius, and one of those who had been consul the past year, Titus Romilius—the one convicted in the trial before the people when Siccius accused him, since he was thought to have begun a popular policy; and of the other senators Gaius Julius and Titus Veturius and Publius Horatius, all of consular rank. And the offices of the tribunes and aediles and quaestors, and any other ancestral offices the Romans had, were dissolved.

[135730] 57.1. In the following year the legislators, taking up affairs, established such an order of constitution as this: one of them held the rods and the other insignia of consular power, who convened the senate, ratified decrees, and did all else that befitted a leader; the others, contracting toward the more popular the invidious part of the power, differed a little to look upon from the many; then again another of them was set over the power, and this happened in rotation by turns, each taking up the leadership for a year for an agreed number of days.

[136287] 57.2. All, sitting from early morning, judged the private contracts and the public matters, as many charges arose toward subjects and allies and those who listened doubtfully to the city, examining each with all fairness and

[136513] 57.3. justice. And the city of the Romans seemed in that year to be best administered by the decemvirate. And most of all in them was praised their forethought for the people and their resistance against all violence on behalf of the weaker; and it was said by many that the city would no longer need protectors of the people or the other offices, one prudent leadership administering all, of which Appius seemed to be the head.

[136943] 57.4. And the praise for the whole decemvirate that man carried off from the people. For not only what he did with the others from the best motive brought him a reputation for goodness, but much more what he continually practised privately—in greetings and kindly addresses and the other courtesies to the poor.

[137256] 57.5. These ten men, having drawn up laws from both the Greek laws and the unwritten customs among themselves, set them forth on ten tablets for whoever wished to examine, accepting every correction of private persons and directing what was written toward common satisfaction. And for a long time they continued sitting in council with the best men and making the most exact scrutiny of the legislation.

[137661] 57.6. When what was written seemed to them to be sufficient, first, convening the senate, none any longer finding fault with the laws, they ratified a preliminary decree concerning them. Then, calling the people to the centuriate assembly, the keepers of the sacred records and the augurs and the other priests being present and interpreting the divine matters as is the custom, they gave out the votes to the centuries.

[138083] 57.7. The people too having ratified the laws, engraving them on bronze pillars, they set them up in order in the forum, choosing the most conspicuous place. And since the time of their office remaining was short, gathering the senators, they set before them to consider what should be done about the elections.

[138396] 58.1. Many things being said, the opinion of those advising to appoint a decemvirate again as sovereign of affairs prevailed. For the legislation seemed incomplete, as composed in a short time; and for what was already ratified, that men might willingly and unwillingly abide by it, some sovereign office seemed needed. And what most persuaded them to choose the decemvirate was the dissolution of the tribunes, which they wished most of all.

[138840] 58.2. These things seemed best to them in common deliberation; but privately the leading men of the council were of opinion to seek the office again, fearing lest certain turbulent men, getting hold of so great a power, work some great evil. The people gladly receiving what the senate resolved and ratifying it with great zeal, the ten men themselves proclaimed the time of the elections, and the most honoured and eldest of the patricians sought the office.

[139301] 58.3. There, indeed, the leader of the then decemvirate, Appius, was greatly praised by all, and all the plebeian throng thought fit to keep him in office, as none other would lead better. He pretended at first to refuse and asked to be released from a burdensome and invidious service. But at last, as all entreated him, he both undertook to seek the office, and, charging that the best of those seeking it with him were ill-disposed toward him through envy, openly contended for his own friends.

[139800] 58.4. And he is designated again in the centuriate elections legislator for the second time; and with him Quintus Fabius surnamed Vibulanus, who had been thrice consul, a man up to this time blameless in every virtue; and of the other patricians whom that man favoured, Marcus Cornelius and Marcus Sergius and Lucius Minucius and Titus Antonius and Manius Rabuleius, men not very distinguished; and of the plebeians Quintus Poetelius and Caeso Duellius and Spurius Oppius; for these too were taken in by Appius for the sake of flattering the plebeians, teaching that it was just, when one office was designated over all, that there be some part of the people too in it.

[140471] 58.5. Being well thought of in all these things and seeming to be the best of the kings and of those who had ruled the city yearly, he takes up the office again for the coming year. These things were done in that decemvirate by the Romans, and nothing else worth mentioning.

[140747] 59.1. In the following year, the ten men about Appius Claudius having taken up the consular power on the Ides of May—they reckoned the months by the moon, and the full moon fell on the Ides—

[140939] 59.2. first, cutting oaths secret from the multitude, they made compacts among themselves to oppose one another in nothing, but whatever one of them should adjudge, this all should regard as valid; and to hold the office for life, and to admit no other to affairs; and to be of equal honour all, and have the same power, using decrees of senate or people rarely and only for the necessary things, but doing most things on their own authority.

[141383] 59.3. When the day came on which they had to take up the office, having sacrificed to the gods what is customary—and the Romans keep this day sacred and most of all are scrupulous neither to hear nor to see anything unpleasant on it—at dawn the ten went out at once, all bringing the insignia of royal power.

[141693] 59.4. The people, when they learned that they no longer kept that popular and moderate guise of the leadership nor exchanged the insignia of royal office as before, came into much despondency and dejection.

[141901] 59.5. And the axes attached to the bundles of rods, which the men preceding each of them, twelve in number, carried, struck them with fear, beating back the crowd from the alleys—which had been the case under the kings too before. For this custom was at once abolished after the expulsion of the monarchs by a popular man, Publius Valerius, who took over their power; whom all the consuls after him, thinking he had begun a fine thing, imitating, no longer attached the axes to the bundles of rods, except on campaigns and the other departures from the city.

[142461] 59.6. But leading a war beyond the borders or going to inspect the affairs of subjects, then they added the axes to the rods, that the fearfulness of the sight, as being against enemies or slaves, might appear least burdensome to the citizens.

[142706] 60.1. When all saw this, which was thought to be a sign of royal power, much fear fell upon them, as I said, thinking they had lost their freedom and chosen ten kings instead of one. Having struck the crowds with terror in this fashion, the ten men, knowing that they must rule them for the future by fear, each gathered a company, choosing the boldest of the young men and those most fit for themselves.

[143112] 60.2. That from the poor and those lowly in fortune the more part should appear flatterers of a tyrannical power, exchanging the common good for their own benefits, was neither surprising nor unexpected; but that even from among the patricians many were found, having some grounds for pride both in wealth and in birth, who endured to help the decemvirs dissolve their country's freedom—this seemed to all marvellous. And they, flattering with all the pleasures that are wont to master men, ruled the city in much security, putting senate or people in no account, but themselves becoming legislators and judges of all, and killing many of the citizens and unjustly stripping many of their properties.

[143814] 60.3. And that what was being done, lawless and dreadful as it was, might have a fair show as though done with justice, they appointed courts for each matter; and the accusers were sent in by those very men from among those helping to set up the tyranny, and the courts were appointed from their companions, who exchanged with one another, giving each other the verdicts as favours.

[144198] 60.4. Many of the charges, and not the least worth, the ten judged by themselves; so that those getting the worse of justice were forced to attach themselves to the companies, since otherwise they could not have safety; and in time the corrupt and diseased part in the city became more than the healthy. For those to whom the doings of the decemvirs were grievous no longer thought fit even to remain within the walls, but withdrew to the fields, watching for the time of the elections, in the expectation that the ten men would lay down their powers when they had completed the year's time, and appoint other magistrates.

[144822] 60.5. Those about Appius, having drawn up the rest of the laws on two tablets, added these too to those formerly published; among which was this law also, that it not be permitted to the patricians to contract marriages with the plebeians—for no other reason, as it seems to me, than that the orders might not come together into concord, blended by intermarriages and partnerships of kinship.

[145216] 60.6. When the time of the elections came, bidding a long farewell both to the ancestral customs and to the newly written laws, neither making a decree of senate nor of people, they remained in the same office.