WORK: Antiquitates Romanae  (slug: dionysius-of-halicarnass-antiquitates-romanae-97af98)

CHAPTER: 03-book-3



[110239] 37.3. And when envoys came from the king and thought fit that they submit to justice to the Romans according to the agreements, they pretended both to know nothing of the things charged concerning the robberies, as not done with common consent, and not to be liable to the Romans concerning any matter; for they had not made the agreements with these, but with Tullus, and, Tullus having died, the compacts concerning the peace were dissolved for them.

[110693] 37.4. Compelled, then, by these causes and answers of the Latins, Marcius leads an army against them, and, sitting down before their city Politorium, before any aid came to the besieged from the other Latins, takes the city by agreement; he treated the men, however, with nothing dreadful, but, letting them keep their own, transferred them in a body to Rome and distributed them among the tribes.

[111092] 38.1. The following year, the Latins having sent colonists to the deserted Politorium and being at work on the land of the Politorini, Marcius, taking his force, led it against them. The Latins having come forth from the wall and arrayed themselves, having conquered them he takes the city the second time. And having burned the houses and razed the wall, that the enemy might have no base of operations again nor work the land, he led his army away.

[111544] 38.2. The following year the Latins, having marched against the city of Medullia, in which were colonists of the Romans, sitting down before the wall and making assaults from every side, take it by storm. But Marcius takes a distinguished city of the Latins, Tellenae, about the same time, having both conquered in pitched battle and reduced it by assault on the walls, and the captured, taking nothing of what they had from them, he transferred to Rome and apportioned them a place in the city for building houses;

[112061] 38.3. and Medullia, having been under the Latins three years, he recovers again in the fourth year, having reduced it by many great battles. And not long after he takes the city of the Ficanenses, which two years before, having taken by agreement and transferred all from it to Rome, but having done the city no other harm, he seemed to have deliberated more equitably than prudently.

[112447] 38.4. For the Latins, having sent colonists to it and holding fast their land, themselves enjoyed the territory of the Ficanenses, so that Marcius was again forced to march a second time against the city, and, having with much labour become master of it, to burn the houses and raze the walls.

[112742] 39.1. After this there are two battles, the Latins and Romans arraying themselves with great forces. In the first, then, having contended for a long time and seeming to have come out evenly balanced, they parted and each withdrew to their own camps; but in the latter the Romans conquer the Latins and pursue them as far as their

[113073] 39.2. camp. After these battles no pitched contest any longer arose between them; but raids of the borderland were made by both continually, and skirmishes of the horse and light troops that patrolled the country, in which the Romans for the most part prevailed, having a force in the field stationed in the strategic forts,

[113399] 39.3. which the Tyrrhenian Tarquinius led. And the Fidenates too revolted from the Romans about the same time, not declaring the war openly, but in small parties and secretly damaging their country by raids; against whom Marcius, marching with a light-armed force, before the Fidenates prepared their war-supplies, pitches his camp near the city.

[113747] 39.4. They at first pretended to be ignorant for what wrongs the Roman army had come against them; but when the king said he had come to take satisfaction from them for what they had plundered and damaged of his land, they pleaded against these things that the community was not the cause of the wrongs, and asked time for the inquiry and search of those liable to the charges, and wore out many days doing nothing of what was needful, but secretly calling in their allies and busying themselves with the making of arms.

[114269] 40.1. Marcius, learning their intent, dug mines, beginning from his own camp, under the walls of the city; and when the work was now finished, having roused his army, he led it against the city, bringing many engines and ladders and the other things prepared for the assault, not at the place where the tunnels were made, but

[114596] 40.2. at another. The Fidenates having run together in a mass to the besieged parts of the city and nobly beating off the assaults, the Romans appointed for this, having opened the ends of the mines, got within the circuit, and, destroying those who came to grips, open the gates to the besiegers.

[114895] 40.3. Many perishing in the taking of the city, Marcius, having ordered the rest of the Fidenates to surrender their arms and proclaimed that all come together into one place of the city, scourging and killing a few of them, those responsible for the revolt, and allowing his soldiers to plunder the houses of all, and leaving a sufficient garrison in the city, led his force away against the Sabines.

[115298] 40.4. For neither did these abide in the agreements they made concerning the peace with King Tullus, but, invading the Roman land, ravaged the borderland again; and Marcius, learning from scouts and deserters the moment for the attack, the Sabines being scattered and plundering the fields, himself, coming with the foot to the enemy's camp, which had a small guard, takes the rampart at the first onset, and ordered Tarquinius, leading the horse, to hasten against those scattered in the foragings.

[115799] 40.5. The Sabines, learning that the Roman horse was driving against them, dropping the booty and the other spoils which they were carrying and leading, fled to their camp; and when they learned that this too was held by the foot, being at a loss whither to turn, they made for woods and mountains. Pursued by the light troops and the horse, a few of them were saved, but the greater number were destroyed. And after this calamity, having sent an embassy again to Rome, they obtain peace such as they wished. For the war that had arisen for the Romans against the Latin cities made necessary the truces and settlements with their other enemies.

[116445] 41.1. About the fourth year after this war, Marcius the king of the Romans, leading the civic force and sending for as much of the allied force as he could, marched against the Veientines and ravaged much of their country. They had begun, a year before, by invading the Roman land and making many seizures of goods and much destruction of men;

[116790] 41.2. and a large army having come out from the Veientines and pitched a camp across the river Tiber near the city of the Fidenates, taking his force he led it with what speed he had, and first shut them off from going out into the country, prevailing in cavalry; then, having forced them to come forth to pitched battle, he conquered and became master of their camp. This war too having gone according to his mind, he brought home to the city the victory-procession and the customary triumph to the gods on his arrival.

[117312] 41.3. In the second year after, the Veientines having again dissolved the truces they made with him and thinking fit to recover the salt-works, which they had given up by agreement in the reign of King Romulus, he sets another battle against them about the salt-works, greater than the former, which he easily won,

[117628] 41.4. and from that time held the salt-works indisputably. The prizes of valour from this battle too the leader of the horse Tarquinius received, and Marcius, deeming him the best of all men, continued to honour him in other ways and enrolled him in the number of the patricians and senators.

[117922] 41.5. There was a war for Marcius against the nation of the Volscians too, bands of robbers going out from there also against the fields of the Romans; and having marched against them with a great force, he encompassed much booty, and, sitting down before their city Velitrae, he ditched it round and palisaded it and set on an assault of the walls, prevailing in the field. When the eldest came out with suppliant boughs and promised both to make good the damages, as the king should adjudge, and agreed to deliver up those liable to the charges for trial, having made a truce with them and received justice from them willing, he composes a peace and friendship.

[118587] 42.1. From the Sabine nation again certain others, who had not yet made trial of the Roman power, dwelling in a city prosperous and great, having nothing to charge against them, but compelled to envy their good fortunes, which were greater than reasonable — men formidable in war — at first, gathering in small numbers, began with robberies and raids of the fields, then, enticed by the spoils, make an open campaign against them and, ravaging much of the borderland, harmed it grievously.

[119078] 42.2. Yet it was not granted them either to carry off the spoils or to depart themselves unscathed, but the king of the Romans, coming to the rescue in haste and pitching his camp near their camp, forced them to come forth

[119302] 42.3. to battle. There was, then, a great contest, and many fell on both sides, but the Romans prevailed by experience and love of toil, in which they had been practised for the longest time, and got the better of the Sabines by far, and, following close upon those of them who fled to the camp, scattered and out of order, made much slaughter.

[119648] 42.4. Having mastered their camp too, full of goods of all kinds, and recovered the prisoners whom the Sabines had taken in the foragings, they departed homeward. The warlike deeds, then, of this king that obtain remembrance and account among the Romans are said to have been such; the civil ones I am about to tell.

[119966] 43.1. First, he added to the city no small portion, having walled what is called the Aventine. It is a hill tolerably high, about eighteen stades in circuit, which was then full of wood of all kinds, but most and finest of laurel, from which a certain place on it is called by the Romans Lauretum; but now it is all full of houses, where, with many others, the temple of Diana too is set up; and it is separated from another of the hills encompassed with Rome, the one called Pallantium, about which the first founded city was settled, by a deep and narrow ravine. But in later times the whole hollow between the hills was filled up.

[120601] 43.2. This hill, then, seeing that it would be a stronghold against the city, if any army should come against it, he enclosed with wall and ditch, and settled in this place those transferred from Tellenae and Politorium and the other cities of which he became master. This, then, is one institution of the king handed down as fair and at the same time practical, from which it came about both that the city became larger by the addition of another city, and less easy to be taken when a great force of enemies should march against it;

[121137] 44.1. and another, mightier than the aforesaid institution, which both made it more prosperous in all the things of life and roused it to take in hand nobler enterprises. For the river Tiber, coming down from the Apennine mountains and flowing past Rome itself and emptying into harbourless and broken shores which the Tyrrhenian sea makes, benefiting Rome but little and not worth mentioning, because it had no fort at its mouths to receive the provisions brought in by sea and those brought down from above and to exchange them with the merchants — though it was sufficient to be sailed up as far as its springs by good-sized river-boats, and up to Rome itself even by large sea-going merchantmen — he resolved to build a port at its mouths, using as a harbour the very mouth of the river.

[121930] 44.2. For it widens out greatly as it joins the sea and takes great bays, such as the best of the sea-harbours; and — what one would most marvel at — it is not closed at its mouth, blocked by the sea-sand, which many even of the great rivers suffer, nor, wandering into marshes and swamps now one way now another, is it used up beforehand before its stream joins the sea, but is ever navigable and empties through its one genuine mouth, beating back the sea-billows, although a great and harsh wind blows there from the west.

[122457] 44.3. The oared ships, then, of whatever size they may chance to be, and of the merchantmen those up to three thousand bushels' burden, come in through this mouth and are conveyed up to Rome, drawn by rowing and by hawsers; but the larger, riding at anchor before the mouth, are unloaded and reloaded by the river-boats.

[122779] 44.4. And in the elbow between the river and the sea, the king, having built a city, which from the circumstance he named Ostia, or, as we should say, a door, prepared Rome to become not only inland but also maritime, and gave it a taste of the goods from across the sea.

[123052] 45.1. He walled also what is called the Janiculum, a high mountain lying beyond the river Tiber, and established a sufficient garrison in it for the safety of those sailing on the river; for the Tyrrhenians plundered the merchants, holding all the country beyond the river;

[123327] 45.2. and the wooden bridge, which it is enjoined to be fastened without bronze and iron, held together by the timbers themselves, he is said to have laid over the Tiber, which to the present they keep up, deeming it sacred. And if any part of it should be damaged, the hierophants tend it, performing certain ancestral sacrifices together with the

[123677] 45.3. construction. Having accomplished in his own reign these things worthy of record, and having handed down Rome not a little stronger to those who came after than that which he himself received, having held the kingship four and twenty years, he dies, leaving two sons, the one still a child in age, the elder just coming to his beard.

[124018] 46.1. After the death of Ancus Marcius, the senate, the people having again entrusted to it to establish whatever polity it wished, resolved to remain under the same and appoints interreges. They, having gathered the multitude for the election of magistrates, choose as king Lucius Tarquinius. The signs from the divine power having confirmed what was judged by the multitude, he takes up the kingship about the second year of the forty-first Olympiad, which Cleondas the Theban won in the stadium-race, Heniochides being archon at Athens.

[124559] 46.2. Of what kind of parents this Tarquinius was, and from what fatherland he sprang, and for what reasons he came to Rome, and through what pursuits he came to the kingship, as I have found in the histories of the country I shall tell.

[124798] 46.3. A certain Corinthian man, Demaratus by name, of the kindred of the Bacchiadae, having chosen the life of a merchant, sailed to Italy, bringing his own ship and his own cargo. Having sold the cargo in the cities of the Tyrrhenians, which were then the most prosperous of those in Italy, and gathered great gains thence, he no longer wished to put in to other harbours, but worked the same sea continually, bringing Greek cargo to the Tyrrhenians and carrying Tyrrhenian to Greece, and becomes master of very much money.

[125324] 46.4. But when faction overtook Corinth and the tyranny of Cypselus rose up against the Bacchiadae, thinking it not safe to live under a tyranny possessing much wealth, especially being of the oligarchic house, having packed up as much of his substance as he could,

[125591] 46.5. he departed, sailing from Corinth. And having many good friends among the Tyrrhenians through his continual intercourse, but most of all in Tarquinii, then a great and prosperous city, he builds a house there and takes a wife distinguished in birth. Two sons being born to him, he gave them Tyrrhenian names, to the one Arruns, to the other Lucumo, and, having educated both in Greek and Tyrrhenian learning, when they came to manhood he takes for them wives from the most distinguished houses.

[126093] 47.1. And not long after, the elder of his sons dies, leaving no visible offspring. And a few days after, Demaratus himself dies of grief, leaving as heir of his whole substance the surviving one of his sons, Lucumo; who, having received his father's wealth, which was great, chose to take part in public life and manage the common affairs and be among the first of the citizens.

[126474] 47.2. But being driven off on every side by the natives, and so far from being reckoned among the first, that he was not even among the middling, he bore the dishonour grievously. Hearing concerning the city of the Romans that, gladly receiving all strangers, it makes them citizens and honours each according to his worth, he resolved to transfer his dwelling there, having packed up all his goods and bringing his wife and of his other friends and household those who wished; and those who were eager to set out with him were many.

[127009] 47.3. When they were at what is called the Janiculum, whence Rome is first descried by those coming from Tyrrhenia, an eagle, swooping down suddenly and seizing the cap lying on his head, flew up again, borne aloft in a circling sweep, and hid it in the depth of the surrounding air; then suddenly sets the cap upon Lucumo's head, fitting it as it had been fitted before.

[127382] 47.4. The sign appearing wonderful and paradoxical to all, the wife of Lucumo, Tanaquil by name, having sufficient experience from her forefathers in Tyrrhenian augury, taking him alone apart from the company, embraced him and filled him with good hopes that from a private fortune he would come to royal authority. Yet she counselled him to consider how he might receive the leadership from the Romans willing, having shown himself worthy of this honour.

[127839] 48.1. Overjoyed at the sign, when he was now drawing near the gates, having prayed the gods that the prophecies might be fulfilled and that he might enter with good fortunes, he passed into the city; and after this, having come to a parley with King Marcius, first he made clear who he was, then that, wishing to dwell in the city, he had come bringing all his ancestral substance, which he said he put into the common stock for the king and the city of the Romans, being greater than for a private man to possess.

[128355] 48.2. The king having gladly received him and enrolled him, together with the Tyrrhenians present with him, into a tribe and phratry, he builds a house, having obtained by lot a sufficient place in the city, and receives an allotment of land. When he had settled these things and become one of the citizens, learning that to each of the Romans a common name is given, and after the common another, which is their family and patronymic, wishing to be made like them in this too, he takes for himself Lucius as the common name instead of Lucumo, and Tarquinius as the family name, from the city in which he chanced to be born and reared;

[128992] 48.3. and in a very little time he becomes a friend of the king, giving gifts of which he perceived him to be most in need, and furnishing money for the war-needs, as much as he required, and on the campaigns fighting best of all, both foot and horse, and, where good counsel was needed, reckoned among the most prudent of the advisers.

[129330] 48.4. Having become honoured by the king, he did not fail of the goodwill of the other Romans either, but won over many of the patricians by his benefactions and prepared the common multitude to be well-disposed toward him by affable greetings and pleasing intercourse and the imparting of money and the other kindnesses.

[129653] 49.1. Such, then, was Tarquinius, and for these reasons, while Marcius lived, he became the most distinguished of all Romans, and when he died, he was judged worthy of the kingship by all. When he took up the office, first he warred upon the so-called Apiolani, a city of the

[129930] 49.2. Latin nation not obscure. For the Apiolani and all the other Latins, thinking after the death of Ancus Marcius that the agreements concerning the peace were dissolved, plundered the Roman land with robberies and forays; in requital for which Tarquinius, wishing to punish them, marched out with a great force and ravaged the best of their land;

[130282] 49.3. and a great relief having come to the Apiolani from the neighbouring Latins, he sets two battles against them, and prevailing in both, set about the siege of the city and brought his forces against the walls in relays; and those from the city, few fighting against many and getting no respite at any time, were in time taken. The city being captured by storm, the greater number of the Apiolani were slain fighting, but a few, surrendering their arms, were sold along with the rest of the spoils, and their children and wives, enslaved by the Romans, were led off, and the city, plundered, was burned.

[130891] 49.4. Having accomplished these things and razed the wall from its foundations, the king led his force homeward, and after this led another army against the city of the Crustumerini. This was a colony of the Latins, but had come over to the Romans in the reign of Romulus; and when Tarquinius took up the office, it began again to think the things of the Latins. Yet there was no need to reduce this too by siege

[131305] 49.5. and toil; for the Crustumerini, learning both the multitude of the force come against them and their own weakness, no aid having come to them from the other Latins, opened the gates, and the eldest and most honoured of the citizens, coming forth, surrendered the city to him, asking him to deal equitably and moderately with them.

[131643] 49.6. To him the matter appeared according to his prayer, and, passing within the wall, he killed none of the Crustumerini, but penalized very few, those responsible for the revolt, with perpetual exile, and to all the rest allowed to keep their own and to share in the Roman citizenship as before; and that they might make no further movement, he left Roman colonists among them.

[132025] 50.1. The same things it was granted also to the Nomentani, who had thought to obtain the same, to obtain. For these too, sending bands of robbers against the fields of the Romans, became their enemies openly, trusting in the alliances of the Latins; and Tarquinius having marched against them and the relief of the Latins being too late, being themselves unable to hold out against so great a force, taking up suppliant boughs they came out of the city and surrendered themselves.

[132508] 50.2. But those who inhabited what is called Collatia attempted to come to battle against the Roman forces and advanced outside the city; but, being worsted in all the encounters and receiving many blows, they were forced to flee back to the wall and sent to the Latin cities asking alliance. But as the things from them were too slow, and the enemy made assaults at many parts of the wall, they were forced in time to surrender the city.

[132948] 50.3. Yet they did not obtain the same moderation as the Nomentani and Crustumerini, but the king took away their arms and penalized them with money and left a sufficient garrison in the city, and appointed to rule them, with an unaccountable office for life, Tarquinius Arruns, his own nephew, who, after the death both of his father Arruns and of his grandfather Demaratus, had inherited the due portion neither of his father's nor of his grandfather's goods, and for this reason was surnamed Egerius; for the needy and poor the Romans so name. But from the time when he took over the charge of that city, he himself was called Collatinus, and all those descended from him.

[133625] 50.4. After the surrender of Collatia the king marched against what is called Corniculum; this too was a city of the Latin nation. Having ravaged their country with much security, none defending it, he marches against the city itself, challenging the men to friendship; but as they did not wish to come to reconciliation, but, trusting both in the strength of the wall and thinking alliance would come from many quarters, having set his force about the whole circuit of the city, he assaulted the walls.

[134130] 50.5. The Corniculani for a long time held out, fighting bravely and giving the assailants many blows; but, wearied by the continuity of the toils and no longer all keeping the same mind (for to some it seemed good to surrender the city, to others to hold out to the end), most of all worn down by their very faction, they were taken by storm.

[134475] 50.6. The best part of them, then, in the taking of the city perished fighting, but the base, and on this account saved, were sold as slaves together with women and children, and their city, plundered by the conquerors, was burned.

[134708] 50.7. At which the Latins, bearing it hard, voted in common to lead an army against the Romans, and, having prepared a great force, invaded their best country, from which they led off many prisoners and became masters of much booty. King Tarquinius went out against them, bringing his light-armed and ready force, but no longer succeeding in overtaking them, invaded their country and did the like.

[135108] 50.8. Such things happened, many by turns, to both as they campaigned against the bordering lands — losses and advantages; but one pitched battle of theirs occurred near the city of Fidenae, all the forces clashing, in which many of both fell, but the Romans conquered and forced the Latins, leaving their camp by night, to depart to their own cities.

[135461] 51.1. After this contest, having the Roman force arrayed, Tarquinius advanced against their cities, putting forward words about friendship. And they, having neither a force united in common nor trusting in their own preparations, accepted the proposals, and some of them surrendered their cities, seeing that on those taken by storm followed enslavements and razings, but on those that came over by agreement only obedience to the conquerors, and nothing else irremediable.

[135936] 51.2. First, then, the Ficolneenses came over to him, a considerable city, on certain agreed terms of justice; then the Camerini, whom certain other small towns and strong

[136109] 51.3. forts followed. At which the rest of the Latins, being troubled and fearing lest he should make the whole nation subject to himself, having come together to the assembly at Ferentinum, voted both to lead out their own force from every city and to call in the strongest of the neighbouring nations, and sent embassies to the Tyrrhenians and

[136456] 51.4. Sabines asking alliance. The Sabines, then, promised them that, when they should hear that they had invaded the Roman land, they too, taking up arms, would ravage the country near them; but the Tyrrhenians agreed to send whatever alliance they should need, not all being of the same mind, but five cities only — the Clusini and Arretini and Volaterrani and Rusellani, and besides these the Vetulonienses.

[136868] 52.1. Elated by these hopes, the Latins, having prepared a considerable force of their own and added that from the Tyrrhenians, invaded the Roman land, and at the same time the cities of the Sabine nation that had promised to share the war with them ravaged the country bordering on them. The king of the Romans, having himself in the meantime prepared a large and good force, led it out against the enemy with

[137280] 52.2. speed. To war against Sabines and Latins at once, and to divide his force into two parts, he supposed not safe, but resolved to lead his whole army against the Latins and pitches his camp near them. At first, then, each side hesitated to risk all their forces, fearing one another's preparations; but the light troops, coming down from their defences, made continual skirmishes on both sides and were for the most part evenly matched;

[137722] 52.3. but later, contention having fallen upon both from such skirmishes, each coming to the aid of their own, few at first, then all, were forced to come forth from their camps. And, having come to battle, men neither unpractised in warlike contests nor far inferior to one another in numbers, both foot and horse, roused to the war with like eagerness and thinking they were casting the last of dangers, both contended worthily of account, but parted from one another evenly matched as night came on.

[138226] 52.4. The intent of each after the contest, however, being not alike, made manifest those who had fought better than the others; for the next day the Latins no longer came forth from their camp, but the king of the Romans, having led out his forces into the plain, was ready to make another battle and for a long time kept his phalanx in array. But as the enemy did not come out against him, having stripped their dead and taken up his own, with much boasting he led his army back to his own camp.

[138725] 53.1. On the following days, another alliance having come to the Latins from the Tyrrhenians, a second contest takes place, far greater than the former, from which King Tarquinius bears off a most distinguished victory, of which he himself was agreed by all to have been the author.

[139009] 53.2. For the Roman phalanx now flagging and being broken on the left wing, learning of the disadvantage occurring to his own men (he happened then to be fighting on the right wing), having wheeled the best squadrons of the horse and taken up the freshest of the foot, he led them behind his own army, and, passing the left wing, drove still further beyond the phalanx. Then, wheeling to the right and applying the spurs to the horses, he charges into the flank of the companies of the Tyrrhenians (for these, fighting on the right wing of the enemy, had routed those opposite them), and, appearing to them unexpectedly, caused much consternation and confusion.

[139672] 53.3. Meanwhile the foot force of the Romans too, recovering itself from its former fear, advanced to even terms, and after this there was much slaughter of the Tyrrhenians and a complete rout of the right wing. Tarquinius, having bidden the leaders of the foot follow in order and at a foot's pace, himself advanced against the camp of the enemy, driving the horses at full speed; and, forestalling those who were saving themselves from the rout, becomes master of the camp at the first onset. For those left in it, neither having foreknown the calamity that had seized their own men nor able, because of the suddenness of the onset, to recognize the approaching horsemen, let them pass in.

[140365] 53.4. The camp of the Latins being taken, those withdrawing from the rout, as to a safe refuge, were destroyed by the horsemen who had seized it, and those who rushed to flee from the camp into the plain were slain by the Roman phalanx coming to grips; but the greater number of them, thrust by one another and trampled about the palisades or in the ditches, perished in the most piteous and ignoble manner; so that the survivors, able to find no means of safety, were forced to surrender themselves to the conquerors.

[140885] 53.5. Tarquinius, having become master of many persons and much goods, sold the prisoners, but bestowed the things taken in the camp upon the soldiers.

[141038] 54.1. Having accomplished these things, he led his force against the cities of the Latins, to reduce by battle those that did not come over to him; yet there was no need for him of assaults on the walls. For all turned to supplications and entreaties, and, sending envoys from the common body, asked to end the war on whatever terms he wished, and surrendered their cities.

[141413] 54.2. Having become master of the cities on these agreements, the king dealt with all most equitably and most moderately. For he neither killed nor forced to flee nor penalized with money any of the Latins, but allowed them to enjoy their own land and permitted them to use their ancestral polities, but ordered them to give back to the Romans the deserters and the prisoners without ransom, and to restore to their masters the slaves of whom they had become masters in the foragings, and to make good whatever goods they had taken from the farmers, and to repair whatever else they had damaged or destroyed in the invasions.

[142040] 54.3. And having done these things, to be friends of the Romans and allies, doing all that they should command. The war, then, that had arisen for the Romans against the Latins came to this end, and King Tarquinius brought home the victory triumph from this war.

[142304] 55.1. The following year, taking his force, he led it against the Sabines, who had long foreknown his purpose and the preparation against them. Not enduring that the war should come into their own country, but having prepared a sufficient force in turn, they came to grips. A battle taking place between them about the borders of the country, until night neither conquered, but both toiled exceedingly hard.

[142713] 55.2. On the following days, then, neither the leader of the Sabines led his forces forth from the camp nor the king of the Romans, but both, breaking camp and harming nothing of each other's land, departed homeward. The intent of both was alike, to lead out another, greater force against each other's country at the beginning of spring.

[143053] 55.3. When all had been prepared by them, the Sabines came out first, having a sufficient force of Tyrrhenians for alliance, and encamp near Fidenae about the confluence of the Anio and the Tiber, having pitched two camps facing and continuous with one another, holding between them the common stream from both rivers, over which a wooden bridge had been built, supported by boats and rafts, which made the passages to one another swift and the camp one.

[143509] 55.4. Tarquinius, learning of their invasion, led out the Roman army himself too and settled a little higher up than their camp, beside the river Anio, on a certain strong hill. Both being roused to the war with all eagerness, no pitched contest, neither greater nor less, arose between them. For Tarquinius forestalled them, having by a general's sagacity crushed all the affairs of the Sabines and taken both their camps. The man's stratagem was of this kind:

[143972] 56.1. having prepared river-boats and rafts full of dry wood and brushwood, and besides pitch and sulphur, on the one of the rivers beside which he himself had encamped, then having waited for a favourable wind about the morning watch, he ordered fire to be set to the wood and the boats and rafts to be let go to drift with the current. They, in a very little while having crossed the intervening passage, fall upon the

[144394] 56.2. bridge and set it ablaze in many places. The Sabines, when they saw a great flame suddenly borne along, having run together to the rescue and contrived all things that were quenchers of fire, Tarquinius came about dawn, leading the Roman force in array, and, assailing the one camp, the most having abandoned the guard-posts because of the rush to the burning, and a few turning to defence,

[144792] 56.3. becomes master of it without toil. While these things were being done, the other camp of the Sabines too, lying beyond the river, another force of Romans, coming upon it, takes — which had been sent on ahead by Tarquinius about the first sleep, and had crossed the one stream formed from the two rivers in boats and rafts at the part where, crossing, it was likely to escape the notice of the Sabines, and had come near the other camp just as it beheld the bridge burning; for this was the signal to it

[145302] 56.4. for the onset. Of those caught in the camps, some were cut down fighting by the Romans, others, casting themselves into the confluence of the rivers and unable to be carried over the eddies, were swallowed up; and no small portion of them perished also at the rescue of the bridge by the fire. Tarquinius, having taken both camps, allowed the soldiers to distribute among themselves the goods taken in them, but the prisoners, being very many, both of the Sabines themselves and of the Tyrrhenians, he led to Rome and kept under much guard.

[145850] 57.1. The Sabines, then, recognized their plight, forced by the calamity of that time, and, sending envoys, made a truce of the war, a treaty for six years; but the Tyrrhenians, bearing it with anger that they had been beaten by the Romans many times, and that Tarquinius did not give back to them the prisoners when they sent an embassy, but kept them as hostages, make a decree that all the cities of the Tyrrhenians carry on the war against the Romans in common, and that the one not sharing in the campaign be excluded from the treaty.

[146391] 57.2. Having ratified these things, they led out their forces and, crossing the Tiber, pitch their camp near Fidenae. Having become masters of this city through treachery, those in it being at faction with one another, and having taken many persons and driven off much booty from the Roman country, they departed homeward, leaving a sufficient garrison in Fidenae. For this city seemed to them to be the best base of operations for the war against the Romans.

[146852] 57.3. King Tarquinius, for the coming year having armed all the Romans and taken as many of the allies as he could, led them out against the enemy at the beginning of spring, before those, gathered from all the cities, should come against him as before; and, having divided his whole force into two parts, himself leading the Roman army, marched against the cities of the Tyrrhenians, and of the allied force, in which the greater part was of the Latins, having appointed Egerius his kinsman general, he bade him advance against the enemy in Fidenae.

[147404] 57.4. The allied force, then, having pitched its camp near Fidenae in a place not safe, through contempt of the enemy, lacked little of being wholly destroyed; for the garrison in the city, having secretly sent for another relief from the Tyrrhenians and watched for a suitable occasion, came out of the city and took the enemy's camp at the first onset, ill guarded, and wrought much slaughter of those who had gone out for the

[147834] 57.5. foragings. But the Roman force which Tarquinius led, shearing and ravaging the country of the Veientines and bearing off many spoils, when a great relief had come together to the Veientines from all the Tyrrhenian cities, joining battle, bears off an indisputable victory; and after this, going through the country of the enemy, plundered it without fear, and, having become master of many persons and of much goods, as from a prosperous country, when the summer was now ending, departed homeward.

[148339] 58.1. The Veientines, then, having been greatly harmed by that battle, no longer came forth from the city, but endured to see their country sheared. King Tarquinius, having made three invasions and for three years deprived the Veientines of the fruits of their own land, when he had made the most of it desolate and could no longer harm it, led his force against the city of the Caeretani, which formerly was called Agylla while Pelasgians inhabited it, but, having come under the Tyrrhenians, was renamed Caere, and was prosperous, if any other of the cities in Tyrrhenia, and populous;

[148928] 58.2. from which a great army came out to fight for the country, and, having destroyed many of the enemy but lost many more still of its own, fled into the city. The Romans, mastering their country, which furnished all things in abundance, tarried many days, and when it was time to depart, leading off as many spoils as they could, they departed homeward.

[149286] 58.3. Tarquinius, when the things against the Veientines had gone according to his mind, leads his army against the enemy in Fidenae, both wishing to cast out the garrison in it and eager to punish those who had surrendered the walls to the Tyrrhenians. There was, then, both a pitched battle of the Romans against those who came out of the city and a fierce contest in the assaults on the walls.

[149684] 58.4. The city was taken by storm, and the garrison, bound together with the other Tyrrhenian prisoners, was under guard; and of the Fidenates those who seemed to have been responsible for the revolt, some, scourged with whips in public, had their necks cut off, others were penalized with perpetual exile; and their properties the Romans left behind as colonists and as garrison of the city divided by lot.

[150093] 59.1. The last battle of the Romans and Tyrrhenians took place near the city of Eretum in the Sabine land. For through that country the Tyrrhenians made their march against the Romans, persuaded by the powerful men there that the Sabines would join the campaign with them. For the six-year truce concerning the peace with Tarquinius had now passed, and many of the Sabines longed to repair their former defeats, a sufficient youth having grown up in the cities.

[150556] 59.2. Yet the attempt did not go according to their mind, the Roman army appearing too quickly, nor was it granted that a common alliance be sent to the Tyrrhenians from any of the cities, but a few volunteers aided them, drawn on by great pay.

[150802] 59.3. From this battle, the greatest of the former ones, as many as they had warred against one another, the affairs of the Romans took a wonderful advancement, having borne off a most beautiful victory, and the senate and people voted that King Tarquinius bring home the trophy-bearing procession; but the spirits of the Tyrrhenians fell, having sent out to the contest all the forces from each city, but received back a few out of many, the saved. For those fighting in the array were cut down, and those in the rout, falling into difficult places without exit, surrendered themselves to the conquerors.

[151409] 59.4. Having made trial of such a calamity, the most powerful of those in the cities did the deed of prudent men. For when King Tarquinius led out another army against them, having come together to one assembly, they voted to parley with him about ending the war and send the eldest and most honoured men from each city, appointing them with full power over the agreements concerning the peace.

[151805] 60.1. The king, having heard them say many things alluring toward equity and moderation, and reminding him of the kinship he had with the nation, said he wished to learn this one thing only from them: whether they still disputed about equal terms and came to make the agreements concerning the peace on certain stated conditions, or recognized themselves to be conquered and entrusted their cities to him. When they answered that they both entrusted their cities to him and would acquiesce in the peace on whatever just terms they should ever obtain it, becoming overjoyed at this,

[152388] 60.2. "Hear now," he said, "on what just terms I shall end the war and what favours I grant you. I am eager neither to kill any of the Tyrrhenians nor to make any an exile from his fatherland nor to penalize with the loss of his possessions, and I release to you all your cities ungarrisoned and untaxed and self-governing, and I allow each to keep its ancient order of polity.

[152767] 60.3. But, giving you these things, I think one thing in return for all I give ought to be mine from you — the leadership of the cities, of which I shall be master even against your will so long as I prevail in arms, but I wish to obtain it from you willing rather than unwilling. Announce these things to the cities, and I promise to grant you a truce until you return."

[153140] 61.1. The envoys, having received these answers, departed, and after a few days were present, bringing him not bare words only, but also the symbols of the leadership with which they themselves adorned their own kings — bringing a golden crown and an ivory throne and a sceptre having an eagle upon its head, and a purple tunic with golden devices, and a purple embroidered mantle, such as the kings of the Lydians and Persians wore, save that it was not four-cornered in shape, as those were, but semicircular. Such garments the Romans call togas, the Greeks tebenni, I know not whence having learned it; for the name does not appear to me to be Greek.

[153795] 61.2. And as some relate, they brought him also the twelve axes, taking one from each city. For it seems to be a Tyrrhenian custom that before each of the kings in the cities one rod-bearer go in front, bearing an axe along with the bundle of rods; and if a common campaign of the twelve cities should take place, the twelve axes were handed over to the one who took up the office of full power.

[154192] 61.3. Yet not all agree with those who say these things, but they say that even earlier than the dominion of Tarquinius twelve axes were borne before the kings, and that Romulus established this custom straightway as soon as he took up the rule. But nothing prevents the invention from being the Tyrrhenians', and Romulus' having first used it, taking it from them, and the twelve axes' having been brought to Tarquinius along with the other royal adornments — just as even now the Romans give the sceptres and diadems to the kings, confirming their authority for them, since even without receiving them from these they have them.

[154824] 62.1. These honours Tarquinius did not use straightway on receiving them, as most of the Roman historians write, but, having given to the senate and the people the decision whether they ought to be taken, since it was the wish of all, then he accepted them, and all the time from that on, until he passed to his destiny, he wore a golden crown and was clad in a purple embroidered garment and, holding an ivory sceptre, sat on an ivory throne, and the twelve rod-bearers, carrying the axes along with the rods, stood beside him as he judged and went before him as he went.

[155398] 62.2. All this adornment remained also to those who held the kingly office after him, and after the expulsion of the kings to the annual consuls, except the crown and the embroidered garment; these alone were taken from them, having seemed to be vulgar and invidious. Except that, whenever, bringing home a victory from war, they are thought worthy of a triumph by the senate, then they both wear gold and are clad in embroidered purple. The war, then, that arose for Tarquinius against the Tyrrhenians, having lasted nine years, had such a conclusion.

[155952] 63.1. One nation only being left, the Sabine, a rival to the Romans for the rule, having warlike men and inhabiting much good land lying not far from Rome, Tarquinius had much eagerness to subject these too, and proclaimed war against them, charging the cities that they had been unwilling to give up those who had promised the Tyrrhenians that, if they should come leading an army into their country, they would make their own fatherlands friendly to those but hostile to the Romans.

[156438] 63.2. And they gladly receive the war, not thinking fit that the most powerful of the citizens be taken from them, and, before the Roman force came against them, themselves lead out an army against that of the Romans. King Tarquinius, when he heard that the Sabines had crossed the river Anio and that all about the camp was being ravaged by them, taking up the most lightly armed youth of the Romans, with what speed he had, led them out against those scattered for the foragings.

[156921] 63.3. Having killed many of them and taken away all the booty they were leading, he pitches his camp near their camp, and, having let a few days pass, until both the rest of the force came to him from the city and the relief from the allies was gathered, he came down into the plain as if to fight.

[157221] 64.1. The Sabines, seeing the Romans advancing eagerly to the contest, led out their forces too, being inferior to the enemy neither in number nor in valour, and, having clashed, fought, showing all daring, so long as theirs was the one contest only against those arrayed against them. Then, learning that another army of enemies was coming upon them in the rear, advancing in order and array, abandoning their standards, they turn to flight. They were picked men of the Romans, foot and horse, who appeared behind the Sabines, whom Tarquinius had set in ambush in suitable places by night.

[157813] 64.2. These men, then, the Sabines, fearing them as they appeared unexpectedly, displayed no more any noble deed, but, as men outgeneralled by their enemies and stricken by an irresistible calamity, tried to save themselves, some by one road, some by another; and in this most of all there was much slaughter of them, pursued by the Roman horse and shut off on every side; so that very few of them were the saved who reached the nearest cities, but the greater part, as many as did not fall in the battle, came under the hand of the Romans. For neither did those left in the camp take courage to beat off the onset of those who came against them, nor come to trial of battle, but, thrown into confusion by the unexpected calamity, surrendered without a fight both themselves and the rampart.

[158606] 64.3. The cities of the Sabines, then, as outgeneralled and robbed of the victory by the enemy not through valour but through guile, prepared to send out greater forces again and a more experienced general. But Tarquinius, learning their intent, gathered his army quickly and, before all those came

[158906] 64.4. together, forestalls them by crossing the river Anio. Learning this, the general of the Sabines went out with what speed he had, taking up the newly gathered force, and encamps near the Romans on a certain high and steep hill, but did not think fit to begin battle until the rest of the Sabine forces should come together, but, sending out continually some of the horse against those foraging the country and setting companies in ambush in woods or glens, kept the Romans from going out into the country.

[159418] 65.1. While he was carrying on the war in this manner, many skirmishes in small parties of light troops and horse took place, but no general battle of all. As the time was being drawn out, Tarquinius, bearing the delay with anger, resolved to lead his forces against the enemy's camp and made many assaults.

[159727] 65.2. Then, perceiving that by violent means it was not easy to be taken because of its strength, he resolved to war against those in it by the scarcity of provisions, and, building forts along all the roads leading to it, and not allowing them to gather wood and forage for the horses and to take many other necessaries from the country, he brought them into much want of all things; so that they were forced, having watched for a stormy night with rain and wind, to flee shamefully from the camp, leaving in it the beasts of burden and the tents and the wounded and all the equipment for the war.

[160327] 65.3. The next day the Romans, learning of their departure and becoming masters of the camp without a fight, plundered the tents and beasts of burden and goods, and, leading off the prisoners, returned to Rome. This war continued, being waged continuously for five years, in which both, ravaging each other's land and fighting many battles, lesser and greater, persevered, the Sabines having a little good fortune in the contests, but the Romans the most; and in the last battle it took its entire end.

[160831] 65.4. For the Sabines came out to the war, not as before in relays, but all together as many as were of military age, and the Romans, all of them, taking up the forces of the Latins and Tyrrhenians and the other allies, came to grips with the enemy.

[161082] 65.5. The general of the Sabines, then, dividing his forces in two, makes two camps, but the king of the Romans, making three divisions and pitching three camps not far from one another, himself led the Roman force, and appointed Arruns his nephew general of the Tyrrhenian alliance;

[161367] 65.6. and over the Latins and the other allies he set a man noble in war and most able to think what was needful, a stranger and without a city — Servius was his personal name, Tullius the family one — to whom the Romans, after the death of Lucius Tarquinius, entrusted the kingship of the city, there being no male offspring of Tarquinius, admiring the man for his valour both in civic and in warlike affairs. The lineage of this man and his upbringing and fortunes and the distinction that came about him from the divine, when I come to that part of the discourse, I shall narrate.

[161952] 66.1. Then, at all events, when the things needful for the contest had been prepared by both, they came together to battle; and the Romans held the left wing, the Tyrrhenians the right, and in the middle of the phalanx the Latins were arrayed. A fierce contest taking place through the whole day, the Romans conquered by far, both killing many of the enemy who had been brave men in the battle, and taking many more prisoners in the flight; and, becoming masters of both camps and encompassing a great wealth of goods, they now without fear mastered all the open country, which, having marred with fire and sword and all evils, when the summer ended, breaking up their camps, they departed homeward. And King Tarquinius brought home from this battle the third triumph of his own reign.

[162739] 66.2. The following year, the king again preparing to lead an army against the cities of the Sabines and having resolved to bring them over by sieges, no noble or youthful counsel any longer arose in any of them, but all, using a common judgment, resolved to end the war before coming into danger of enslavement and razing.

[163064] 66.3. And the best of the Sabines came from each city to King Tarquinius, who had already come out with all his force, surrendering to him their walls and asking that he make the agreements moderate. He, gladly receiving the submission of the nation without dangers, makes a treaty with them for peace and friendship on the same agreements by which he had earlier brought over the Tyrrhenians, and gave them back the prisoners without ransom.

[163508] 67.1. These are the warlike deeds of King Tarquinius that are recorded; the peaceful and civic ones are such as the following, for these too I do not wish to pass over unmentioned. For straightway, as soon as he took up the office, eager to make the common people his own, as the former kings did, he won them over by such benefactions: having chosen a hundred men out of all the commons, to whom all bore witness some warlike valour or civic prudence, he made them patricians and enrolled them in the number of the senators; and then for the first time the Romans had three hundred senators, being till then two hundred.

[164131] 67.2. Then to the sacred virgins, by whom the unquenchable fire is guarded, being four, he added two others; for, more rites being now performed by the city, at which the sacrificers of Vesta had to be present, the four did not seem to suffice. Tarquinius having begun, the rest of the kings followed, and down to our own times six are appointed ministers of Vesta.

[164498] 67.3. He seems also to have been the first to devise the punishments by which those who do not keep their virginity are chastised by the hierophants — whether by reasoning or, as some think, persuaded by a dream — which after his death the interpreters of the rites say were found in the Sibylline oracles; for a certain priestess in his reign, Pinaria the daughter of Publius, was detected approaching the rites not pure. What the manner of punishment is by which they chastise the corrupted, I have set forth in the

[165017] 67.4. writing before this. The forum too, in which they judge and hold assemblies and perform the other civic acts, he adorned, enclosing it with workshops and colonnades, and the walls of the city, which were rough and poor in workmanship, he first built of wagon-sized stones worked to the rule.

[165316] 67.5. He began also to dig the subterranean channels, through which all the water flowing together from the alleys is conducted into the Tiber, having constructed works wonderful and beyond description. I, for my part, among the three most magnificent works of Rome, from which most of all the greatness of the empire is shown, count the aqueducts and the paving of the roads and the construction of the sewers, referring my judgment not only to the usefulness of the work, concerning which I shall speak at the proper time, but also to the costliness of the expenditures, which one might conjecture from a single work, taking Gaius Acilius as confirmer of what is to be said, who says that, the channels having once been neglected and no longer drained, the censors let the cleaning out and repair of them for a thousand talents.

[166148] 68.1. Tarquinius also built the largest of the hippodromes, the one lying between the Aventine and the Pallantium, being the first to make roofed seats round it (for till then they viewed standing) upon scaffolds, beams set beneath the wooden stands; and, dividing the places into thirty phratrae, he assigned to each phratra one portion, so that each, sitting in the proper place, might view.

[166543] 68.2. And this work too was destined in time to become among the very fair and wonderful constructions of the city. For the length of the hippodrome is three and a half stades, and the breadth four plethra; and round it, along the longer sides and along one of the shorter, a channel for the reception of water has been dug, ten feet in depth and breadth. Beyond the channel three-storeyed porticoes have been built. Of these the lower have stone seats, as in the theatres, rising a little one above another,

[167053] 68.3. and the upper wooden. The greater porticoes come together into one and join one another, being closed by the lesser, which has a crescent shape, so that out of the three there comes one amphitheatrical portico of eight stades, sufficient to receive a hundred and fifty thousand persons. The remaining one of the shorter sides, left open to the sky, has vaulted starting-stalls for the horses, all opened together by

[167476] 68.4. a single barrier. There is also outside the hippodrome another single-storeyed portico having workshops in it and dwellings above them, through which there are entrances and ascents for those who come to the spectacle at each workshop, so that the so many myriads are in no way hindered in entering and being released.

[167802] 69.1. This king undertook also to build the temple of Jupiter and Juno and Athena, rendering a vow which he made to the gods in the last battle against the Sabines. The hill, then, on which the temple was to be set up, needing much labour (for it was neither easy of access nor level, but steep and drawn together into a sharp summit), having encompassed it on many sides with high retaining-walls and heaped much earth into the space between the retaining-walls and the summit, he made level and most suitable for the reception of temples.

[168344] 69.2. But he did not succeed in laying the foundations of the temple, surviving four years after the ending of the war. Many years later, the third to reign after him, Tarquinius — the one cast out of the office — laid the foundations and wrought the most of the building. Yet not even this one completed the work, but under the annual magistrates who held the consulship in the third year the temple received its completion.

[168771] 69.3. It is worth recounting also the things that happened before its building, which all who have collected the histories of the country have handed down. For when Tarquinius was about to build the temple, having called together the augurs, he ordered the men first to take auspices concerning the place itself: what site of the city was most suitable to be dedicated as sacred and most pleasing to the gods themselves.

[169193] 69.4. When they had pointed out the hill overlooking the forum, which then was called Tarpeian, but now Capitoline, he again ordered them, having taken auspices, to say in what part of the hill it would be necessary to lay the foundations. This was not very easy; for there were many altars of gods and divinities on it, a little apart from one another, which it was necessary to remove elsewhere and to give over the whole ground to the precinct that was to be the gods'.

[169667] 69.5. It seemed good, then, to the augurs to take auspices concerning each altar of those set up, whether the gods would yield to having them moved at that time. The other gods and divinities, then, permitted them to transfer their altars to other places, but those of Terminus and Youth, though the diviners besought them much and importuned, were not persuaded nor endured to yield their places. Therefore their altars were included in the building of the temple, and now the one is in the porch of Athena, the other in the very shrine, near the seat of the god.

[170233] 69.6. From this the diviners conjectured that no time would move the boundaries of the city of the Romans nor change its prime; and down to my own times both of these is true of them, already to the twenty-fourth generation.

[170459] 70.1. The most distinguished of the augurs, the one who moved the altars and consecrated the precinct of Jupiter and foretold the other divine matters to the people through divination, was himself called by the common and personal name Naevius, and by the family name Attius; who is agreed to have been the most dear to the gods of all who were exact in the art, and to have obtained through it the greatest name, having displayed certain incredible excesses of the science of augury; of which I, having chosen one which I have most marvelled at, shall tell, premising from what chance setting out and what beginnings taking from the divine power he had so great a distinction as to make unenviable all who flourished in the

[171185] 70.2. same age. He had a poor father who farmed a paltry plot, with whom Naevius, being a boy, worked at the other tasks, as much as was in the power of those of his age, and, driving out the swine, tended them. Having once fallen asleep, and after waking not finding some of the swine, for a while he wept, dreading the blows from his father; then, going to the shrine of the heroes set up in the plot, he asked the heroes to help him find the swine, and, this being done, he promised to sacrifice to them the largest of the clusters of grapes from the

[171740] 70.3. plot. Having after a little found the swine, he wished to render to the heroes his vow, but was in much perplexity, unable to find the largest cluster. Distressed at the matter, he asked the gods to make plain to him through auspices what was sought. Then it came upon him by some divine prompting to divide the vineyard in two, taking one part of it on the right, the other on the left; then over each of the parts he observed the auspices presenting themselves. Birds having appeared over the one part, such as he himself wished, he again divided that ground in two and distinguished the birds presenting themselves in the same way. Using this division of the places, and going up to the last vine pointed out by the birds, he finds an incredible thing of a cluster, and, carrying it himself to the shrine of the heroes, is seen by his father.

[172593] 70.4. And to his father, who marvelled at the size of the bunch and inquired whence he had got it, he narrates all from the beginning. And he, supposing — which was the case — that there were certain inborn beginnings of divination in the boy, having brought him to the city, places him with teachers of letters; and when he had sufficiently shared in the common education, he hands him over to the most learned of the Tyrrhenians to be taught the

[173042] 70.5. art of augury. Having the inborn divination and acquiring the learned art from the Tyrrhenians besides, Naevius far surpassed, as I said, all the other augurs, and to all the public examinations the augurs of the city, though he was not of the college, summoned him because of the success of his divinations, and foretold nothing that did not seem good to him.

[173410] 71.1. This Naevius, when Tarquinius once wished to appoint three other new tribes out of the horsemen previously enrolled by himself, and to make the added tribes named after himself and his own companions, alone opposed it stoutly, not allowing any of the things established by Romulus to be disturbed.

[173715] 71.2. The king, aggrieved at the hindrance and holding Naevius in anger, set about to cast down his science to nothing, as a man boastful and saying nothing true. Having resolved this, he summoned Naevius to the tribunal, a great crowd being present in the forum. Having discoursed beforehand with those about him in what manner he supposed he would prove the augur a false prophet, when he came, taking him up with kindly greetings, "Now," he said, "is the time to display the exactness of your prophetic science, Naevius. For, intending to undertake a great deed, I wish to learn whether the possibility attaches to it. But go, and, having taken auspices, come quickly, and I, sitting here, will await you."

[174426] 71.3. The diviner did as commanded, and not long after was present, saying he had received favourable auspices and declaring the deed possible. Tarquinius, laughing at the word and bringing out from his bosom a razor and a whetstone, says to him: "You are caught, Naevius, deceiving us and manifestly lying against the divine power, since you have dared to call even impossible deeds possible. For I was taking auspices whether, striking this whetstone with this razor, I shall be able to cut it through the middle."

[174944] 71.4. Laughter arising from all about the tribunal, Naevius, in no way disturbed by the mockery and the uproar, "Strike with confidence, Tarquinius," he said, "the whetstone, as you purpose; for it will be divided, or I am ready to suffer anything whatsoever." The king, marvelling at the boldness of the diviner, brings the razor against the whetstone, and the edge of the iron, going down through the whole stone, both divides the whetstone and cuts off some part of the hand holding it.

[175435] 71.5. All the rest, then, when they beheld this wonderful and incredible deed, struck with amazement cried out, but Tarquinius, ashamed at the trial of the art and wishing to repair the unseemliness of his reproaches, first desisted from his attempts concerning the tribes, then, resolving to court Naevius himself, as the most dear to the gods of all men, won him over both by many other kindnesses and, that he might obtain undying remembrance from those who came after, having made a bronze image of him, set it up in the forum, which was still in my own time lying before the senate-house near the sacred fig-tree, smaller than a man of middling stature, having a mantle over its head. A little apart from it both the whetstone is said to be hidden under the earth and the razor under a certain altar; the place is called by the Romans the Well. And the things recorded concerning this diviner are these.

[176345] 72.1. King Tarquinius, now resting from warlike deeds because of old age (for he was eighty years old), is treacherously slain by the sons of Ancus Marcius and dies — they having attempted even earlier to cast him out of the office and often laboured at this, in the hope of the dominion falling to them when he should be expelled, as being their ancestral right and most easily to be given them by the citizens.

[176759] 72.2. But when they failed of this hope, they contrived an inescapable plot against him, which the divine power did not suffer to go unpunished. And I shall narrate the manner of the plot, beginning from their first attempt.

[176985] 72.3. That Naevius, the formidable augur, whom I said once opposed the king when he wished to make more tribes out of fewer, at the time when he most flourished through his art and was most powerful of all the Romans, whether envied by some rival in the art, or plotted against by enemies, or having suffered whatever else, suddenly becomes invisible, and neither could any of his relatives conjecture his death nor find his body;

[177417] 72.4. and the people being aggrieved and bearing the calamity grievously and taking many suspicions against many, the sons of Marcius, having marked the impulse of the multitude, referred the slander of the pollution to King Tarquinius, having nothing else to bring as proof or sign of the slander, but strengthening it by these two probabilities: first, that, having resolved to transgress in many new ways concerning the polity, he wished to put out of the way the one who would oppose him, as in the former cases; then, that, a dreadful calamity having occurred, he made no search for the doers, but handed the deed over to neglect — which none of those outside the charge would do.

[178104] 72.5. Having prepared great factions about themselves of patricians and commons, to whom they had given their own substance, they made much accusation of Tarquinius and exhorted the people not to look on while a defiled man laid his hands upon the rites and polluted the office, and that too one not native but an immigrant and without a city.

[178449] 72.6. Haranguing such things in the forum, men reckless and not unable to speak, they stirred up many of the commons, who, when he came to the forum for the sake of his defence, attempted to drive him out as not pure; yet they were not strong enough to overcome the truth nor able to persuade the people to cast him out of the office.

[178785] 72.7. But when both he himself, having defended himself most powerfully, cleared away the slander concerning himself, and his son-in-law Tullius, to whom he had given his other daughter, being most powerful among the people, drew the Romans into pity, they, having been deemed sycophants and base men and incurring much shame, departed from the forum.

[179138] 73.1. Having failed of this attempt and obtained through friends a reconciliation of the enmity — Tarquinius bearing their unreasonableness moderately because of the benefactions from their father and supposing repentance a sufficient correction of their rashness — they remained three years in the pretence of friendship; but when they supposed they had a suitable occasion, they stitch against him such a snare as this:

[179561] 73.2. having clothed two of the boldest young men from the conspiracy in shepherds' garments and armed them with woodmen's bill-hooks, they send them to the king's house at midday, having taught them what they must say and do and shown them beforehand the manner of the attack. These, coming near the palace, reviled one another as men wronged, and did not even keep their hands off one another's bodies, and, using a great shout, both called for the help from the king, many from the conspiracy being present with them — countrymen, of course, in the story — sharing the indignation of both and bearing witness for them.

[180184] 73.3. When the king, having called them in, ordered them to say concerning what they were at difference, they pretended to be disputing about goats, and, shouting at once and passionately gesticulating in the wild manner and saying nothing to the point, they roused much laughter from all. When they thought they had got, from being despised, the suitable occasion of the attempt, they bring blows with the bill-hooks down upon the king's head, and, having done this, fled out of doors.

[180672] 73.4. A cry arising at the calamity and help running together from many quarters, being unable to escape, they are seized by their pursuers, and after this, mangled with tortures and forced to name the leaders of the plot, they met in time with the fitting punishment. King Tarquinius, then, having become the author of no small nor few goods to the Romans, having held the office eight and thirty years, thus ends his life.