WORK: Antiquitates Romanae  (slug: dionysius-of-halicarnass-antiquitates-romanae-97af98)

CHAPTER: 06-book-6



[110189] 56.2. now, hear from me. I think the people are neither irreconcilable toward us nor will do any of the things they threaten, judging that their deeds are not like their words, but I think they are far more eager than we for a settlement. For we both dwell in our most honoured country and have our livelihoods and houses and families and all things of most worth in our own power; but they are without city and without hearth, deprived of the persons most necessary to them, and have no easy supply for their daily living.

[110714] 56.3. "For what reason, then, if anyone should ask me, does the people not accept our proposals, though itself suffering ill, and yet send no embassy to us?—Because, by Jupiter, I would say, up to now it hears words from the senate, but sees no deed coming from them either humane or moderate, and thinks it has often been deceived by us, who always promise to take some forethought for it, but take none. And it does not endure to send an embassy, both fearing those here accustomed to accuse it, and dreading lest it fail of any of its demands.

[111262] 56.4. "Perhaps too there may be in it some passion of foolish pride; and that is no marvel, since even among ourselves there are some in whom is this quarrelsomeness and contentiousness, who think fit, both privately and publicly, not to be worsted by their adversary, but ever seek by every means to prevail, and not first to grant any favour until they get the one to be benefited into their power. Reflecting, then, on these things, I think an embassy should be sent to the commoners from those most trusted by them;

[111783] 56.5. "and I advise that the men to be sent be invested with full powers to settle the strife on whatever terms they themselves think just, referring nothing further to the senate; for they will know this. And those who now seem arrogant and harsh, when they learn that you truly are zealous for concord, will come down to more equitable terms, demanding nothing either shameful or impossible. For everything that is provoked, especially if it be humble, is wont to grow savage toward those who scorn it, but to be tamed toward those who court it."

[112333] 57.1. When Menenius had said this, a great murmur fell upon the senate, and they talked among themselves in groups—those well disposed toward the commoners urging one another to bring all zeal that they might lead the people back to their country, since they had now gained as leader of that opinion the most distinguished of the aristocratic men; while the aristocrats, wishing above all that the polity should not be moved from the ancestral order, were at a loss what to do with the present circumstances, not thinking fit to change their purposes, yet unable to remain by their resolutions; and the uncommitted, who took the side of neither faction, wished to keep the peace and to consider how they should not be besieged.

[113062] 57.2. When silence fell, the elder of the consuls, having praised Menenius for his nobility and thought fit that the rest should prove guardians like him, speaking what they thought with frankness and doing without hesitation what was resolved, called next, in the same manner, by name, asking him to declare his opinion, Manius Valerius, brother of him who had helped free the city from the kings, a man more devoted to the people than any of the aristocrats whatsoever.

[113535] 58.1. He, rising, first reminded the senate of his own policies, and that, though he had often foretold the evils that would befall, they had treated his words with neglect; then he thought fit that those opposed to the reconciliation should not now seek moderate things, but, since they had not let the strife be removed when the city's differences were still small, at least now consider how it might quickly cease and not, advancing further, escape notice and become perhaps incurable, or, if not, hard to cure and the cause of many evils to them. And he declared that the demand of the commoners would no longer be the same as before, nor did he conjecture that the people would come to terms asking only release from debts, but would perhaps need some safeguard by which it might continue secure for the future;

[114353] 58.2. for, since the office of dictator had come in, the law guarding their freedom had been abolished—the law which neither allowed the consuls to put to death any citizen untried, nor that the commoners worsted in trial by the patricians should be handed over to those who had condemned them, but gave to those who wished the right to transfer the judgments from the patricians to the people, and that whatever the people decided should be valid. And almost all the rest of the power of the commoners, of which in former times they had been masters, had been taken away—seeing that not even the triumph from the wars could be obtained from the senate for a man more deserving of this honour than any other, Publius Servilius

[115081] 58.3. Priscus. At these things, suffering naturally, the many were dispirited and had wretched hopes for their safety, since neither consul nor dictator who wished to care for them had been able to, but one of them had even reaped insult and dishonour for his zeal and forethought on behalf of the many. And these things, he said, had been wrought by a conspiracy not of the most gracious of the patricians, but of certain insolent and grasping men, terribly eager for unjust gain, who, having enslaved many citizens for a great difference and at high interest, and applying to them cruel and arrogant compulsions, made the whole commons estranged from the aristocracy; and having formed a faction and proclaimed as its leader Appius Claudius, a man hating the people and oligarchic, through him confound all the city's affairs. And unless the sound part of the senate stood in their way, the city was in danger of some enslavement and overthrow. At the end he declared that he agreed to use the opinion of Menenius, and thought fit to send the embassy quickly; and that the men, when they came, should try to settle the strife as they wished, but, if no one should grant them what they wanted, should accept what was given.

[116307] 59.1. After him rose, when called, Appius Claudius, the leader of the faction opposed to the people, a man thinking much of himself, and that not without just cause; for his daily private life was temperate and grave, and the choice of his policies was noble and preserved the dignity of the aristocracy. He, taking occasion from the harangue of Valerius, used such words as these:

[116690] 59.2. "Valerius would have been less to blame, had he declared only his own opinion and not accused those who held the contrary; for he might have heard none of the evils that belong to him. But since it did not suffice him to advise such things as will make us slaves to none but the basest of the citizens, but he both laid hold of those who opposed him and made hostile mention of me, I see much necessity that I too should speak on these matters, and first clear myself of the slanders against me. For he has reproached me with a practice neither civic nor seemly—that I have chosen to make money from every source, and have deprived many of the poor of their freedom, and that the secession of the people has come about not least on my account—none of which it is easy for you to learn is either true or sound.

[117507] 59.3. "Come, then, say, O Valerius, who are those whom I enslaved for debt? Whom of the citizens did I hold, or do I now hold, in bonds? Which of the seceders is deprived of his country through my cruelty or love of money? But you could not say. For so far am I from having enslaved any citizen for debt, that, having given out my own to very many, I made none of those who defrauded me liable to seizure or dishonour, but all are free, and all owe me thanks and are counted among my friends and clients in matters most necessary. And I say this not to accuse those who have not done the like with me, nor do I think those wrong who did some act allowed by law; but I am clearing myself of the slanders against me.

[118223] 60.1. "As for what he reproached me with as to harshness and the patronage of wicked men, calling me a hater of the people and oligarchic because I cling to the aristocracy—these are common accusations against all of you, as many as think fit, being the better, not to be ruled by the worse, nor to have the polity you inherited from your forefathers taken away by the basest of all polities among men, democracy.

[118638] 60.2. "For let not this man give the name of oligarchy to the leadership of the best, as though the thing, slandered by the name, would thereby be obliterated; but we might far more justly and truly bring the reproach of demagogy and a longing for tyrannic deeds. For it is unclear to no one that every tyrant springs from a fawner upon the people, and that the road is swift for those who wish to enslave cities which leads through the basest citizens to despotic power; whom this man has continued to court and

[119152] 60.3. does not even now cease. For know well that the base and humble would not have dared to commit so great offences, had they not been roused by this grave and patriotic man, on the ground that the deed would be without danger to them, and that, besides paying no penalty, they would have a better lot than before. And you would learn that I speak the truth, recalling that, while frightening you about war and declaring the reconciliation necessary, he at the same time said that the poor would not be content to be released from their debts, but would need some safeguard too, and would no longer endure to be ruled by you as before; and at the end he thought fit that you should be content with the present and concede whatever the people should think right to take on its return, not distinguishing the base from the noble nor the unjust from the just.

[120013] 60.4. "To such arrogance, then, has this man—an elder and one who has reaped all the honours from you—filled the folly of the city. Was it worth your while, Valerius, to utter against others reproaches that do not belong to them, when you are yourself liable to such accusations?

[120294] 61.1. "Against the slanders uttered by this man, what has been said suffices. But concerning the matters about which you have assembled to deliberate, I think it both just and worthy of the city and expedient for you—not only what I declared at the first, but, persisting in the same opinion now too, I declare—not to confound the order of the polity, nor to disturb the unalterable customs of our fathers, nor to abolish from among men faith, a sacred thing, with which every city is safely governed, nor to yield to a people senseless and craving unjust and unlawful deeds.

[120871] 61.2. "And so far am I from bowing any part of my opinion through fear of those at variance with us—who, banding against me the commons in the city, try to frighten me—that I am far more strongly fixed in my anger than before, and am doubly indignant at the demands of the people; and I have marvelled, senators, at the strangeness of your opinion, that, having not granted it cancellations of debts and release from condemnations when it was not yet plainly an enemy and asked for them, now, when it is in arms and does the deeds of enemies, you deliberate whether you will concede these things—and whatever else may seem good to it; and it will think fit, doubtless, and will make this the first of its demands, to be of equal honour and to share

[121621] 61.3. the same things with us. Will not affairs, then, come round to a democracy, the most ignorant, as I said, of polities among men, and disadvantageous to you who think fit to rule others? Not if you are wise. Or you would be the most senseless of all, if, having deemed it intolerable to be ruled by one tyrannic man, you now hand yourselves over to a many-headed tyranny, the people, and grant it these things not as it persuades you with favours, but overpowered by necessity and as men yielding against their will, since it is not possible now to do otherwise.

[122190] 61.4. "But when folly, instead of being punished for its offences, gains honour for them too, how arrogant and haughty, think you, will it be? For do not be lifted up by this hope, that the people will be moderate in its demands, if it become plain to it that you have all so voted.

[122474] 62.1. "But most of all in this Menenius has been deceived in his judgment—a temperate man, who from his own ways conjectures good of others. For it will press upon you grievously beyond what is fitting, through the arrogance which is wont always to attend on power, and through the folly, of which the multitude shares the greatest part; and if not at the first, at least in time afterward, and at each thing it asks and fails to obtain, it will take up arms and set upon you haughtily in the same way. So that if you concede the first things, thinking them expedient, you will at once be commanded something worse, and again another thing harder than this, since you obeyed the first too through fear, until in the end they cast you from the city—as in many other places, and most recently in Syracuse, the landholders were driven out by their clients.

[123329] 62.2. "But if you mean to be indignant at those things and oppose their demands, why do you not begin straightway to have free spirits? For it is better, setting out from a lesser cause, before you have been harmed at all, to display your nobility, than, having endured many things, then to be indignant about what has happened and not to entrust the rest, and late to begin to have sense. Let no one of you be frightened either by the agitation of the seceders or by the war of the foreigners; nor condemn your own force as not sufficient to save the city.

[123888] 62.3. "For the strength of the exiles is small and will not hold out long, remaining, as now, in the open under huts in the wintry season, and unable to provide its necessities—not by plunder, when it has consumed what it has, nor by buying and importing from elsewhere, through poverty, men who have no money either privately or in common; and wars for the most part hold out by surpluses of money; and anarchy, as is likely, and the faction arising from anarchy, falling upon them, will quickly dissolve and break up their counsels.

[124424] 62.4. "For surely they will not think fit, having surrendered themselves to Sabines or Tyrrhenians or any other foreigners, to be slaves to those whose freedom they themselves once took away along with you; and least of all will they be trusted by them—men who eagerly sought to destroy their own country basely and shamefully—not to do the like to the city that receives them. And all the nations round about you are governed by aristocracy, and in no city does the populace lay claim to equality; so that surely the leading men in each city, who do not allow their own crowd to make disturbance, will not receive this intrusive and factious one into their own country, lest, not having shared like rights themselves, they be in time deprived of equality.

[125182] 62.5. "But if indeed I err in judgment and some city should receive them, there they will be recognised as enemies and will suffer the lot of enemies. And we have as hostages their fathers and wedded wives and the rest of their kin, than which we could not, even praying, ask better of the gods; whom, setting them in sight of their kinsmen, we will destroy, if they dare to come to grips, as men about to use them with the uttermost outrages. And themselves, if they learn this, know well, you will get supplicating, lamenting, surrendering themselves to us without their arms, enduring everything. For such necessities are dreadful and able to break and cast to nothing all arrogant calculations.

[125882] 63.1. "These are the reasons why I think the war from the exiles is not to be feared. As for the terrors from the foreigners, it is not now first that they will be tested and found to be such only in word; before too, as often as they gave us trial of themselves, they appeared less than their reputation. And those who think the city's own force not sufficient, and on this account most dread the war, let them learn that they have not adequately perceived it.

[126345] 63.2. "Against the seceders among the citizens we shall have a counterbalancing force, if we wish, by choosing the most vigorous of our servants and freeing them. For it is better to grant freedom to these than to be deprived of our empire by those; and they have sufficient experience of war, having often been present with us on the campaigns.

[126692] 63.3. "Against the foreign enemies let us go ourselves with all zeal, and bring all our clients and what is left of the commons. And that this last may be eager for the contests, let us grant it release from debts—not in common, but man by man. For if we must yield to the times and use moderation, let this moderation not be toward our enemy citizens, but toward our friends, to whom we shall seem to give favours not under compulsion but of persuasion. And if there be need of yet other help, this not sufficing, let us summon those from the forts and recall those in the colonies.

[127277] 63.4. "How great a multitude this is, it would be easy to learn from the most recent census. There are a hundred and thirty thousand Romans of military age registered, of whom the exile element would not be a seventh part. And I do not count the thirty cities of the Latins, which would with much prayer welcome the contests on our behalf, on account of kinship, if you should but vote them equal citizenship, which they continually keep asking for.

[127728] 64.1. "And that which is the strongest of all in wars, which you yourselves have not yet considered, nor any of the counsellors mentions—this I will add and then cease. There is nothing of which those who would have a fortunate issue of their contests have such need as of good generals. Of these our city is rich, but those of our adversaries are poor.

[128083] 64.2. "For numerous forces, when they get commanders who do not know how to rule, behave unseemly and are for the most part tripped up by their own size, and suffer the more, the greater toil they have; but good generals, even if they get small forces, quickly make them great. So that, so long as we have men able to lead, we shall not lack those willing to be ruled.

[128453] 64.3. "Reflecting, then, on these things and remembering the city's deeds, vote nothing humble or ignoble or unworthy of yourselves. What, then, if someone should ask me, do I advise you to do? For perhaps you have long been eager to know this. Neither to send any embassy to the seceders, nor to vote a cancellation of debts, nor to do anything else that might seem a token of fear and helplessness; but if, laying down their arms, they come down to the city and put it in your power to deliberate about them, then, examining at leisure, to use moderation toward them, knowing that all that is senseless—especially if it be a crowd—is wont to grow arrogant toward the humble, but to be humbled toward the arrogant."

[129171] 65.1. When Claudius had ceased, a great clamour and extraordinary tumult held the council for a long while. For those who seemed aristocratic and thought it right to look to the more just before the unjust attached themselves to the opinion of Claudius and urged the consuls, best of all, to join the stronger party, considering that they held a kingly, not a popular, magisterial power; or, failing that, to keep themselves neutral and let neither faction prevail, and, having counted the opinions of the councillors, to side with the more numerous opinions.

[129732] 65.2. But if, disregarding both of these, they should make themselves masters of the settlements, they said they would not permit them, but would oppose them with all zeal, with words while they could, and with arms when it became necessary. And this was a strong body, and almost the whole youth of the patricians held to this purpose.

[130070] 65.3. But those who desired peace attached themselves to the opinion of Menenius and Valerius, and especially the advanced in age, reflecting on the disasters that befall cities from civil wars. Being overborne by the shouting and disorder of the young men, and suspecting their ambition, and fearing the violence they were making against the consuls—that it would come not far short of blows, unless someone yielded to them—they ended by turning to tears and entreaties of their opponents.

[130562] 66.1. When the tumult had abated and silence came, after a while the consuls, having conferred a little among themselves, brought forth this as the conclusion of their opinion: "We, senators, thought it best of all that all of you should be of one mind, especially in deliberating about the common safety; but, failing that, that the younger should yield to the elder among you and not contend, reflecting that to them too, when they reach this age, it will fall to receive equal honour from their descendants. But since we see you fallen into a most destructive strife—the deadliest of human diseases—and much arrogance attending your young men, for now, since little of the day is left and your resolutions could not reach an end in it, depart from the council; and at the next assembly you will come more moderate and with better opinions.

[131406] 66.2. "But if your contentiousness remains, we will use the young no longer as judges or counsellors of what is expedient, but for the future will check their disorder by fixing by law the number of years which those who deliberate must have; and giving the word again to the elder, if they agree on nothing in their opinions, we will end their contention by a quick road, which it is better for you to hear and learn beforehand.

[131837] 66.3. "You know, doubtless, that we have a law, from the time we have dwelt in this city, that the senate is mistress of all things, save to appoint magistrates, to ratify laws, and to declare war or to end one in being; of these three the people has the power by casting its vote. And at present we deliberate about nothing other than war and peace, so that there is much necessity that the people, becoming master of the vote, should ratify our opinions.

[132295] 66.4. "Having ordered the multitude, therefore, according to this law to come to the Forum, when you have declared your opinions, we will give it the vote, thinking that thus your strife would best be lifted; and whatever the majority votes, this we shall hold valid. Worthy, surely, to obtain this honour are those who remain well-disposed to the city and are to share equally with us in evils and goods."

[132703] 67.1. Having said this, they dissolved the assembly. On the following days, having ordered that all in the fields and forts should be summoned, and having proclaimed to the senate to come on the same day, when they perceived that the city was full of crowds and that the opinions of the patricians were being overborne by the entreaties which the fathers and infant children of the seceders made with wailing and lamentation, on the appointed day they went out to the Forum, which from much

[133195] 67.2. of the night was crowded throughout with a multifarious throng. And coming forward to the temple of Vulcan, where it was their custom to hold the assemblies, first they praised the people for the eagerness and zeal of their coming in such numbers; then they urged them to wait quietly until the senate's preliminary decree should be made; and to the kinsmen of the seceders they advised good hopes, as men who would before long recover their dearest. After this, going into the council, they themselves discoursed reasonable and moderate words, and thought fit that the others too should declare kindly and humane opinions. First of all the rest they called Menenius; who, rising, used the same words as before, summoning the senate to the reconciliation, and declared the same opinion, thinking fit to send an embassy to the seceders quickly with full powers for the settlement.

[134082] 68.1. After him rose, called by age, those who had held the consular office, to all of whom it seemed best to use the opinion of Menenius, until the word came down to Appius. He, rising, said: "I see that it is acceptable both to the consuls, senators, and to almost all the rest of you to bring back the people on whatever terms it itself thinks fit; and I alone of all am left of those who opposed the settlement, remaining hateful to them and no longer of any use to you.

[134558] 68.2. "Yet not on this account will I depart from what I resolved from the first, nor will I willingly leave my post in the polity. The more deserted I become of those who chose the same things as I, the more honoured I shall be by you at some time hereafter; and praise shall be mine while I live, and, when I am dead, remembrance from those who come after. May it be, then, O Capitoline Jupiter and gods who watch over our city, heroes and divinities, as many as oversee the land of the Romans, that the return of the exiles be fair and expedient for all, and may I be proved false in the hopes

[135156] 68.3. I hold for the future. But if any evil befall the city from these counsels—and this will be plain before long—may you yourselves give swift correction to it and sure safety to the commonwealth, and to me, who neither on any other occasion chose to say what is pleasant rather than what is most useful, nor now betray the common good while contriving my own private safety,

[135536] 68.4. be gracious and kind. To the gods, then, I pray these things, for there is no longer need of words; but my opinion, which I declare as before, is that those of the commoners who remain in the city be released from their debts, but that we war with all zeal against the seceders, so long as they remain in arms."

[135855] 69.1. Having said this, he ceased. When the opinions of the elders had attached themselves to that of Menenius, and the word came down to the younger, the whole senate being upright, there rose Spurius Nautius, successor of one of the most illustrious houses; for the founder of their line, Nautius, was one of those who set out the colony with Aeneas, who was priest of Athena Polias and carried off the image of the goddess when he migrated, which others kept by succession, those of the line of the Nautii; and he was thought, both for his own valour, to be the most brilliant of the young men, and that before long he would attain the consular power.

[136511] 69.2. Beginning to make a common defence on behalf of all the young men—that they had used neither contentiousness toward their fathers nor arrogance when they held the contrary purpose in the former senate, but, if at all they erred, they erred through their youth in failing of judgment—he ended by saying that he would furnish the proof of this in their change of mind. At all events, he said, they yielded to them as wiser, to vote everything they thought expedient for the commonwealth, since they at least would oppose nothing of these things, but

[137066] 69.3. would obey their elders. When the other young men declared the like with him, except a very few of Appius' kinsmen, the consuls, praising their good order and exhorting them to show themselves such in all common affairs, chose as envoys the ten most distinguished of the elders, all but one of consular rank. Those appointed were these: Agrippa Menenius Lanatus, son of Gaius; Manius Valerius, son of Volusus...; Publius Servilius, son of Publius...; Publius Postumius Tubertus, son of Quintus; Titus Aebutius Flavius, son of Titus; Servius Sulpicius Camerinus, son of Publius; Aulus Postumius Balbus, son of Publius; Aulus Verginius Caelimontanus, son of Aulus.

[137736] 69.4. After this, the senate being dissolved, the consuls, coming forward to the assembly, read the decree of the senate and brought forward the envoys; and when all thought fit to learn the instructions given to them, they said in public: to do, in whatever way they could, the making of friendship for the people with the patricians without guile and deceit, and to bring back the fugitives to their own with speed.

[138155] 70.1. The envoys, having received these instructions from them, set out the same day. Rumour, outrunning their coming, announced to those in the camp all that had happened in the city, and at once all, leaving the stronghold, met the envoys while they were still on the road. There was in the camp a certain very turbulent and factious man, sharp in mind to foresee something of what was to come from afar, and able to say what he thought, being talkative and not without glibness, who was called Lucius Junius, of the same name as the one who overthrew the kings; and, wishing to fulfil the namesake, he thought fit to be surnamed Brutus too. To the many, then, laughter at the man's empty pretension came, and whenever they wished to mock him they called him Brutus.

[138925] 70.2. This man, having taught Sicinius, the commander of the camp, that it was not better for the people lightly to entrust itself to the proposals, lest, from a lesser claim, it should find its return the more dishonourable, but to hold out for a long while and put a kind of feigned tragedy upon affairs, and having promised that he himself would take up the speech on behalf of the people and having laid down the rest of what should be done or said, persuaded Sicinius. After this Sicinius, summoning the people to an assembly, bade the envoys speak about what they had come for.

[139510] 71.1. Coming forward, Manius Valerius, who was the eldest and most popular of them, the multitude witnessing his zeal with most kindly cries and salutations, when he had obtained silence, used such words as these: "There is nothing now to hinder you, commoners, from returning again to your own and being reconciled with the fathers.

[139845] 71.2. "For the senate has voted you a fair and expedient return, and has made it its resolve to bear no rancour for anything that has happened; and us, whom it knew to be most devoted to the people and honoured by you for our justice, it has sent as envoys, having invested us with full powers for the settlement, that, not using opinions and conjectures about your mind, but hearing from yourselves on what terms you think fit to end the dissension—if any of your demands be moderate and hindered neither by impossibility nor by some other irreparable disgrace—we may grant them to you, no longer awaiting the council's opinion, nor putting off matters to long delays and the envy of opponents.

[140542] 71.3. "The senate having thus voted, receive their favours gladly, commoners, with all eagerness and zeal, accounting it a great thing—such great good fortune—and owing much thanks to the gods for it, if the city of the Romans, ruling so many men, and a council that holds the leadership of all the goods in it, though it is not their ancestral way to yield to any of their adversaries, bow to you alone in their claim willingly, and have neither thought fit to bargain precisely about what befits each party, as superiors with inferiors, but themselves were first to send an embassy about a settlement, nor received with anger your arrogant answers, which you made to the former envoys, but endured this proud and boyish weight of your arrogance, like good fathers with foolish children; and thought fit to send yet another embassy and to take less than their due and to endure everything, citizens, that is

[141452] 71.4. moderate. Standing, then, on such good fortune, do not delay to say, commoners, what you need, nor trifle with us, but, ending the strife, depart rejoicing to the city that bore and reared you—to which you rendered no fair returns for your nurture, leaving it, as far as in you lay, deserted and a pasture for sheep. But if you let slip this opportunity, you will often pray to find another like it."

[141860] 72.1. When Valerius had ceased, Sicinius came forward and said that those who deliberate well ought to examine the expedient not from a single argument, but to set before themselves the opposing argument too, especially when considering matters of such moment; and he thought fit that those who wished should speak to these things, laying aside all shame and reserve; for the affairs, shut up in such necessities, permitted them to yield neither to hesitation nor to

[142328] 72.2. shame. When silence fell—since all looked at one another seeking the one who would speak for the common good, but none appeared, for Sicinius kept using the same words—there came forward, according to his promise, that Lucius Junius, the one who wished to be surnamed Brutus, and, having met with a sudden burst of applause from the multitude, delivered such a harangue:

[142706] 72.3. "The fear of the patricians, commoners, still frozen in your souls, seems to dismay you, and on this account, being humbled, you hesitate to bring out into the open the words you are accustomed to use among yourselves. And perhaps each of you thinks his neighbour will speak for the common good, and that all rather, if there be any risk, will endure it, while he himself, having stood in safety, will, of whatever good comes from daring, have his share without fear—an ill calculation. For if all of us should suppose this, the cowardice of each one of you singly will become a common harm to all, and in seeking his own private safety each man

[143359] 72.4. will destroy the common good of all. But if you did not before know that your fear is loosed and that you hold your freedom securely along with your arms, learn it now at least, using these men as teachers. For the haughty and harsh come now not commanding you as before, nor threatening, but begging and exhorting you to return to your own, and they begin to deal with you as with free men on equal terms. Why, then, are you still dismayed at them and silent, and do not have free spirits and, breaking your bridles at last, say in common what you have suffered at their hands? O wretched men,

[143961] 72.5. what do you fear? That you will suffer some harm by using me as leader of your free speech? For I will risk it on your behalf, speaking what is just with frankness to them, and I will hide nothing. And since Valerius said there was nothing to hinder you from returning to your homes, the senate granting the return and having voted besides to bear no rancour, I will answer him these things, which are true and necessary to be said.

[144401] 73.1. "There are, Valerius, many other things to hinder us from laying down our arms and putting ourselves in your power, but three the greatest and most manifest. First, that you come accusing us as wrongdoers and think to grant the return as a kind of benefit; next, that you give no hint, in summoning us to the reconciliation, on what just and humane terms we shall make it; and last, that nothing of what you may promise is sure to us, but you have continued often to deceive and cheat us.

[144897] 73.2. "I will speak of each separately, beginning from the just; for both privately and in public one ought to begin from the just. We, then, if we are wronging you at all, need neither impunity nor amnesty; and indeed we do not even think fit to share in the city any longer, but will endure, wherever necessity may lead us, entrusting ourselves to fortune and the divinities as guides. But if, being wronged by you, we have been forced to make trial of the fortune in which we are, why do you not confess that you yourselves, having dealt ill with us, need pardon and amnesty? But now you say you grant what you ask for, and the anger from which you seek to be freed, this you boast as though you were remitting it—confounding the nature of truth and reversing the claim of justice.

[145683] 73.3. "That you are not wronged but do the wrong, and, having received many great benefits from the people—some toward freedom, some toward empire—have rendered it no fair returns, learn. And I will make my arguments from facts which you yourselves know; and, by the gods, if I say anything false, do not endure it, but at once refute me.

[146023] 74.1. "Our ancient polity was monarchy, and we continued to use this polity down to the seventh generation; and through all these leaderships the people was never at any time worsted by the kings, and least of all by the last; I forbear to say that it reaped many great goods from their rule.

[146317] 74.2. "For, apart from the rest of their courting of it—by which, flattering it, they wished it to be their own and your enemy, which all do who manage their power in tyrannic fashion—when they had conquered after a long war Suessa, a most prosperous city, though they might have shared the spoils with no one but kept them themselves and surpassed all kings in wealth, they did not think fit to do so, but brought all the booty into the common stock; so that we, apart from slaves and cattle and the rest of the possessions, which were many and fair, distributed five minae of silver per man.

[146912] 74.3. "Neglecting these things, when they used their power more tyrannically—erring not against the people but against you—we, ill-bearing what was being done, withdrew from goodwill toward the kings and attached ourselves to you; and rising up against them with you, both those in the city and those in the camp, we expelled them and, bringing it to you, entrusted to you their power. And though it was often in our power to go over to the exiles for the great gifts they held out to us, that we might abandon our faith to you, we did not endure it, but drained off many great and continuous wars and dangers on your behalf; and to the present, this seventeenth year now, we have been worn out fighting all men for the common freedom.

[147649] 74.4. "For while the polity was still unsettled—as is wont to happen amid changes made suddenly—against two of the most distinguished cities of the Tyrrhenians, the Tarquinienses and the Veientes, who wished to bring back the kings with a great army, we, few against many, ventured and fought it out, and, displaying the greatest zeal, conquered in battle and drove off those arrayed against us, and with the surviving consul preserved the magistracy.

[148102] 74.5. "Not long after, when Porsina, king of the Tyrrhenians, himself thought fit to bring back the exiles, with the force from all Tyrrhenia which he led and those long since gathered by the exiles, we, having no force a match for them and on this account shut up in a siege and helplessness and want of every resource, by enduring all the terrors compelled him, become our friend, to depart.

[148497] 74.6. "Last of all, when the kings had prepared a third return through the Latin nation and were bringing thirty cities against us, seeing you supplicating and lamenting and each one of you calling upon us, reminding us of comradeship and fellowship of rearing and brotherhood in arms, we did not endure to abandon you; but, thinking it the fairest and most brilliant contest, the one on your behalf, we advanced against the perils, hazarding that greatest of dangers, in which, receiving many wounds and losing many persons of kinsmen and comrades and tent-mates, we conquered the enemy and slew their commanders and destroyed the whole royal kindred.

[149151] 75.1. "These are the things we furnished beyond our strength, through our own eagerness, toward freeing you from the tyrants, set to it not by necessity more than by valour. Now hear what we did toward your being honoured and ruling others and putting on a dominion greater than the original expectation; and, if I turn the speech aside at all from the truth, as I said at the beginning, oppose

[149547] 75.2. me. For you, when the safety of your freedom seemed secure, did not think it enough to remain at this, but, rushing to daring and innovation—and perhaps thinking all that surrounds freedom an enemy, and well-nigh proclaiming war against all men—you thought fit to use our bodies for all the ventures and contests on behalf of this greed.

[149892] 75.3. "How many cities, then, waging war against you one and two at a time for their freedom, we made subject—some overcoming them in pitched battle, some taking them by storm of their walls—I pass over. For why should I tell the deeds bit by bit, having such abundance of arguments? But all Tyrrhenia, divided into twelve principalities and abounding in power great both by land and by sea—who were they that helped win it and made it subject to you? And these Sabines here, a nation so great, with whom you had ever the contest for the primacy—what aid afforded you no longer to dispute over equality? And what of the thirty cities of the Latins, lifted up not only by greatness of power but also proud in claiming the more just—who were they that enslaved them and made them, begging against the enslavement and razing of their cities, flee for refuge to you?

[150756] 76.1. "I pass over the rest—how, while not yet at variance with you, and ourselves laying claim to the hopes from empire, we shared the dangers with you. But when you had plainly clothed your magistracy in tyranny and were proved to be treating us like slaves, and we no longer remained the same in our minds toward you, and at the same time nearly all the subjects were rising in revolt—the Volscians beginning the rebellion, and following them the Aequians, Hernicans, Sabines, and many others—and it seemed there was such an opportunity as no other, had we wished it, to accomplish one of two things, either to overthrow your empire or to render it more moderate for the future—do you remember into what despair of empire you came and how you were utterly dispirited, whether we should not join the contests with you or, in anger, turn against you as enemies, and how many entreaties and promises you made?

[151667] 76.2. "What, then, did we, the humble and insulted by you, do then? Worsted by your entreaties and persuaded by the promises which this excellent Servilius, then consul, made to the people, we bore no rancour for the old wrongs, but, hoping for good things for the time to come, gave ourselves to you, and, having in a short time finished all the warlike work, came back leading many prisoners and fair booty.

[152078] 76.3. "In return for which, what thanks did you render us? Just thanks, worthy of the dangers? Whence? Far from it. You falsified the promises which you bade the consul make on behalf of the commonwealth, and the man himself, this excellent one whom you used for the deceit, you made to have no share in the triumph, though most of all men deserving to obtain this honour, fixing on him the insult for no other reason than that he thought fit you should do what is just as you had promised, and was plainly indignant at the deceit.

[152611] 77.1. "And lately—for, adding this to my speech about the just, I will cease—when the Aequians and Sabines and Volscians, using one mind, both themselves rose up and summoned the rest, were you not forced to flee for refuge to us, the humble and base, you the grave and weighty, promising everything for your safety then? And, that you might not seem to deceive us again, which you often did, you found as a veil for the deceit this Manius Valerius, the most popular of men; trusting in whom, that we should not be deceived by a dictator, and that a man kind toward us, we joined you in this war too and conquered the enemy, enduring contests not small nor few nor obscure.

[153286] 77.2. "But when the fairest part of the war had reached its end sooner than the hope of all, so far were you from rejoicing and owing much thanks to the people, that you thought fit to keep us still, against our will, under the standards in arms, that you might evade the promises as you had resolved from the first. And when the man would not endure the deceit nor the shame of the deed, but brought the standards into the city and dismissed the forces to their homes, making this a pretext for not doing what was just, you insulted him, and observed none of your agreements with us, but in the same act committed three of the greatest crimes: abolishing the dignity of the senate, destroying the faith of the man, and making unprofitable to your benefactors the thanks for their toils.

[154075] 77.3. "Having these and many other like things to say to you, patricians, we do not think fit to turn to supplications and entreaties of you, nor, like those who have done dreadful deeds, to receive our return on impunity and amnesty. Yet we do not think we ought to argue precisely about these things at present, since we have assembled to discourse about concord, but we let them go, consigning them to neglect and oblivion.

[154503] 78.1. "But on what terms you make your embassy, and what you have come to ask, why do you not say plainly? On what hopes do you think fit that we return to the city? Having taken what fortune as guide of the road? With what cheer or joy to receive us? For up to now we hear you holding forth nothing humane or good—no honours, no offices, no remedy for poverty, nothing whatever at all. And yet you ought not to say what you are about to do, but, having done it, to say it, that, having already received some deed done from goodwill, we might conjecture the rest

[155067] 78.2. will be such. I suppose, then, they will say to this that they have come with full powers, so that whatever we persuade one another of shall be valid. Let this be true; let what follows from it come to pass; I make no objection. But I wish to learn from them what will be after this—when we have said on what terms we think fit to make the return, and these have been conceded by them—who will be the guarantor to us of the agreements?

[155510] 78.3. "Trusting what security shall we lay our arms from our hands and put our persons again into their power? The decrees of the senate to be written about these things—for not yet written? And what again will prevent these from being annulled by other decrees, whenever it seems good to Appius and those who think like him? Or the dignity of the envoys, who pledge their own faith? But it was through these very men that they deceived us before. Or, having procured pledges from them by oaths in covenants before the gods? But I, beyond all human faith, fear this—which I see despised by those in power; and the involuntary compacts of those who claim to rule toward those who lay claim to freedom, not now first but having often learned of, I know hold good only so long as their necessities prevail.

[156315] 78.4. "What, then, is such a friendship and faith, in which we shall be forced to court one another against our judgment, each side watching its own opportunities? And after this, suspicions and continual slanders against one another, envies and hatreds and every other form of evils, and a great contest as to who shall first destroy his rival, suffering lying in the future delay.

[156699] 79.1. "And of a civil war, as all know, there is nothing worse, in which the conquered are unfortunate and the conquerors do wrong, and it falls to the one to be destroyed by their dearest, to the other to destroy their dearest. To such fortunes and disasters, not to be prayed for, neither do you, patricians, call us, nor let us, commoners, hearken to them; but, as fortune has divided us from one another, let us be content. Let these, then, have the whole city and reap it without us and enjoy all the other goods alone, having cast the humble and inglorious commoners from their country; and let us depart, wherever the divinity may lead us, reckoning that we leave a foreign place, not our own city.

[157406] 79.2. "For to none of us is there left here a lot of land, nor an ancestral hearth, nor common sacred rites, nor a dignity as in a country, clinging to which we should love the place and remain even against our will; nor even the freedom of our persons won with arms by many toils; since some things the many wars destroyed, others the want of daily necessaries consumed, and others we were robbed of by these arrogant creditors—to whom in the end we wretches were forced to till our own lots, digging, planting, ploughing, tending flocks, fellow slaves to our own war-captured bondsmen, some bound with chains, some with fetters, some, like the fiercest of beasts, with collars and irons.

[158097] 79.3. "Outrages and insults and lashes and toils from night to night, and every other cruelty and insolence and arrogance which we endured, I pass over. Freed, then, by the divinity from so great and so many evils, let us flee from them gladly, with all the zeal and power each man has, making fortune and god, who save us, our guides on the road, reckoning freedom our country and valour our wealth. For every land will receive us as partners—to those who receive us we shall be, on the one hand, not grievous, on the other, useful.

[158632] 80.1. "Let there be for us examples of these things many Greeks and many barbarians, but most of all the forefathers of these men and of us; of whom some, rising up with Aeneas from Asia into Europe, founded a city in the land of the Latins, and others, later setting out from Alba under Romulus' leadership of the colony, established in these places the city we now leave.

[159007] 80.2. "And we have a force not only not a little greater than theirs, but threefold, and a juster cause for the migration. For those who migrated from Ilium were driven out by enemies, but we from here by friends; and surely it is more piteous to be driven out by one's own than by strangers. And those who joined with Romulus

[159335] 80.3. in the expedition, for the sake of getting better land, despised their fathers'; but we, leaving the city-less and hearth-less life, set out a colony neither envied by gods nor grievous to men nor a burden to any land; and we have not even come through blood and kindred slaughters against those who drive us out, nor harmed with fire and steel the land we leave, nor left behind any memorial of eternal enmity, as it is the custom for treacherous exiles and those shut up in unwilling necessities

[159840] 80.4. to do. Calling the gods and divinities to witness, who lead all mortal things according to justice, and leaving to them to exact the penalties on our behalf, we ask only this: that those of us who have in the city infant children and parents and any wives who may wish to share our fortune, take back their persons. This is enough for us to receive, and we need nothing else from our country. But fare you well and live the life you choose, thinking thus in matters of polity and partnership against the humbler sort, alien and unsharing."

[160387] 81.1. Brutus, then, having spoken such words, ceased; and to those present, all that he said about the just seemed true, and all his accusations of the council's haughtiness, but most of all those in which he showed the security of the agreements full of guile and deceit. When at the end he went through the outrages they had suffered from the creditors, and reminded each man of his own evils, no one was so hard in mind that he did not melt into tears and bewail the common misfortunes; and this happened not to them alone, but also to those come from the senate. For not even the envoys had strength to restrain their tears, reflecting on the calamities arising from the dividing of the city; and there was a long time in which, downcast and tearful and at a loss

[161156] 81.2. what to say, they stood. When the great lamentation had ceased and silence held the assembly, there came forward to make defence against these things one who seemed to surpass the other citizens in age and dignity, Titus Larcius, who, twice appointed consul, having used the power called dictatorship best of all men, made that envied office be reckoned holy and full of reverence.

[161545] 81.3. Setting out to make speeches about the just—blaming the creditors as having done cruel and inhuman deeds, but laying hold of the poor as not justly thinking fit to be released from their debts by force rather than by favour, and as not rightly being angry with the senate because they obtained none of the moderate things from it,

[161883] 81.4. rather than with the guilty; and trying to show that small was the part of the people that did wrong unwillingly, forced by the length of its poverty to ask for the release, but the greater part, given over to licence and insolence and living by pleasures and prepared to serve its desires by plunder from others' goods; and thinking that the wretched must be distinguished from the wicked, and those needing humanity from those deserving hatred; and setting up certain other such arguments, true indeed, but not pleasing to all his hearers—he did not persuade, but there was much murmuring at each point, and from some indignation as if he were embittering their griefs, from others acknowledgments as if he hid nothing of the truth; but this latter part was far less than the other, so that they were obliterated by the many, and the cry of the indignant prevailed.

[162758] 82.1. When Larcius had added a few words more to these and laid hold of their uprising and the rashness of their counsels, Sicinius, who was then leader of the people, taking up the speech, exasperated their tempers still more, saying that from these very words they could best learn what honours and favours would receive them when they returned to their country.

[163124] 82.2. "For to men who, being at the height of their dangers and needing the people's help and come for this, it does not even now occur to make moderate and humane speeches—what disposition must we think they will assume, when affairs go for them according to their hope, and the things now insulted in words become subject in deeds? From what arrogance will they refrain, from what maltreatment, from what tyrannic cruelty?

[163550] 82.3. "But if it suffices you to be slaves all the time of your life, bound and scourged and destroyed by fire and steel and famine and every outrage, do not waste time, but, throwing away your arms and putting your two hands behind you, follow them; but if there is in you any longing for freedom, do not endure them. And you, envoys, either say on what just terms you summon us, or, not saying them, depart from the assembly; for we will give you the floor no longer."

[164022] 83.1. When he ceased, all present applauded as men agreeing with one who had reasoned what was needful; and after this, silence coming, Menenius Agrippa—who had both made the speeches in the senate on behalf of the people and was most responsible for the opinion that the embassy with full powers be sent—signalled that he too wished to speak. To them the matter seemed answered to their prayer, and now at least they supposed they would hear words holding true settlements and saving opinions for both sides.

[164533] 83.2. And at first all roared out with a great cry, bidding him speak; then they checked themselves, and so great a silence held the assembly that the place differed not at all from a desert. He, in other respects, was thought to have used the most persuasive words possible and aimed at the wish of his hearers; and at the end of his harangue he is said to have told a fable in the manner of Aesop, fashioned to have much likeness to the affairs, and by this most of all to have won them—whence the speech is deemed worthy of remembrance and is borne in all the ancient histories. What was said by him was as follows:

[165153] 83.3. "We were sent by the senate to you, commoners, neither to make defence on its behalf nor to accuse you; for these things did not seem to have their season nor to be suited to the fortunes that grip the commonwealth; but to dissolve the strife with all zeal and contrivance and to set the polity back into its original order, having the full power for this. So that concerning the just we do not think there is need, as Junius here did, to spin out the time at great length; but on what humane terms we think the strife should be dissolved, and what faith there will be to confirm our agreements—about these things,

[165775] 83.4. which we have resolved, we will speak to you. To us, reflecting that every strife is healed in every city when the causes that furnished the difference are removed, it seemed necessary to recognise and stop the very pretexts that began the dissension. Finding that the harsh exactions of the loans had become the causes of the present evils, thus we correct them: we think it just that all who owe debts and cannot discharge them be released from their obligations; and if the persons of any who are past due are held by the lawful terms, these too we judge to be free; and as many as, convicted in private suits, have been handed over to those who condemned them, these too we wish to be free, and we make void their condemnations.

[166515] 83.5. "Concerning the contracts of past time, then, which we judge made the secession, we set them right in this way; concerning those that shall be later, as shall seem good to you, the people, and to those of the council deliberating in common, a law being ratified, so let it stand. Was it not these things that set you apart from the patricians, commoners, and, if you obtained them, did you think they sufficed you and you reached for nothing else? They are now given you; depart at once rejoicing to your country.

[167036] 84.1. "The pledges that will confirm these agreements and furnish you security shall be all such as are lawful and customary among those who dissolve enmities. The senate will vote these things and give the rank of law to what shall be written; or rather, let what is resolved be written here by you, and the senate will obey it.

[167367] 84.2. "That the things now conceded shall remain firm, and that nothing contrary to them shall later be brought forward by the senate—first we, the envoys, are sureties, giving you our persons and souls and offspring as pledges; next the other senators, as many as shall be enrolled with the decree; for surely nothing will ever be written against the people without our consent. For we who lead the council and first declare our opinions of the rest are we.

[167827] 84.3. "The last pledge for all men, Greeks and barbarians, which no time will ever abolish, is that which, by oaths and covenants, makes the gods sureties of the agreements; by which many bitter enmities of private men, and many wars set up between cities, have been reconciled. And if you take this pledge, either entrust to a few of the leaders of the council to give you the oaths on behalf of the whole senate, or think fit that all who are enrolled in the decrees swear over sacrifices that they will in very truth keep firm the things agreed.

[168377] 84.4. "Right hands and covenants and pledges made before the gods do not you slander, Brutus, nor abolish the fairest of human practices; nor do you, commoners, endure him saying that they are the knaveries of unholy and tyrannic men, which are far from the valour of the Romans.

[168658] 85.1. "Having spoken of one more pledge, which is neither unknown to any man nor disputed, I will cease. And what is this? That which introduces the common interest and makes both parts be saved through one another. This, indeed, first and alone draws us together to the same place and will never let us be apart from one another. For the ignorant multitude will always need, and will never cease needing, intelligent leadership, and the council able to lead will need the crowds willing to be ruled; and not by opinion alone

[169185] 85.2. have we conjectured this, but by deed have we made trial and know it. Why, then, do we frighten and make trouble for one another? Why do we speak base words, when we have good deeds in hand, instead of, opening ourselves and throwing our two arms about one another, going to our country to recover the old delight of the sweetest things and the longing dearest of all, but seek instead non-existent securities and faithless faiths, like the bitterest enemies who suspect everything for the worse? For us, commoners, of the council, one pledge suffices about your never being base toward us, should you return—we who know your good services in rearing us and your lawful practices and the rest of the valour you have often displayed in peace and in war.

[169945] 85.3. "And if, through necessity of faith and hope, the contracts should get a common correction, the rest at least we trust will be good on your side, and we need neither oaths nor hostages nor any other pledge whatever from the multitude; we, on the contrary, will oppose nothing of your demands. And concerning the faith, with which Brutus tried to slander us, these things suffice. But if any envy, not just, lurks in you, persuading you to think evil concerning the senate, I wish to speak a word against this too, commoners; and—by the gods—hear me in quiet and with attention.

[170530] 86.1. "A city is somehow like a human body. For each is compounded and made of many parts; and neither part has the same power as the parts within them, nor furnishes equal services.

[170714] 86.2. "If, then, the parts of the human body should take each a separate sense and voice of their own, and then strife should fall among them, all the rest becoming of one mind against the belly alone, and the feet should say that the whole body rests upon them; the hands, that they work the crafts and procure the necessaries and fight enemies and furnish many other benefits to the common good; the shoulders, that all the burdens are carried upon them; the mouth, that it speaks; the head, that it sees and hears and, embracing all the other senses, holds them, through which the creature is preserved; and then they should say to the belly: 'But you, good lady, what of these do you do, or what is your favour and benefit to us? Nay, you are so far from doing and helping us accomplish anything of common use, that you even work against us and trouble us, and—a thing unbearable—compel us to serve you and to fetch from every quarter for the filling of your own desires.

[171691] 86.3. "'Come, why do we not lay claim to freedom and rid ourselves of the many businesses we endure for her sake?' If, then, these things should seem good to them, and each should no longer do its own work, can the body in any way endure for long, but would it not within a few days be consumed by the worst of deaths, famine? One could not say otherwise.

[172048] 86.4. "In the same way conceive also concerning a city. For many are the peoples that fill it too, in nothing like one another, of whom each furnishes the common good its own particular service, as the limbs do the body. For some till the fields, some fight for them against enemies, some bring in many benefits by sea through trade, others work the necessary crafts. If, then, all these peoples should rise in strife against the council gathered from the best, and say: 'But you, council, what good do you do us, and for what cause do you think fit to rule the others? For you could say nothing.' And then: 'Shall we not rid ourselves of this tyranny of yours at last and dwell without

[172736] 86.5. "'a leader?' If, then, conceiving these things, they should stand off from their accustomed practices, what will prevent this city from perishing miserably and miserably by famine and war and every other evil? Learning, then, commoners, that just as in our bodies the belly, ill-reviled by the many, nourishes the body while it is nourished and preserves it while it is preserved, and is a kind of common feast distributing to all what is fitting and the cause of the harmony, so in cities the council, which administers the common affairs and provides for what befits each, preserves and guards and sets right everything—cease your envious cries against it, that you were cast from your country and that as wanderers and beggars you go about because of it. For it has done you no harm, nor would it do; but itself it calls and beseeches and, opening its soul along with the gates, receives you."

[173640] 87.1. While Menenius was saying such things, many and various cries arose from those present throughout the whole harangue. But when at the end of his speech he turned to lamentations and bewailed the misfortunes about to seize both those remaining in the city and those driven out, and the fortunes of both, tears poured from all, and with one accord and one cry they shouted to lead them to the city and not waste time; and very nearly did they hasten to depart from the assembly, having entrusted all affairs to the envoys and contrived nothing further for their security, had not Brutus come forward and checked their impulses, saying that all the rest was well for the people, all that the senate promised, and that they owed it much thanks for the concessions; but that he feared for all time, and lest tyrannic men, attempting it perhaps at some later day,

[174505] 87.2. should bear rancour against the people for what had happened. There was one only safeguard for all who fear their superiors—if it became plain to them that those who wished to wrong them had no power; but while the ability to do wicked deeds was present, the wicked would not lack the will. If, then, they should obtain this security, they would need nothing further.

[174880] 87.3. When Menenius interposed and bade him say what security he thought the people still needed, "Grant us," he said, "to appoint magistrates each year from ourselves, however many, who shall have authority over nothing else, but shall help those of the commoners who are wronged or overpowered, and shall not look on while any one is robbed of his rights. This we beseech and beg of you, besides the other things you have granted—if the reconciliation is not word but deed—to give and bestow."

[175377] 88.1. The people, when they heard this, with a great cry that held a long while both praised the man and urged the envoys to grant them this also. The envoys, withdrawing from the assembly and conferring a little among themselves, returned not long after. When silence fell, Menenius came forward and said: "The matter, commoners, is great and full of many strange suspicions; and fear and concern enter us, lest at some time we make two cities in one; yet, for the part that lies with us, not even against this request of yours do we set ourselves.

[175928] 88.2. "Only grant us this, which is for your sakes too: allow some of the envoys to go into the city and declare this to the senate; for though we have the power from it to make the settlement however we wish, being autocrats of the promises, we do not think fit ourselves to take this, but, since a new matter has met us beyond expectation, having taken away our own power, we will carry it and lay it upon the council; though we are persuaded that it too will think the same as we. I, then, will remain here and with me a part of the embassy, but Valerius will go and the rest with

[176513] 88.3. him." These things seemed good; and in haste, mounting their horses, those who were to declare to the senate what had happened rode to the city. When the consuls set the matter before the councillors, the opinion of Valerius was to grant this favour too to the people; but Appius, who from the first had opposed the reconciliation, then too openly spoke against it, shouting and calling the gods to witness and foretelling to the polity how great a seed of evils it was about to sow. But he did not persuade the many, who had set out, as I said, to dissolve the strife. There came, then, a decree of the senate, that all the other things which the envoys had promised the people should be valid, and that the security

[177238] 88.4. which it asked be granted. The envoys, having arranged these matters, on the following day came to the camp and made clear what the senate had resolved. After this, Menenius advising the commoners to send some to the city, to whom the senate would give the pledges, there was sent Lucius Junius Brutus, of whom I spoke before, and with him Marcus Decius and Spurius Icilius. Of those come from the senate, half returned to the city with Brutus and his colleagues, while Agrippa, with the rest, remained at the camp, being asked to draw up the law for the commoners according to which they would appoint the magistrates.

[177865] 89.1. On the following day Brutus and his colleagues were present, having made the compacts with the senate through the fetial priests, whom the Romans call Fetiales. The people, divided into the phratries then existing—or however one wishes to call them, which those men call curiae—appoint these annual magistrates: Lucius Junius Brutus and Gaius Sicinius Bellutus, whom they had already as leaders, and besides these Gaius and Publius Licinius and Gaius Visellius Ruga.

[178339] 89.2. These five men were the first to take up the tribunician power, on the fourth day before the Ides of December, as is done even to our own time. When the elections were completed, to those come from the senate everything seemed well concerning the matters for which they were sent; but Brutus, calling an assembly, advised the commoners to declare the office sacred and inviolable, confirming its security by law and

[178762] 89.3. oath. These things seemed good to all, and this law was written by him and his colleagues: "Let no one compel a tribune, against his will, to do anything, as if he were one of the many, nor scourge him, nor order another to scourge, nor kill him, nor bid kill. And if anyone do any of the forbidden things, let him be accursed, and let his goods be consecrated to Demeter, and let him who kills any of those who have done these things be

[179207] 89.4. clear of bloodshed. And, that for the future the people may not have the power to abolish this law, but that it remain unalterable for all time, it was ordained that all Romans swear over sacrifices that they would use the law, both they and their descendants for all time; and a curse was added to the oath, that to those who kept it the heavenly gods and the divinities below be gracious, but to those who transgressed it the opposite both from gods and from divinities, as upon men liable to the greatest guilt. From this it became a custom among the Romans that the persons of the tribunes be sacred and inviolate, and it remains so to our own time."

[179869] 90.1. When they had voted these things, they built an altar on the height where they had encamped, which from the fear that then held them they named, as their ancestral tongue signifies, of Jupiter Deimatius (the Affrighter); and having performed sacrifices to it and consecrated the place that received them, they came down to the city with the envoys.

[180225] 90.2. Having rendered thank-offerings also to the gods in the city, and persuaded the patricians to ratify the office by casting their vote, when they had obtained this too from them, they further asked the senate to permit them to appoint each year two men from the commoners who should serve the tribunes in whatever they needed, and should judge the cases which those committed to them, and should take care of the sacred and public places and of the abundance in the market.

[180705] 90.3. Having received this concession too from the senate, they appoint men whom they called assistants of the tribunes, colleagues, and judges. Now, however, in the native tongue, from one of the works they perform, they are called overseers of sacred places (aediles), and they no longer have a power subservient to others, as before, but many great things have been entrusted to them, and in most respects they somewhat resemble the agoranomoi among the Greeks.

[181171] 91.1. When affairs had settled and the city recovered its original order, an army was levied by the commanders against the foreign enemies, the people bringing much zeal and in a short time making ready everything needful for the war. When the consuls had cast lots concerning the command, as is their custom, Spurius Cassius, who obtained the care of affairs in the city, remained, taking a sufficient part of the levied force; while Postumus Cominius led out the rest of the army, leading a worthy portion of the Romans themselves and a not small Latin allied force.

[181741] 91.2. Resolving to attack the Volscians first, he seized at the first assault their city Longula, the men in it having attempted to lay claim to some valour and sent out a force into the open by which they trusted to ward off the assailants, but having been shamefully compelled to flee before displaying any brilliant deed, and having done nothing noble even in the assault on the walls. In a single day, at all events, the Romans both mastered their land without effort and took the city by storm with little trouble.

[182262] 91.3. The Roman general, allowing the soldiers to plunder the goods found there and leaving a garrison in the city, led the force against another city of the Volscians, called Polusca, which is not far distant from Longula. No one daring to meet him, having traversed the country with much ease, he assaulted the walls; and of the soldiers, some breaking through the gates, others mounting the wall by ladders, on the same day they become masters of this city too.

[182728] 91.4. When he had taken the city, choosing out a few, the authors of the revolt, he put them to death, and punishing the rest by confiscation of money and depriving them of their arms, he compelled them for the future to be subjects of the Romans.

[182977] 92.1. Leaving in this city too a small part of the army for a guard, on the following day, taking up the force, he advanced against Corioli, a very notable city and, as it were, the metropolis of the Volscians; where there was a strong force gathered, and the wall was not easy to take, and the necessaries for war had long since been prepared by those within. Attempting the assault on the walls, until late evening he was beaten off by his opponents, losing many of his own men.

[183459] 92.2. On the next day, having prepared rams and wicker shields and ladders, he was making ready as if to make trial of the city with his whole force; but hearing that the Antiates were about to come to the aid of the Coriolani in great strength, on account of kinship, and that those sent were already on the road, he divided his army, resolving with the half to assault the walls, leaving Titus Larcius in charge of it,

[183881] 92.3. and with the rest he purposed to bar the assailants. And there were two contests on the same day; and the Romans conquered—all fighting eagerly, but one man displaying incredible valour and performing deeds beyond all telling, who was of the patrician class and of not undistinguished fathers, called Gaius Marcius, a man temperate in his daily life and full of a free spirit. The manner of each of the two battles was as follows. Larcius, leading out the army at daybreak, brought it up to the walls of Corioli and made assaults at many points; but the Coriolani, priding themselves on the help from the Antiates, which they trusted would be present not long after, opening all the gates, rushed in a mass upon the enemy.

[184611] 92.4. The Romans received their first onset and dealt many blows to those who came to grips; then, as more came on, being thrust down a sloping place, they gave way. Seeing this, Marcius, of whom I spoke before, took his stand with a few and received the oncoming throng of the enemy; and having struck down many of them, when the rest gave way and fled toward the city, he followed, ever killing those at hand and urging the fugitives among his own to turn back and take heart and follow him.

[185106] 92.5. They, ashamed at the deed, turned again and pressed upon those opposite them, striking and pursuing; and in a short time, each routing those they grappled with, they pressed upon the walls; and Marcius, now daring the danger more boldly, went still further forward, and, coming to the very gates, fell in with the fugitives into the wall. When many others had rushed in with him, in many parts of the city there was much slaughter on both sides—some fighting along the streets, others about the houses being captured.

[185631] 92.6. The women too within helped the work, hurling tiles from the roofs upon the enemy, and, so far as each had strength and power, eagerly aided their country. Yet they did not hold out long against the perils, but were forced to surrender themselves to the conquerors. The city being thus taken, the rest of the Romans turned to plundering what was found there and continued a long while busy with the spoils, since there was much money in the place and many slaves;

[186102] 93.1. but Marcius, who first and before many had withstood the enemy and proved the most brilliant of all the Romans both in the assault on the walls and in the contests within them, appeared still more brilliant in the second contest set against the Antiates. For he did not think fit to be absent from this battle either, but, as soon as the city was taken, taking with him the few who could follow, he went at a run, and finding the forces already drawn up and about to come to grips, first announced to his own the capture of the city, showing as its proof the smoke which was being borne up in quantity from the burning houses, and begging the consul, he posted himself against the strongest part of the enemy.

[186819] 93.2. And when the signals for battle were raised, he was the first to come to grips with the opponents, and, having killed many of those who engaged him, thrust himself into the middle of their phalanx. The Antiates no longer endured to fight him at close quarters, but left their ranks wherever he came on, and, surrounding him in a body, hurled at him as he advanced and pursued, retreating. Postumus, when he learned this, fearing lest the man, being isolated, should suffer some harm, sent the best of the young men to aid him; and they, forming their companies dense, charged the enemy. As those in front did not receive them but turned to flight, advancing further they found Marcius full of wounds and saw about him many corpses lying and men half-dead.

[187582] 93.3. After this they now advanced in common, with Marcius as leader, against those still remaining in formation, killing those who withstood and treating them like slaves. Worthy of mention, indeed, were the other Romans too in this battle, but the best of them were those who had shielded Marcius; and above all Marcius himself, who was unquestionably the chief author of the victory. When it was now growing dark, the Romans withdrew to their camp, thinking highly of the victory and having both killed many of the Antiates and leading many prisoners.

[188138] 94.1. On the following day Postumus, summoning the army to an assembly, went through much praise of Marcius and bound him with crowns of valour, rendering thank-offerings for both contests. He presented him with a war-horse adorned with the trappings of a general and ten captive persons, leaving it to him to take whom he wished, and as much silver as he himself could carry away, and from the rest of the booty many fair first-fruits.

[188576] 94.2. When a great cry arose from all, as men praising and rejoicing with him, Marcius, coming forward, said he owed great thanks both to the consul and to all the rest for the honours with which they deemed him worthy; yet he would not avail himself of them, but would be content with the horse, for the splendour of its trappings, and one captive, who happened to be his guest-friend. The soldiers, who before too had admired the man for his nobility, marvelled still more at his disdain of wealth and that he bore so great good fortune with moderation. From this deed he was surnamed Coriolanus, and had become the most distinguished of all those of his age.

[189239] 94.3. When the battle against the Antiates had reached this end, the rest of the cities of the Volscians dissolved their enmity toward the Romans; and as many as held the like sentiments with them—those already in arms and those preparing for war—ceased. Dealing with all these with moderation, Postumus returned home and disbanded the army. Cassius, the other of the consuls, who had been left in Rome, dedicated in the meantime the temple of Demeter and Dionysus and Cora, which is set up at the boundaries of the largest of the circuses, above the very starting-stalls—Aulus Postumius the dictator having vowed on behalf of the city to dedicate it to the gods, at the time when he was about to contend against the Latin army, and the senate after the victory having voted that its entire building be made from the spoils; and it then received its completion.

[190102] 24.1. At the same time new treaties also were made, with oaths, with all the cities of the Latins for peace and friendship, since they had attempted no disturbance in the strife and were plainly rejoicing in the return of the people, and seemed ready to share in the war against the seceders.

[190396] 24.2. What was written in the treaties was as follows: "Let there be peace between the Romans and all the cities of the Latins toward one another, so long as heaven and earth keep the same station; and let them neither make war on one another, nor bring in wars from elsewhere, nor furnish safe roads to those who bring war; and let them help with all their power those who are warred upon; and of the spoils and booty from common wars let each side obtain an equal share; and let the judgments of private contracts be made within ten days, in whatever place the contract was made. To these treaties let it be permitted neither to add anything nor to take anything from them, save what shall seem good to the Romans and all the Latins."

[191134] 24.3. These things, then, the Romans and the Latins agreed with one another, swearing over sacrifices. And the senate voted also to render thank-offerings to the gods for the reconciliation with the people, adding one day to the so-called Latin Festivals, which were two: the first having been consecrated by King Tarquinius, at the time when he conquered the Tyrrhenians; the other added by the people, when, having expelled the kings, it made the city free; to which the third was then assigned for the sake of the return of the seceders.

[191676] 24.4. The presidency and the care of the sacrifices and games held in them the assistants of the tribunes took over—those who now have the aedilician power, as I said—adorned by the senate with purple and an ivory chair and the other insignia which the kings had.

[191941] 96.1. Not long after the festival, one of the consulars, Menenius Agrippa, ended his life—he who had conquered the Sabines and led home a most brilliant triumph over them, by whom the senate, being persuaded, granted the return to the exiles, and the people, trusting him, laid down their arms; and the city buried him at public charge and with the fairest and most splendid funeral of all men. For the man had no estate sufficient for the magnificence of a funeral procession and burial; so that even to the guardians of his children, when they deliberated, it seemed best to bring him out and bury him cheaply, as one of the many.

[192575] 96.2. But the people did not allow it; rather, the tribunes, gathering the multitude into an assembly and going through many encomiums of the man's deeds both in war and in civic affairs, and his temperance and the frugality of his life, but most of all extolling with their praises to the utmost his self-restraint with regard to money-making, said it was the most shameful of things that so great a man should obtain an obscure and humble burial through poverty; and they exhorted the people to undertake the expense and to contribute man by man as much as they themselves should

[193158] 96.3. appoint. To the hearers it was welcome, and at once, each bringing what was appointed, a great sum of money was gathered. The senate, learning this, took the matter as a disgrace and resolved not to look on while the most distinguished of the Romans was buried by a man-by-man collection, but judged that the expense should be made from the public funds, entrusting the care to the quaestors. They, contracting for the provisions at very much money and adorning his body with the most costly array and supplying everything else for magnificence, buried him worthily of his valour.

[193746] 96.4. And the people, vying with the senate in honour, did not even think fit to take back the sum contributed, though the quaestors returned it, but bestowed it on the man's children, pitying their poverty, that they might do nothing unworthy of their father's valour. There was also a census at this time through the consuls, from which were found more than a hundred and ten thousand persons in all who registered. And these were the things done by the Romans in the consulship of these men.