WORK: On Demosthenes  (slug: dionysius-of-halicarnass-on-demosthenes-b4fa20)

CHAPTER: 01-on-demosthenes



[0] 1. . . . As for his forensic speeches, I have not come across them; of his deliberative speeches I have met with a few, and some technical treatises, but most of his works are display pieces. The character of his style is of the following kind. He praises those Athenians who distinguished themselves in war: "For what quality that ought to belong to men was lacking in these men? And what quality that ought to be absent was present? May I be able to say what I wish, and may I wish to say what I ought, escaping the divine indignation and avoiding human envy. For these men possessed a virtue inspired by the gods, while their mortality was human; many a time they preferred the present spirit of fairness to a self-willed insistence on the letter of justice, and many a time rightness of speech to precision of law, holding this to be the most divine and most universal of laws—to say and to keep silent and to act as duty requires at the time when duty requires it. They trained themselves above all in the two things most needed, judgement and strength, deliberating with the one and bringing matters to completion with the other; they were attendants upon those who suffered unjustly and chastisers of those who prospered unjustly; stubborn in pursuit of advantage, even-tempered in pursuit of what was fitting, checking the folly of impulse by the prudence of their judgement; insolent toward the insolent, orderly toward the orderly, fearless toward the fearless, formidable amid dangers. As witnesses of these things they set up trophies over their enemies, offerings to Zeus and monuments to themselves, men not inexperienced in inborn warlike spirit, nor in lawful loves, nor in armed strife, nor in beauty-loving peace; reverent toward the gods through their justice, holy toward their parents through their devotion, just toward their fellow citizens through their fairness, dutiful toward their friends through their loyalty. And so, though they died, the longing for them did not die with them, but lives on, immortal, in bodies that are not immortal, the longing for men who live no longer." . . . "The cities, then, were in a state of faction, and those which came to the matter later, on learning what had been done before, carried excess to far greater lengths in the ingenuity of their undertakings and in the strangeness of their reprisals. And they changed the accustomed meaning of words in their application to deeds, as they thought right. For reckless daring came to be considered loyal courage; prudent hesitation, specious cowardice; moderation, a screen for unmanliness; and to be intelligent in everything, to be useless in everything. Frantic impulsiveness was reckoned a man's part, while cautious deliberation was a fair-seeming pretext for shrinking back. The man who raged was always trusted, and the one who opposed him suspected. He who laid a plot and succeeded was intelligent, and he who suspected one still cleverer; but the man who took thought beforehand so as to need none of these things was held to be a dissolver of his faction and terrified of his opponents. In short, the man who anticipated another about to do some evil was praised, as was the one who urged on another who had no such intention. Indeed even kinship became more alien than comradeship, because comrades were readier to dare without making excuses. For such associations were not formed for advantage within the established laws, but in defiance of them, out of greed. And they confirmed their mutual trust not so much by divine law as by sharing together in some transgression. The fair proposals of their opponents they accepted with precautions of deed, if they were the stronger, not with generosity. To avenge oneself on another was worth more than not to have suffered at all. And oaths of reconciliation, if any were ever taken, were given by each side merely to meet a present difficulty, and held good only so long as they had no power from elsewhere." Such, then, was the diverging, elaborate, highly wrought style, filled with all the adventitious ornaments, of which Thucydides is the standard and rule, a man whom none of those who came after either surpassed or imitated to perfection.

[4217] 2. The other style, the plain and simple kind, which seems to have a structure and force akin to the speech of an ordinary man and a likeness to it, had many good men as its champions—historians, philosophers, and orators. For those who set forth genealogies, those who composed local histories, those who philosophized about nature, and the writers of ethical dialogues (to which group belonged the whole Socratic school except Plato), and those who composed deliberative or forensic speeches—almost all of these belonged to this school of preference. Lysias, son of Cephalus, perfected it and brought it to the summit of its own excellence, living at the same time as Gorgias and Thucydides. What his preference was and what his power, has been made clear in the work before this one, and there is no need to speak again now of the same matters. It will be enough to say only this much: that these two men tuned the perfect harmony of the octave with one another, choosing and perfecting, with extraordinary zeal, both the extremes of style, which stand at the greatest distance from each other. And the relation which the highest string bears to the lowest in music, this relation the style of Lysias bears, in political discourse, to that of Thucydides. For the one can astound the mind, the other can please it; the one can contract and tighten the intelligence, the other can relax and soften it; the one can lead the hearer into passion, the other can settle him in a calm disposition. Yet to force and compel is proper to the style of Thucydides, while to deceive and steal away the facts is proper to that of Lysias; and innovation and boldness belong to the historian's own manner, while safety and freedom from risk belong to the orator's. . . . that it does not appear to be a matter of contrivance . . . it wishes to seem uncontrived. Each style, then, has been wrought to its full development and has reached the height of its own kind of construction; but the one inclines toward seeming greater than it naturally is, the other toward seeming less. Of this style too I think no examples are needed at present. These, then, are two characters of style, so different from one another in their procedures, and the men who took the first rank in them, whom I have described, are both formidable in their own works, but in the respect in which they were equal to one another, incomplete.

[6616] 3. The third style . . . was the mixed and composite kind, made up of these two. Whether the man who first composed it and brought it to its present orderly form was Thrasymachus of Chalcedon, as Theophrastus believes, or someone else, I cannot say. But those who took it up and nurtured it and brought it not far from perfection were, among orators, Isocrates the Athenian, and among philosophers, Plato the pupil of Socrates; for it is impossible to find, apart from Demosthenes, any men other than these who either practised what is necessary and useful more successfully, or displayed elegance of language and adventitious ornament more excellently. Now the style of Thrasymachus, if indeed he was truly the fountainhead of the middle style, seems to have a preference worthy of serious attention; for it is well blended, and has taken what is useful from each of the others. But that he employed it with a power unequal to his intention is shown by this example from one of his deliberative speeches: "I could wish, men of Athens, to have had a share in that time of old and those affairs, when silence sufficed for the younger men, since circumstances did not compel them to speak and the elders governed the city aright. But since fate has set us in such a time that . . . we must hear of the city, and . . . its disasters . . . and that the greatest of these are not the work of the gods, nor of fortune, but of those in charge—then it is necessary to speak. For either insensible or most enduring is the man who will still offer himself to those who wish to do him wrong, and take upon himself the blame for the plotting and wickedness of others. The time past is enough for us, when, instead of peace, we came to be in war and danger, struggling to this present moment, loving the day gone by and dreading the day to come, and instead of concord we came to enmity and disturbance with one another. And whereas abundance of good things makes other men insolent and factious, we kept our self-control amid good things, but went mad amid evils, which usually bring others to their senses. Why then should anyone still proclaim aloud, when one is . . . grieved at present circumstances and thinks he holds something of the kind, so that there will be no more such trouble? First, then, I shall show that those who differ with one another, both among the orators and among the rest, have without reason come to be at odds with one another—which is what must happen to those who quarrel without judgement; for, thinking they say opposite things to each other, they do not perceive that they are doing the same things, nor that the argument of the others is present within their own argument. Consider, then, from the beginning, what each side seeks. First, the ancestral constitution causes them disturbance, though it is the easiest of all things to understand and the most common to all the citizens. As for whatever lies beyond our own knowledge, we must hear it told by the older men; but whatever the elders themselves witnessed, this we must learn from those who know." Such, then, is the style of Thrasymachus, midway between the two, well-tempered, and a timely starting-point toward both characters.

[9830] 4. The style of Isocrates, who won the greatest name among the Greeks for wisdom—a man who never contested any case, private or public, but composed many fine writings in every kind of discourse—what character it seemed to me to have, I have shown earlier at greater length. But there is nothing to prevent my stating now in summary the most essential points. It has the purity and precision of the Lysianic style; for he uses neither archaic nor invented nor strange and out-of-the-way words, but the most common and familiar ones. It is ethical and persuasive and pleasing, and it has avoided figurative expression, as that style does; while from the style of Thucydides and Gorgias it has taken grandeur and dignity and elegance of language. And for instructing the hearer most clearly in whatever he wishes, he practises the simple and unadorned manner of expression of Lysias; but for astounding by the beauty of words, and for investing the subject matter with dignity and loftiness, he has modelled himself on the adventitious and elaborately wrought diction of the school of Gorgias. He goes wrong, however, in the places where he sometimes tries to be charming, emulating the youthful figures of Gorgias—for the antitheses and the balanced clauses and the like, when they are neither moderate nor used at the right moment, disgrace its grandeur—and still more in the places where, in pursuing euphony and rhythm, he treats it as a thing to be guarded against to let the vowels of the letters clash, and treats it as a thing to be guarded against to use any of the harsher ones. He pursues the period by every means, and not even a rounded and compact one, but a kind that is drawn out and broad, curving with many bends, like rivers that do not flow in a straight course. These things, however, in many places make his style longer than it should be and less true, unfeeling and lifeless, and suited to festal display rather than to actual contest. But I shall use examples a little later, when the occasion requires it.

[11861] 5. The Platonic mode of expression, for its part, also wishes to be a mixture of both characters, the elevated and the plain, as I have said before; but it is not by nature equally fortunate with respect to both. Now whenever it practises the plain, simple, and unaffected style, it is extraordinarily pleasing and humane. For it becomes sufficiently pure and translucent, like the most transparent of streams, and precise and delicate beyond any other writer who has worked in the same style. It pursues the common usage of words and cultivates clarity, looking down upon all adventitious construction. The patina of antiquity creeps over it gently and imperceptibly, and it puts forth a fresh and flowering bloom, full of springtime grace; and, as from the most fragrant meadows, a sweet breeze is borne from it. It seems to make neither its clearness sound like prattle nor its elegance like the theatre. But whenever it takes an immoderate impulse toward verbosity and fine writing—which it is often wont to do—it becomes much worse than itself. For it grows both more unpleasant and worse in its Greek and more turgid; it darkens what was clear and makes it like a fog, and it stretches the thought out at length when it should be compressed into few words. It pours itself out into tasteless circumlocutions, displaying an empty wealth of words, and, disdaining the proper terms in common use, it seeks out the coined and the strange and the archaic-sounding. Above all it is storm-tossed about figurative expression, profuse in epithets, ill-timed in metonymies, harsh in its metaphors and not preserving the proportion in them. It wraps itself in allegories, many and long, having neither measure nor fitness. With poetic figures it produces the utmost distaste, and most of all in the figures of Gorgias, in which it luxuriates inopportunely and childishly. And the man is full of this ceremonial pomp in such passages, as Demetrius of Phalerum too has remarked somewhere, and many others before him. For the tale is not my own.

[13900] 6. Let no one suppose that I say such things out of condemnation of the whole diverging and elaborately wrought style which Plato uses. For may I never become so dull or insensible as to hold such an opinion concerning a man so great, since I know of many great and wonderful things, on many subjects, that have been brought forth by him from the height of his power. Rather, I wish to make this point: that he is wont to commit such errors in his elaborate constructions, and that he becomes worse than himself whenever he pursues the great and excessive in his diction, but is by far better whenever he brings in the plain, precise mode of expression—the kind that seems unaffected but is in fact constructed with a blameless and simple construction. For in this either he commits no error at all, or some very slight one not worth a charge. But I should have thought a man so great would have guarded against all reproach. Yet his contemporaries too censured him as one who erred (whose names I have no need to mention), and so did he himself—and this is the most splendid thing of all. For he perceived, it seems, his own want of taste, and gave it the name of "dithyramb"—a name which I should now be ashamed to use, though it is true. And he seems to have suffered this, as I believe, because, though reared in the Socratic dialogues, which are most plain and most precise, he did not remain among them, but fell in love with the elaborate construction of Gorgias and Thucydides. So it was nothing beyond the likely that he should suffer, drawing in some of the faults along with the merits which the styles of those men possess.

[15537] 7. I take as an example of the elevated style a passage from one of his most celebrated books, in which Socrates delivers his discourses on love to one of his companions, Phaedrus, from whom the book takes its title. For in this work the opening passages are full of charm and grace: "Dear Phaedrus, where now, and from where?" "From Lysias, Socrates, the son of Cephalus; and I am going for a walk outside the wall. For I spent a long time there, sitting from early morning until the reading of the speech of Lysias, and after the reading too for a while." Then, as when out of a calm and settled sky a great wind bursts forth, he disturbs the purity of his diction, carrying it off into poetic tastelessness, beginning here: "Come now, Muses—whether you have this title from the kind of your song as clear-voiced ones, or from the musical race of the Ligyans—take hold with me of the tale." That these are mere noises and dithyrambs, having much pomp of words but little sense, he himself will declare. For in setting forth from what cause love got its name as a passion, and using this expression—"For the desire that, without reason, has prevailed over the opinion that impels toward the good, leading toward the pleasure of beauty, and being strongly strengthened by its own kindred desires toward the beauty of bodies, the leading impulse named from its very strength was called love"—and after drawing out so long a circumlocution for a matter that could be embraced in a few words, he catches himself in his own untimeliness and says: "Hear me, then, in silence. For the place truly seems to be divine. So if, as my discourse proceeds, I should often become possessed by the nymphs, do not be surprised. For at this moment I am uttering things not far short of dithyrambs." "These things—not by others, but by our own words are we taken captive," as the tragedy has it, most divine Plato, you who have come to love the noise and nonsense of dithyrambs. And the things that Socrates says again in the recantation, when atoning to Love, beginning here: "The great leader in heaven, Zeus, driving his winged chariot, goes first, ordering all things and caring for them; and there follows him a host of gods and spirits, arranged in eleven divisions. For Hestia alone remains in the house of the gods. But of the rest, all those who are appointed in the number of the twelve gods as ruling gods lead the way each in the order in which he was appointed. Many, then, are the blessed sights and journeys within the heaven, which the race of blessed gods traverses, each doing his own work; and there follows ever whoever wills and is able, for envy stands outside the divine company." These things, and others like them, which are many, if they took on melody and rhythm like dithyrambs and processional songs, would seem to resemble the poems of Pindar—those addressed to the sun, as it seems to me:

[18440] Ray of the sun, what have you devised, O all-seeing one, mother of eyes? Star supreme, stolen away in the daytime, you have made the strength of men helpless and the path of their wisdom, rushing along a darkened track. Are you driving on some newer thing than before? But by Zeus, swift driver of horses, I beseech you, turn into some harmless course for Thebes, O lady, this portent shared by all. If you bring a sign of some war, or of failure of harvest, or of an overwhelming might of snow, or of deadly faction, or of an emptying of the sea over the plain, or of a frost upon the earth, or of a rainy summer streaming with furious water, or whether, flooding the land, you will make a new race of men from the beginning— I lament nothing, since with all the rest I shall suffer.

[19226] And here the allegory is not untimely, as it is in Plato.

[19285] 8. But—lest my discourse advance further than it should—I shall leave Plato and proceed to Demosthenes, for whose sake I have enumerated the characters of style which I held to be the best, and the men who held sway in them—not all of them. For Antiphon, Theodorus, Polycrates, Isaeus, Zoilus, Anaximenes, and those who lived in the same times as these, practised nothing new or excessive, but constructed their own styles after these characters and according to these standards. Such, then, was the political style which Demosthenes inherited, already set in motion in so manifold a fashion; and, coming after men so great, he thought it right to become the emulator of no single one of them, neither of any character nor of any man, considering them all to be in some sense half-finished and incomplete. Rather, choosing out from all of them whatever was best and most useful, he wove these together and produced from many a single mode of expression: magnificent yet plain, elaborate yet unadorned, strange yet familiar, festal yet true, austere yet cheerful, intense yet relaxed, sweet yet bitter, ethical yet passionate—differing in nothing from the Proteus of the old poets' tales, who took on every form of shape without effort, whether he was some god or spirit deceiving human eyes, or some manifold thing of expression in a wise man, deceptive to every ear. The latter one might rather conjecture, since it is not lawful to attribute mean and unseemly shapes to gods or spirits. Such, then, is the opinion I hold concerning the style of Demosthenes, and I assign to him this character, mixed from every kind.

[20905] 9. Whether I have understood the matter rightly, anyone who wishes may consider for himself, making his examination upon the examples themselves. The passages, then, which the orator has constructed after the character of Thucydides are of the following kind: "Many speeches being made, men of Athens, at almost every assembly, concerning the wrongs which Philip, ever since he made the peace, has been doing not only to you but also to the other Greeks; and all, I am sure, would say—even if they do not act accordingly—that we must both speak and act so that he may cease from his insolence and pay the penalty: yet I see all our affairs brought down and abandoned to such a point that I fear it may be a blasphemous thing to say, though true—that even if all who came forward had wished to speak, and you to vote, in such a way as to make matters as bad as possible, I do not think they could be brought into a worse condition than they are now." In what respect, then, do I hold this style to resemble that of Thucydides? In the very respect in which I am convinced that style differs most from the rest. This is that the thoughts are not brought out in a straightforward mode of expression, nor, as is customary for the others to speak, simply and plainly, but the diction is altered and turned aside from what is customary and natural into what is unfamiliar to most people and not as nature requires. What I mean is this. The speech would be simple and brought out in a straightforward mode of expression if one had constructed it thus: "Many speeches being made, men of Athens, at almost every assembly, concerning the wrongs which Philip does to you and to the other Greeks, ever since he made the peace." But as it is, the use of "almost" instead of "nearly," and the splitting of "Philip does wrong" and its recovering the sequence after a long interval, and the "not only to you but also to the other Greeks"—where the matter could have been shown even without a verb, by the construction alone—has made the style diverge from the customary and become elaborate. Likewise too with what is added to this. If it had to be said simply and without elaboration, it would have been reported thus: "And all saying—even if some do not do so—that we must both speak and act in such a way that he will cease from his insolence and pay the penalty." But as it has been brought out—"and all, I am sure, would say"—it does not preserve the straightforward path of the style. For the "I am sure" had no necessary place, and the use of "would say" instead of "asserting" reveals not the simple manner but the diverging and elaborate one. And like these are also the following: "Then do you think that, while he could have done no harm to those who could have done no harm to him, but who would perhaps have guarded themselves against suffering, he would choose rather to deceive these than to use open force after warning?" For here the style would have had nothing elaborate or crooked, had he brought it out thus: "Then do you think that those whom he saw able to do him no harm, but who would perhaps have guarded against suffering, he would choose rather to deceive than to use force after warning?" But by the changing of the case and the contracting of many conjunctions into a small space, the mode of expression has, I think, become elaborate and unfamiliar and divergent. Again these too are of the same kind: "But as it is, he did not do this—in which he would have honoured the people—nor did he make any such youthful display. But to me, who—whether anyone, men of Athens, wishes to consider it madness (for it is perhaps madness to do something beyond one's power), or also ambition—undertook the office of chorus-producer: he pursued me so openly and so vilely with his spite that he ended by keeping his hands off neither the sacred garments, nor the chorus, nor my person." What, again, is it in these passages that disturbs the natural utterance? First, that before completing the leading element—whether one should call it a thought or a clause—he throws in another, and, before the second has reached its end, joins on a third; then he sets down the sequence of the second thought upon the third which has reached its end; and then, after all of these, he gives back, at a long interval and when the mind no longer expects it, what was a part of the first. "But to me, who"—this has not yet reached its end—"whether anyone, men of Athens, wishes to consider it madness"—this is another thing, separated from the first, and itself incomplete—"for it is perhaps madness to do something beyond one's power"—this again is part of neither of the things said before, but stands by itself, for it is a kind of summary statement—"or ambition"—but this was part of the second clause, "whether anyone wishes to consider it madness." And what is said after all of these, "undertook the office of chorus-producer," was part of the first, "but to me, who." There are countless such things in Demosthenes, and especially in the speeches against Philip; or rather . . . none that are not so, except for one speech, that On the Halonnesus; and many also in the forensic contests, the public ones at any rate. And in general, both in these and in the deliberative speeches—by which sign, as I said—you may recognize, by this most ready mark, the character of Demosthenes. But anyone who tries to judge by whether the man used these devices more or less, with an eye to the natures of the subjects and the dignity of the persons, will go astray; which perhaps is not unreasonable.

[26485] 10. Come now, let us also say in what respect the style of Demosthenes, when constructed after the same character, differs from that of Thucydides; for the discourse requires it. Not in quality, by Zeus; for in this respect both practise alike—I mean diverging from the customary, and pursuing not the common but the excessive. The difference lies in quantity, and still more in the matter of timeliness. For Thucydides uses elaboration without economy, and is led by it rather than leading it, and does not even know how to seize its right occasion skilfully, but often goes wrong in this very thing as well. By this, the immoderateness of his divergence makes his style obscure, and his failure to master the occasions makes it unpleasing. But the orator aims at sufficiency, and measures out the occasions, constructing his style not merely as an offering and a possession, like the historian, but also for use. And so neither has the clarity, which is the first thing needed in speeches of contest, been overstepped, nor has the appearance of being formidable—on which above all he is plainly intent—failed to be added. Such, then, are the passages which Demosthenes has constructed in imitation of the elevated, elaborate character that diverges from the customary—the character whose whole strength lay in formidable power, and of Thucydides, who took the first rank in it.

[27866] 11. The passages constructed after the plain, precise, pure, and admired character . . . which, from the man who shone in it, might fairly be called Lysianic, are of the following kind. Nothing will prevent—indeed, it will perhaps make the inquiry more agreeable—if the style of Lysias is set down first, the style which I am convinced that of Demosthenes resembles, containing a narrative full of outrageous behaviour: "Archippus here, men of Athens, stripped for exercise in the same wrestling-school where Tisis, the defendant, also did. A quarrel arose, and they came to gibes and contradiction and enmity and abuse with one another. Now there is a certain Pytheas, a lover of the youth (for the whole truth shall be told to you), left as his guardian by his father. This man, when Tisis described to him the abuse in the wrestling-school, wishing to gratify him and to seem clever and a contriver, bade him—as we perceived from what was done and learned from those who knew well—be reconciled for the present, but watch for a chance to catch him somewhere alone. Persuaded of this, and reconciled, and associating with him and pretending to be his friend, Tisis went to such a pitch of madness, young as he was . . . And it happened that there was a horse-race at the festival of the Anaceia . . . him passing by the door with me; for they happen to be neighbours of one another. At first he invited us to dine together, and when he was unwilling . . . to a revel, saying that with him also . . . So, having dined, now as it was growing dark, we came and knocked at the door. They bade us come in. But when we got inside, they thrust me out of the house, and seizing this man here they bound him to the pillar, and Tisis took a whip and, after laying on many blows, shut him up in a chamber. Nor was it enough for him to commit this outrage alone, but—having emulated the most worthless of the young men in the city, and having recently taken over his patrimony, and pretending to be young and rich—again, when day had come, he bade his servants bind him to the pillar and flog him. And when his body was now in a wretched state, he sent for Antimachus and said nothing of what had happened, but claimed that he himself had been at dinner, and that the other had come in drunk, and, having broken down the door and entered, had abused him and Antimachus and their wives. Antimachus was angry with them, as men who had done great wrong; nevertheless, having summoned witnesses, he asked him how he had come in. And he said it was at the bidding of Tisis and his household. And when those who had come in advised that he be released as quickly as possible, and held what had happened to be terrible, they gave him back to his brothers. And as he could not walk, they carried him on a couch to the Deigma and showed him in such a condition to many of the Athenians and many of the other foreigners as well, so that those who saw him not only were angry with those who had done it, but also accused the city, because it does not, publicly and on the spot, punish those who commit such crimes."

[30962] 12. This is the narrative of Lysias, from the speech Against Tisis. The one I am now about to quote is that of Demosthenes, from the speech Against Conon; and, leaving aside the resemblance in subject matter . . . let us consider the resemblance in style: "We went out, the year before last, to garrison-duty at Panactum, our service having been posted. Now the sons of this Conon pitched their tent near us, as I could have wished they had not. For it was from there that the enmity from the very start, and the collisions, came upon us; and you shall hear how. These men used to drink every day, the whole day long, as soon as they had finished their midday meal, and this they kept on doing all the while we were on garrison-duty; whereas we conducted ourselves out there just as we were accustomed to do here. And whatever hour it happened to be when the others were making their evening meal, by that time these men would already be in their drunken violence—for the most part against our serving-boys, but in the end against ourselves as well. For, claiming that the boys annoyed them with smoke while cooking, or spoke ill of them—whatever they pleased—they used to beat them, and emptied their chamber-pots over them, and made water on them, and left out no kind of indecency and insolence whatever. Seeing this and grieved by it, at first we sent them off; but when they jeered at us and would not stop, we reported the matter to the general—all of us mess-mates together, going to him in a body, I no more than the rest. And when he had rebuked them and reproached them, not only for their indecencies toward us but also for what they did generally in the camp, they were so far from stopping or feeling shame that, as soon as it grew dark, that very evening they came rushing in upon us. And at first they abused us, then they laid blows upon me as well, and made such an uproar and din about the tent that both the general and the company-commanders came, and some of the other soldiers, who prevented us from suffering any irreparable harm, and from doing any ourselves while being treated outrageously in our cups by these men. When the matter had come to this point, when we got back here, there was, as was natural, anger and enmity between us on account of these things. Yet I, for my part, did not think I ought either to bring suit against them or to make any account of what had happened, but I had simply resolved on this for the future—to take care and to guard against coming near such men. First, then, of the things I have told, I wish to produce the testimonies; and after that to show what I have suffered at this man's hands, so that you may know that the very man whose place it was to censure the first offences has himself, in addition to these, done things far more dreadful." [Witnesses.] "These, then, are the matters of which I thought I ought to make no account. But not long afterward, as I was walking in the evening, as I was accustomed, in the marketplace, with Phanostratus of Cephisia, one of my contemporaries, Ctesias, this man's son, came by, drunk, near the Leocorium, going past the house of Pythodorus. Catching sight of us, and crying out, and saying something to himself in the way that a drunken man does, so that one could not make out what he said, he passed on up toward Melite. Now there were drinking there, at the house of Pamphilus the fuller, this Conon, a certain Theodorus, Alcibiades, Spintharus the son of Eubulus, Theogenes the son of Andromenes, and a good many others, whom Ctesias roused up and brought along into the marketplace. And it happened that, as we turned back from the temple of Persephone and were walking again about that same Leocorium, we fell in with them. As we mingled together, one of them, some stranger, fell upon Phanostratus and held him fast; and this Conon and his son and the son of Andromenes, falling upon me, first stripped me, then tripped me up and flung me into the mire, and so handled me, leaping upon me and treating me with such outrage, that they split my lip and closed up my eyes. And they left me in so wretched a state that I could neither rise nor utter a word. And lying there I heard them saying many terrible things. Some of it contains blasphemies which I should shrink even from naming; but the one thing that is a sign and proof of this man's insolence, and that the whole affair was the doing of this man, this I will tell you: he sang in mimicry of the cocks that have won the victory, and the others thought fit to applaud him, beating their sides with their elbows in place of wings."

[35567] 13. Are these passages not pure and precise and clear and constructed with proper and common words, like those of Lysias? To me, at least, they seem to be so. What then? Are they not concise and rounded and full of truth, and showing forth that simple, uncontrived nature, just like those of Lysias? Most assuredly. And are they not also persuasive, and spoken with a certain character, and preserving what is fitting to the persons and the circumstances assumed? And of the pleasure and persuasiveness and charm and timeliness, and all the other excellence that blossoms in the works of Lysias, is there not a large share? It is impossible to say otherwise. Indeed, if it were not through the title showing whose each speech is that each was known, but we had come upon them without titles, I think not many of us would readily distinguish which is Demosthenes' and which Lysias'—so great a resemblance do the two characters bear to one another. Of this kind too are the speech Against Apollodorus for Phormio, and the one For Damage Against Olympiodorus, and the one Against Boeotus concerning the Name, and the Appeal Against Eubulides, and the Counter-suit Against Macartatus, and all the other private speeches, which are not much more than twenty in number. Once you have come upon these for the present, you will know what kind of thing I mean. And many portions of the public contests too have been constructed in this character. I would bring forward examples from each, were the discourse not going to become longer than is moderate. In these it is plain that he was no more concerned about elegance of language and dignity and all the adventitious constructions than about precision. And the speech delivered in reply to the letter and the envoys from Philip, which Callimachus entitles On the Halonnesus, the one that has this beginning—"Men of Athens, it is not possible that the charges which Philip brings"—is wholly precise and delicate, and has modelled itself to the very fingernail upon the Lysianic character, but has little display of divergence or grandeur of speech or formidable power or any of the other qualities which naturally accompany the power of Demosthenes. What, then, is the difference even in these works? And how might one discern, when Demosthenes descends to the necessary character, in what respect he is superior to Lysias even in style? For you think it right to learn this too. A certain natural smoothness of speech and charm runs over the speeches of Lysias, as I said before too, by which he excels all the other orators except Demosthenes. This, however, like a south wind, carries him only as far as the prooemium and the narrative; but when he comes to the demonstrative passages, it grows faint and feeble, and in the passionate passages it is utterly quenched; for it has not much tension, nor strength. But in Demosthenes the tension is great, and the charm is self-sufficient, so that even in this he wins by what is sufficient and moderate, and in that he excels in everything. This is a second observation by which one might discern the style of Demosthenes, when it is brought together into these necessary matters. For he does not strip off the magnitude and the tension as he strips off the divergence and the verbosity and all the adventitious ornaments; rather, this is an inalienable part of his style, whether it is innate or present through practice in his utterance. It takes on, however, certain intensifications and relaxations in due proportion. And these things are by now familiar to those to whom I am speaking, and we have no need of examples.

[39183] 14. So, then, concerning that character . . . But of the oratorical kind that lies between the two extremes—which Demosthenes inherited unfinished from Isocrates, and still earlier from Thrasymachus, and last from Plato, and which he perfected so far as was possible for human nature—one might take many examples from the deliberative speeches against Philip, and many from the other public speeches, but the most numerous and finest from the defence On Behalf of Ctesiphon; for this speech seems to me to have employed the finest and most moderate construction of style. If, then, I had sufficient time, I would set down the actual passages. But since many necessary matters still remain to me, this I shall leave aside, and at present I shall use only the briefest samples, speaking as to those who know. The following, then, are such examples of the middle character. From the prosecution of Aeschines: "It is always fitting, men of Athens, to hate and punish traitors and takers of bribes, but especially now, at this present crisis, it would be timely, and would benefit all men in common. For a terrible and grievous disease, men of Athens, has fallen upon Greece, one that needs much good fortune and care from you," and what follows. From the prosecution of Aristocrates: "Many such things there are among us as are nowhere else, but the most peculiar of all and the most august is the court on the Areopagus, about which so many noble things have been handed down, both legendary and such as we ourselves witness, as about no other court," and the rest. From the speech On the Immunities: "First, then, consider Conon, whether it is right, after finding fault either with the man or with his deeds, to make void anything of what was granted to him. For he, as you may hear from some of you who are of the same age, after the return of the people from the Piraeus, when our city was weak," and what follows. From the defence On Behalf of Ctesiphon: "As for what Philip seized and held before I entered public life and addressed the assembly, I shall pass over; for I consider none of these things to concern me. But what, from the day on which I undertook this task, I prevented him from taking—of these I shall remind you, and concerning these I shall render account, after first saying this much: a great advantage, men of Athens, lay ready for Philip. For among the Greeks—not among some, but among all alike—there occurred such a crop of traitors and bribe-takers and men hateful to the gods as no one remembers to have arisen before," and what is joined to these.

[41761] 15. This character, for my part . . . if anyone should not most readily accept the reason why I hold neither those passages of Thucydides, excessive and divergent from the customary, to be the best, nor place the perfect excellence of style in the plain and contracted passages of Lysias, this is what I would say to him: Those who gather in the assemblies and the law-courts and the other gatherings, where political speeches are needed, are not all formidable and excellent and possessed of the mind of Thucydides, nor are they all laymen and inexperienced in the construction of noble speeches; but some have flowed together from farming, some from seafaring, some from the menial crafts, men whom one would please more by conversing in a simpler and more common manner. For what is precise and excessive and strange, and everything that is not customary for them to hear and say, disposes them with annoyance, and just as some of the very wearisome foods or drinks turn the stomach, so those things dispose the ears with annoyance. But there are also the political men, the men of the marketplace, and those who have come through the ordinary education, with whom one cannot converse in the same way as with those others, but must bring to them the elaborate and excessive and strange mode of expression. Such men are perhaps fewer than the others—indeed a very small fraction of them, and no one is ignorant of this—but they are not on that account worthy to be despised. The speech, then, that aims at the few and well-educated will not be persuasive to the worthless and uninstructed crowd; and the one that thinks it right to please the many and the laymen will be despised by the more refined. But the one that seeks to persuade both audiences will be less likely to miss its end. This is the one mixed from both characters. For these reasons I have considered the style so constructed to be the most moderate of all, and of speeches I most approve those that have avoided the excesses of either character.

[43778] 16. Having said at the outset that Isocrates and Plato seem to me to have practised this kind of character best of all the rest, and to have advanced it to the greatest length, though not also to have perfected it, and having promised to show that Demosthenes worked out fully whatever each of those men had left wanting, I shall now proceed to this. I shall set out the passages of each of those two men that seem to be the best, and shall set beside them those of Demosthenes that were composed on the same subjects, so that the preferences and powers of the men may become more clearly manifest, taking the most exact

[44400] 17. test upon similar tasks. Let Isocrates be brought in first, and let a passage of his be taken from the speech On the Peace, which seems to be most charming, and which he himself brings forward in the speech On the Antidosis, taking great pride in it—the passage in which he compares the constitution under their ancestors with the one then established, and sets the old deeds against the new, praising the ancient ones and finding fault with those of his own time, and declaring the demagogues to be the cause of the change for the worse, as men who did not propose the best policies but addressed the people with a view to its pleasure. Since the comparison is rather long, only the most essential parts have been taken by me. It runs thus: "For who that came from elsewhere, and was not corrupted along with us, but suddenly stood over our doings, would not think that we are mad and out of our minds?—we who pride ourselves on the deeds of our ancestors, and think it right to praise the city for what was then done, yet do none of the same things as they, but the very opposite. For they kept on making war against the barbarians on behalf of the Greeks, while we, having uprooted from there those who draw their living from Asia, have led them against the Greeks. And they, freeing the Greek cities and helping them, were judged worthy of the leadership; while we, enslaving them and doing the opposite of those men of old, are indignant if we shall not have the same honour as they. We have fallen so far short, both in deeds and in thoughts, of those who lived at that time, that they, for the salvation of the Greeks, dared to abandon their own fatherland, and, fighting both on land and at sea, conquered the barbarians; whereas we do not think it right to run risks even for our own aggrandizement, but seek to rule over all men, yet are unwilling to take the field, and undertake a war against well-nigh all mankind, yet for it we train not ourselves, but men—some stateless, some deserters, some who have flowed together from other crimes—who, whenever any others offer them more pay, will follow them against us. Yet so dearly do we love them that, on behalf of our own children, if any should commit some offence, we would not be willing to undergo a trial, but on behalf of these men's plunder and violence and lawlessness, though the charges are bound to come upon us, we not only are not indignant, but even rejoice whenever we hear that they have done some such thing. We have come to such a pitch of folly that we ourselves are in want of our daily bread, yet have undertaken to maintain mercenaries, and we ill-treat and exact tribute from our own allies in private, in order to provide the wage for the common enemies of all mankind. And we are so much worse than our ancestors—not only those who were of good repute, but even those who were hated—that they, if they voted to make war on any, with the Acropolis full of silver and gold, nevertheless thought it right to face the danger with their own persons for what had been decided; whereas we, who have come into such want and are so great in number, like the Great King make use of hired armies. And in those days, if we manned triremes, we put the foreigners and slaves aboard as sailors and sent out the citizens under arms; but now we use the foreigners as hoplites and compel the citizens to row, so that, whenever they disembark on the enemy's land, those who claim to rule the Greeks step ashore holding a rower's cushion, while men of the kind I described a little before face the danger under arms. Indeed, would anyone, seeing the affairs of the city well administered, take courage about the rest as well? Would he not be most indignant at these very things?—we who say that we are sprung from the soil and that this city of ours was founded before all others, and who, though it befitted us to be an example of governing well and in orderly fashion, administer our own affairs worse and more disorderly than those who are only now founding their cities; and we plume ourselves and are high-minded over being born better than the rest, yet more readily share this nobility with any who wish for it than the Triballians and Lucanians share their baseness."

[48647] 18. Such, then, is the style of Isocrates that seems to be the finest of all, worthy of admiration for many reasons. For it is pure in its words, if any style is, and precise in its diction; and it is clear and common, and embraces all the other excellences out of which a clear style is best produced. It has, too, many of the adventitious ornaments; for it is elevated and dignified and stately, and fair-worded and pleasant and well-formed, sufficiently. Yet it is not perfect in this respect; there are points in which one might find fault with it as deficient—and not, by Zeus, in the most trifling matters. First, in conciseness; for, aiming at clarity, it often neglects moderation. But it ought to have provided equally for both. Next, in compactness; for it is supine and drawn out and flowing around the thoughts, like the styles of historians, whereas the style of contest aims at being rounded and well-knit and having nothing baggy. Besides these, the following too belong to the man. He is timid about figurative constructions, and faint-hearted, and does not introduce powerful tensions. And yet the athletes of true style must have strong holds and inescapable grips. He cannot rouse passion in his hearers to the degree he wishes—and for the most part he does not even wish it, but is convinced that it is enough for the political man to display an earnest thought and a fair disposition. And, to be sure, he attains each of these; for the truth must be testified. Yet the strongest of all things for one who is to persuade an assembly or a court was to lead the hearers to passion. Nor, indeed, does he hit the fitting mark in all things; but, claiming that the diction should at all costs be flowery and theatrical, as though pleasure held all the power in speeches, he sometimes falls short of what is fitting. Yet not all subjects demand the same diction; rather, as there is a garment fitting to bodies, so there is a phrasing suited to thoughts. To make the ears pleasant at all costs by the choice of euphonious and soft words, and to think fit to enclose everything in the rhythmical cadences of periods, and to adorn the speech with the figures of the theatre—this was not everywhere useful. But this very thing is taught us by those who wrote epics and tragedies and serious lyrics, who made not so great a grant to pleasure as to truth.

[51013] 19. Whether I reckon these things rightly, and whether the man is somewhat deficient in these excellences, anyone who wishes may consider, making his examination upon the passage just now set down. At once, then, the first thought, which could have been brought out in a few words, he makes long by drawing it round in a circle and saying the same things twice or thrice. It was contained, in the first clause, "for who that came from elsewhere," in the addition "and was not corrupted along with us, but suddenly stood over our doings"; for in power both come to the same. And in "we who pride ourselves on the deeds of our ancestors," the "and think it right to praise the city for what was then done"; for to pride oneself and to praise are the same. And in "yet do none of the same things as they," the "but the very opposite"; for it would have sufficed to say one of the two. It was possible to make one period out of the two, both more concise and more graceful: "For who that came from elsewhere would not think us mad—we who pride ourselves on the deeds of our ancestors, yet do none of the same things as they?" There are many such redundancies, in well-nigh every period, occupying no necessary place, which make the expression more immoderate but the period more elegant. So long, then, is his style; but how is it broad and ill-knit? "And they, freeing the Greek cities and helping them, were judged worthy of the leadership; while we, enslaving them and doing the opposite of those men of old, are indignant if we shall not have the same honour as they." These baggy passages it was rather possible to tighten and make more rounded, somewhat thus: "And they, freeing Greece and preserving it, advanced to the leadership; while we, enslaving and destroying it, are indignant if we shall not obtain the like." And the thought after these is broadly stated and ill-knit: "We have fallen so far short, both in thoughts and in deeds, of those who lived at that time, that they, for the freedom of the Greeks, dared to abandon their own fatherland, and, fighting both on land and at sea, conquered the barbarians." It was possible to turn back its breadth by bringing it out thus: "We are so much worse than our ancestors, in that they, to save the Greeks, abandoned their own fatherland and, fighting against the barbarians, conquered." Countless samples of this weakness too may be taken. For except for a few cases, in which the compactness came about not so much by design as by accident, the rest is said with breadth. And how is the style lacking in tension and without strong holds? In bringing on the thoughts said before some such thought as this: "And we are so much worse than our ancestors—not only those who were of good repute, but even those who were hated—that they, if they voted to make war on any, with the Acropolis full of silver and gold, nevertheless thought it right to face the danger with their own persons for what had been decided; whereas we, who have come into such want and are so great in number, like the Great King make use of hired armies." Come now, how was it possible to say it more rounded? "But perhaps in these things we are worse than our ancestors, yet in the rest we are better—not, I mean, than those of good repute (how could we be?), but than the hated ones. And who does not know that they, having once filled the Acropolis with very much wealth, did not hire out the common riches against the enemy, but, contributing from their private means, thought it right sometimes to face danger with their own persons; whereas we, being so poor and so great in number, make war with mercenary armies, just like the Great King?" Moreover, that his diction is lifeless and not passionate, and has the smallest share of that breath which is most needed in speeches of contest, is, I think, plain to all even without a reminder. But if, after all, examples are needed—and there are many that one could mention—I shall be content to use a single thought. There succeeds the antithesis examined a little before another antithesis of this kind: "And in those days, if we manned triremes, we put the foreigners and slaves aboard as sailors and sent out the citizens under arms; but now we use the foreigners as hoplites and compel the citizens to row, so that, whenever they disembark on the enemy's land, those who claim to rule the Greeks step ashore holding a rower's cushion, while men of such natures as I described a little before face the danger under arms." In this I do not find fault with the man for his spirit, for the thought is noble and able to stir passion; what I blame is the smoothness and softness of the style. For it ought to have been rough and bitter and to produce something like a blow; but it is moist and even, flowing through the hearing soundlessly like oil, seeking, indeed, to charm and please the ear. But is it at least well off in figures suited to contests, since they are many and varied, and through them does it rouse passion in the hearers? Far from it. For the things that most enfeeble its power and turn the ear away are precisely these childish balanced clauses and frigid antitheses and the like. To begin with, in this very passage of which we are speaking, the whole matter is an antithesis, and its particular thoughts are set one against one, and each of the periods is constructed by antitheses, so as to wear out the hearers with distaste and surfeit. What I mean is this. Of every thought and period and premise the beginnings and the endings are of this kind: "they—but we, and"; "and they—but we, and"; "then—but now, and"; "as far as they—but we, and"; "this—but that." These he has turned in a circle from beginning to end. But turns and changes and varieties of figure, which naturally relieve the weariness of the thought, are nowhere. One could censure many such deficiencies of style in Isocrates, but even these are sufficient.

[56943] 21. After him let Demosthenes be brought in, and let a passage of his too be taken, from one of the deliberative speeches against Philip, in which he too compares the deeds of his own time with those under their ancestors, and the new demagogues with the old—not setting each single ancient deed against a new one, nor making the comparison in a petty, point-by-point fashion, but making the whole antithesis from the whole position, in continuous fashion thus: "And yet consider, men of Athens, the chief points one might make of the deeds under our ancestors and of those of your own time. The account shall be brief and familiar to you; for it is not by using others' examples, but your own, men of Athens, that you may become prosperous. Those men, then—whom the speakers did not flatter, nor love as these men now love you—ruled the Greeks, with their consent, for forty-five years; they gathered into the Acropolis more than ten thousand talents; the king who held this land was subject to them, as it is fitting for a barbarian to be to Greeks; many and noble trophies they set up, both on land and at sea, in their own campaigns; and of all men they alone left behind a glory in their deeds greater than the envy of others. In the affairs of the Greeks, then, they were such; now look what they were in the affairs of the city itself, both in public and in private. In public, then, they built for us so many and such fine buildings and adornments of temples, and of the offerings in them, that to none of those who came after has any chance of surpassing them been left. In private they were so temperate, and so steadfast in the spirit of the constitution, that the house of Aristides and of Miltiades and of the others famous in that day, if any of you knows what it is like, sees that it is no more august than that of his neighbour. For the city's business was not done with a view to private gain, but each thought it right to increase the common good. And from managing the affairs of the Greeks loyally, those toward the gods piously, and their own affairs justly among themselves, they reasonably acquired great prosperity. Then, indeed, such was the state of affairs for them, using as leaders the men I have named. But now how do things stand with us, under these worthy men of the present? In the same and like fashion? And all the rest I pass over, though I have much to say; but to think how great a solitude you have come into, with the Spartans destroyed and the Thebans occupied, and none of the rest worthy to dispute the primacy with you—when it was open to us both to hold our own affairs in safety and to arbitrate the rights of others—we have been robbed of our own territory, we have spent more than fifteen hundred talents to no purpose, and the allies we won in the war these men have lost in peace, and we have trained up against ourselves an enemy so great. Or let someone come forward and tell me from what other source Philip has grown strong, if not from ourselves. 'Well, my good sir, if these things are poorly managed, at least matters within the city itself are now in a better state.' And what could one cite? The battlements that we whitewash, and the roads that we repair, and fountains, and trifles? Look, then, to those who manage these affairs, of whom some have become rich from beggars, and others honoured from obscure, while some have built their private houses more august than the public buildings; and the more the city's affairs have diminished, the more theirs have grown. What, then, is the cause of all this? And why was everything well then, and now not aright? Because then the people, themselves daring even to take the field, were master of the politicians and lord of all the good things, and each of the rest was content to receive from the people a share of honour and office and some good thing; whereas now, on the contrary, the politicians are lords of the good things, and through them everything is done, while you, the people, unstrung and stripped of your money, have become an appendage and an accessory, content if these men dole out to you the theoric money or send round a few sacrificial victims. And, most unmanly thing of all, you owe them thanks for what is your own. And, having shut you up in the city itself, they lead you on to these things and tame you, making you tractable to themselves. But it is never possible, I think, to acquire a great and youthful spirit while doing small and base things. For whatever men's pursuits may be, such of necessity must their spirit be too. These things, by Demeter, I should not be surprised if greater harm should come to me from you for saying them than to those who have done them. For freedom of speech is not always granted you about everything; rather, I am amazed that even now it has been." Who would not agree that this discourse differs from that of Isocrates in everything else? For he has interpreted the matters more nobly and more magnificently than that style, and . . . has embraced them in words, and has knit and contracted and rounded off the thoughts better, and has used more strength and weightier tensions, and has avoided the frigid and childish figures with which that style adorns itself beyond measure; but most of all, in respect of the active and contentious and passionate, it is wholly and entirely superior to it. At any rate, I will tell what I feel toward both styles; and I think I shall be telling a common experience of all men, and not one peculiar to me alone.

[62469] 22. Whenever I read one of the speeches of Isocrates—whether those written for the courts and assemblies, or . . .—I become earnest in disposition and possess great steadiness of mind, like those who listen to the music of solemn flutes, or to Dorian and enharmonic melodies. But whenever I take up one of the speeches of Demosthenes, I am possessed and carried this way and that, passing from one passion into another—disbelieving, agonizing, fearing, despising, hating, pitying, well-disposed, angry, envious—passing through all the passions that naturally master the human mind; and I think I am no different from those who are initiated into the rites of the Mother of the Gods, and the Corybantic rites, and the like—whether those men are moved by odours . . . or by sounds or by the breath of the spirits themselves, and so receive their many and various phantasies. And I have indeed sometimes pondered what the men of that time must have felt on hearing him speak these things. For if we, who are so far removed in time and have no concern at all in the matters, are so drawn along and mastered, and go wherever the discourse leads us, how then were the Athenians and the other Greeks led on by the man, in the true and personal contests, when he himself was speaking his own cause, with the dignity that he possessed, displaying his own feeling and the resolution of his soul, adorning everything and giving it colour by the fitting delivery, of which he was the most formidable practitioner—as all agree, and as one may see from the very speeches I just now produced, which it is not possible for one who wishes to read through pleasantly as a mere recitation, but which themselves teach how they must be delivered, now ironically, now in indignation, now in resentment, and again threatening, and soothing, and admonishing, and exhorting, and showing forth in the utterance everything that the style wishes to do? If, then, the breath that has been infused into the books through so many years has such strength, and is so leading of men, surely there was at that time something prodigious and formidable in the delivery of his speeches.

[64619] 23. But—lest, by dwelling on these things, I be forced to leave out some of what remains—I shall let Isocrates go, and the character of that manner; and concerning Plato I shall now speak my own opinion with frankness, adding nothing to the man's reputation and taking nothing from the truth, and especially since some think it right to declare him the most divine of all philosophers and orators in interpreting things, and exhort us to use this man as the standard and rule of speech at once pure and powerful. Indeed I have heard some saying that, if there is even among the gods a manner of speech such as the human race uses, the king of them, being a god, speaks no otherwise than as Plato does. Against such notions and prodigious sayings of half-finished men in matters of style, who do not know what the noble construction is, nor are able—laying aside all irony, as is my nature—I shall speak. But in what manner I think fit to make my examination of him, I wish to state beforehand. The formidable power of the man in the dialogues, and especially in those where he keeps the Socratic character, as in the Philebus, I greatly admire and have admired; but I have never emulated his want of taste in the adventitious constructions, as I said before too, and least of all in those passages where, descending into political subjects, he attempts to write encomia and censures, prosecutions and defences. For then he becomes another man than himself and disgraces the philosopher's dignity. And it has often come to me to say, upon such speeches of his, what is made in Homer when Zeus speaks to Aphrodite: "Not to you, my child, are the works of war given; but do you go after the lovely works"—of the Socratic dialogues—"while these shall be the care of political and oratorical men." I make all lovers of letters the common judges of my opinion, excepting any who are ambitious and who judge matters by reputation and not by truth. Now to pick out from all his speeches whatever has been said worst—which some others do—and then to set against these the best of Demosthenes' style, I did not approve. But to take from each what is most highly esteemed, and, setting these side by side, to examine the better—this seemed to me to be just, and to this very part I shall turn. Now there is one forensic speech in Plato, the Apology of Socrates, which never saw the door of a court or the marketplace, but was written with some other intention, having a place neither among speeches nor among dialogues. This, then, I pass over. Of deliberative speech there is none, unless someone wishes to call the letters deliberative speeches; let these too be dismissed. Encomia there are in the Symposium, many of Love, some of which are not worth serious attention, and one of Socrates, of whatever sort; for I have no need now to speak of this. The best of all his political speeches is the Menexenus, in which he runs through the funeral oration, in imitation, as it seems to me, of Thucydides, but, as he himself says, of Archinus and Dio . . . This speech, then, I shall take up, and against it shall examine certain passages of Demosthenes—not from the funeral oration, for this I do not consider to have been written by the man, but from his other speeches, all that are spoken concerning the noble and concerning virtue, or rather from a single contest; for I have not time to use as many examples as I wish, though I should have wished it above all. Such, then, will be my manner of comparison.

[68119] 24. Let Plato be taken first; and since he seems to pride himself on precision and dignity of words, these I shall test upon his own writings, beginning, as he does, with the speech: "In deed these men have from us what is fitting to them, and, having obtained it, they go the appointed journey." The opening is admirable and fitting to the subject in beauty of words and dignity and harmony; but what is added is no longer like the first—at once the phrase, "escorted in common by the city, in private by their kinsmen." For in the saying that the buried men have everything fitting to them, there was contained also their bodies' being escorted to the burial both publicly and privately. So it was not necessary to say the same thing again, unless the man supposed this to be the finest of all the customs concerning burials—I mean, the presence of many at the funerals—and thought he did nothing strange in both including it with the rest and speaking of it alone by itself. He must then have been simple-minded, if he thought this the most splendid of the adornments with which the city adorned them. For—to pass over everything else—the public maintenance of their fathers in old age until death, and the rearing of their sons until manhood, how much better was it than the escorting of the bodies publicly? To me it seems far better. So this addition, Plato, is not necessary. But, granting it not to be necessary, was the clause perhaps taken in for the sake of beauty or of some other adventitious ornament? Far from it. For, besides having nothing worth serious regard, either in the choice of words or in their arrangement, it spoils as well the period before it, and at least ruins both its symmetry and its euphony. For now, embraced in two clauses, it is symmetrical and harmonious and rounded and has taken a sure footing; but if it takes on this clause, all this is dissolved, and it will take on the historical instead of the rhetorical stamp. And if we separate this clause from what precedes and bring it out by itself, neither will it become a period when it stands by itself, nor will it have, by Zeus, character or passion, nor any other persuasion and charm whatever. If, then, the addition was taken in neither for the sake of the necessary nor for the sake of the superfluous—but in these matters and in these the construction of style consists—what else could one call this but what it truly is, untimeliness? To these the man adds the following: "And in speech the law commands us to render the remaining honour to these men, and we must." The "and we must," set here again at the end—for the sake of what is it taken in, and why? Is it to make the style clearer? But even without this addition it is clear. Indeed, if it stood thus—"And in speech the law commands us to render the remaining honour to these men"—who would blame it as not clear? But is it pleasanter to hear and more magnificent? On the contrary, it has obliterated its dignity and ruined it. And this each man must learn not by argument, but recognize from his own feelings. For by the irrational senses all things annoying and pleasant are judged, and these need neither teaching nor exhortation.

[71312] 25. "You are making a malicious charge of the matter," someone might perhaps say, "in demanding fine speech and elegance of language from a man not wise in these things. Examine the conceptions, whether they are fine and magnificent and found in none of the others. About these he was earnest; in these he was formidable. Of these take account from him, but let the manner of his style be." And how can one say this? For, on the contrary, everyone knows that the philosopher employed more ambition about the interpretation than about the matters. One could bring countless proofs of this; but this single passage suffices to display the man's empty zeal, which he employs about the excessive embellishment of his utterance. For instance, in adding to what was said before a thought neither excessive nor wonderful, but one said by many and often—that the praise of noble deeds can make the honours and memories immortal for the good has been said by countless men of old—having perceived that it has nothing wise or excessive in its conception, what was left, I suppose, was for him to make it pleasant by the beauty of his interpretation. Then, like the youths, descending from the noble and magnificent words and figures to these theatrical Gorgianic ones—I mean the antitheses and the balanced clauses—he adorns his phrasing with these trifles.

[72661] 26. Let us hear, then, how he says it: "For of deeds well done, by a speech well spoken, there comes to the doers remembrance and adornment from the hearers." Here speech is set against deeds, "spoken" against "done," and "well" has been changed in name to "nobly," and the three members of the sentence are balanced against the three. And for the sake of the period's stepping safely, and of nothing necessary, the thought being already complete, the "from the hearers" has been added. Has this same thought, then, been interpreted in like manner by the poets, whom the philosopher despises and drives from his commonwealth, or more nobly and more grandly? "It is fitting that the brave be hymned . . . with the fairest songs. For this alone touches upon immortal honours: spoken . . . but a noble deed dies if left in silence." Pindar made this for Alexander the Macedonian, being more earnest about the melodies and rhythms than about the diction. But Plato, who professes wisdom, adorns his phrasing with dainty and over-elaborate figures. And this is not yet enough; he will be found doing the same things in the period after it. For he says: "There is need, then, of some such speech as will sufficiently praise the dead and kindly counsel the living." So an adverb is set against an adverb, and a verb against a verb—the "sufficiently" against the "kindly," and against "praise" the "counsel"—and these too are balanced clauses. These are no Licymnii saying them, nor Agathons—those who speak of "insolence or lust for hire from somewhere," or "the toil of fatherlands"—but the man divine in interpretation, Plato. And I do not censure the figures; for these too sometimes bring a bloom to speeches. For which reason I do not blame even the practice of them itself, and find fault only with their untimeliness—and most of all when it is done by such a man, whom we think fit to use as the standard of correct speech. For in this very speech there are these too: "things for which no poet has yet won and holds the worthy renown they deserve"; and again: "having walled herself and built ships, having received the war"; and further: "for which both first and last and throughout you must try with all eagerness to have every readiness in every way"; and again: "bearing their misfortunes manfully, they will seem to be truly the fathers of manly sons"; and these as well: "educating the one fitly, supporting the others worthily in old age"; and again somewhere: "and I myself beg on their behalf, of the one to imitate their own, of the others to endure for their own"; and these: "for the constitution is the nourishment of men, and the good a nourishment of the good, but the ignoble a nourishment of the bad"; and these still: "having conquered the enemy, having ransomed the friendly, having met with an unworthy fortune." There is a great crowd of such figures throughout the whole funeral oration. But, leaving off the precise discussion of these, I shall come to those other things—and to me, much ashamed and reluctant to say it, but say it I will: that they seemed to me signs of crudity and incapacity.

[75783] 27. For the man, having said beforehand what figure it befits the speech to take, adds these words: "Upon these let us display the doing of the deeds, that they revealed themselves noble and worthy of these men." "To have revealed a worthy doing of deeds"—I do not know whether anyone who practises the fine and precise and pure mode of expression would have thought fit to say it. For matters are done, deeds are wrought, but it is sayings that are thought worthy of being revealed. This, then, is crudely said; and the enthymeme stated upon it is feebler still, for it is long-winded and incongruous, and has neither formidable force nor proper construction: "And of their nobility the first beginning for these men was the birth of their ancestors, which was not foreign, nor did it declare these their descendants to be settlers in the land, having come from elsewhere, but sprung from the soil and in truth dwelling and living and being nourished in their fatherland, not by a stepmother, as others, but by their mother, the land in which they dwelt; and now they lie, having died, in the proper places of her who bore and reared and received them." What nation of men using a pure mode of expression will speak of a birth as the one sprung from the soil and the other as foreign-come? For to be sprung from the soil, or not native, is something that has befallen us, not our birth. At any rate, a man born in one place can migrate elsewhere, but the birth itself cannot suffer this. And who that is earnest to speak well would think fit to say that the birth of the ancestors declared those who would be born later to be sprung from the soil and not settlers in the land in which they were born? For neither has the birth itself the nature to declare anything, nor can anyone migrate into the place in which he is born; rather, we declare sayings, and those who have come from another land are settlers in the one that received them. And who, wishing to preserve the sequence, having spoken of the birth and rendering his account about it, would have joined on the "having come from elsewhere"—the masculine to the feminine and the plural to the singular? For the language would surely have been congruous if, referring to the birth, of which he was speaking, he had added, "it having come from elsewhere." But if he intended to make his speech about the men from the start, he would have set down the phrasing thus: "And of their nobility the first beginning for these men were their ancestors, who were not foreign-come, nor did they declare these their descendants settlers in the land, having come from elsewhere, but sprung from the soil."

[78435] 28. And it is worth observing, too—not in passing—what he has said about the nobility of the men, when he first praises the land from which they sprang. He says, then, that it is beloved of the gods, and produces as witnesses of this the gods who contended over it—a commonplace thing, said by well-nigh all who have praised the city. And it is not this that deserves a malicious charge, but how he has interpreted it that one should learn: "And there is witness to our argument in the strife and judgement of the gods who contended over her. And one whom gods praised, how is it not right that she be praised by all men?" Mean and unenviable seems to me the style, and having nothing worthy of the much-contested city, as it seems to me. For what wealth of words is here? What dignity? What loftiness? What is not softer than her worth? What is not more deficient than the truth? Was it thus that Plato ought to have spoken of the contention of Athena and Poseidon over Attica, the strife and judgement? Thus to bring down the love which the gods had for the honours in it to some mean and moderate phrase, saying "one whom gods praised"? But what he adds after these in praise of the land—that she first gave birth to the race of men and brought forth for it the cultivated fruits—is worth observing: "And she chose out of the living creatures and brought forth man, who in understanding surpasses the rest and alone acknowledges justice and the gods." I do not know whether any other most splendid matter has been said by Plato more cheaply than this, and in more ordinary fashion. Let us grant him to have spoken the encomium of man thus carelessly and feebly. But about his nourishment, at least, he will use a noble phrasing: "For she alone, in that time and first, brought forth nourishment for man, the fruit of wheat and barley." O gods and spirits, where is that rich Platonic stream, foaming with its great constructions? Does that twelve-fountained mouth of the wise man speak so meanly and trickle drop by drop? "He husbanded it, by Zeus, and lowered the construction of his own accord, perhaps," someone will say. And how so?—a man who does not think "milk" a dignified word, but renames it "the fountain of nourishment" in what follows.

[80688] 29. Let us leave this too; but let us examine how he spoke of the greatness of the gift itself: "by which the human race is most beautifully and most excellently nourished." If one of us earth-dwellers and ground-walkers had said "most beautifully and most excellently," how much laughter would he have stirred? Yet let this too be dismissed. "Of this fruit she was not grudging, but gave a share to the others as well." If anyone should wish to take an example of . . . style, would not "the earth, not grudging of its fruit" stand first beside it? To me at least it seems so. And does she who shared her own good things with all men, and sowed with so great a wealth both barbarian and Greek land, deserve to be adorned with these phrases—that she did not grudge the seeds, and that she distributed them to the others? Ought he not either not to have mentioned the not-grudging-toward-one's-neighbours at all, or else to have embraced the distribution of the fruit in some more dignified word—gift, or grace, or some other of the kind? I let this pass. But the gift of Athena he has stated thus: "And after these the birth of the olive, a help in toils, she sent up for her descendants." Circumlocutions again here, and dithyrambs. And why need one say more? For going through the whole speech one would find some things said neither precisely nor delicately, others childishly and frigidly, others without strength and tension, others lacking pleasure and charm, others dithyrambic and vulgar. But I should have wished all to be noble and worthy of serious regard. For it is Plato who writes these things, who, if he shall not carry off even the first prize for style, will at least afford a great contest, about the second prize, to those who would compete. But about these matters enough.

[82483] 30. But the passages which some think the man to have said best, at the close of the speech—and I agree—these I shall set down, and then turn to Demosthenes. For in running through their praise, he says that those who were about to die in the war charged those present with what they should report to their own children and fathers, if anything should befall them in the battle. They are these: "I will tell you both what I heard from those very men, and what they would now gladly say to you, recovering their power, conjecturing from what they then said. But you must think you are hearing from those very men the things I report. They are these: 'Children, that you are of good fathers, the present moment itself declares. For we, when we might have lived ignobly, choose rather to die nobly, before bringing you and those after you into reproaches, and before shaming our own fathers and all our former race—holding that for him who shames his own life is not to be lived, and that to such a man no one, of men or of gods, is a friend, neither on earth nor afterward when he has died. You must, then, remembering our words, whatever else you practise, practise it with virtue, knowing that, falling short of this, all possessions and pursuits are shameful and base. For neither does wealth bring beauty to its possessor along with cowardice—for such a man will be rich for others and not for himself—nor do beauty and strength, dwelling with a cowardly and base man, appear fitting, but unfitting, and they make his cowardice more conspicuous; and all knowledge, separated from justice and the rest of virtue, appears as villainy, not wisdom. For which reason both first and last and throughout you must try, with all eagerness, in every way, so that above all you may surpass both us and those before us in good repute; but if not, know that for us, if we conquer you in virtue, the victory brings shame, while the defeat, if we be defeated, brings happiness. And we should most be defeated, and you should conquer, if you prepare yourselves not to misuse the glory of your ancestors nor to spend it, knowing that for a man who thinks himself something there is nothing more shameful than to offer himself for honour not on his own account, but through the glory of his ancestors. The honours of parents are for their descendants a noble and magnificent treasure; but to use up a treasure of wealth and honours, and not to hand it on to one's descendants, is shameful and unmanly, from want of one's own possessions and good repute. And if you practise these things, you will come to us as friends to friends, when the proper fate brings you; but if you neglect them and prove base, no one will receive you kindly. To the children, then, let this be said. But our fathers, those who have them, and our mothers, we must ever console, that they may bear the misfortune most easily, if it should chance to happen, and not lament along with them. For they will not need anyone to add to their grief; the fortune that has come will be sufficient to provide that. But, healing and soothing them, we must remind them that the gods have heard their greatest prayers. For they prayed not that their children should become immortal, but good and of fair fame; and these they obtained, which are the greatest of goods. And it is not easy for a mortal man that all things in his life should turn out according to his mind. And bearing their misfortunes manfully, they will seem to be truly the fathers of manly sons, and themselves such; but yielding, they will furnish suspicion either that they are not ours, or that those who praise us speak falsely. But neither of these should be; rather, those above all should be our praisers in deed, showing themselves to be in truth fathers, men of men. For of old the saying "nothing too much" seems to be well said; for it is in truth well said. For the man for whom all things tending to happiness, or near it, depend upon himself, and are not suspended on other men, by whose faring well or ill his own affairs too are compelled to waver—for that man life has been best arranged; he is the temperate man, and he the brave and the prudent; he, when children and wealth come into being and are destroyed, most of all obeys the proverb; for he will appear neither rejoicing nor grieving overmuch, because of his trust in himself. Such men we both think fit, and wish, and say our own to be. And we now offer ourselves as such, neither indignant nor overly afraid, if we must die at the present moment. And we beg both our fathers and our mothers to pass the rest of their life using this same disposition, and to know that not by mourning and lamenting us will they most gratify us. But if there is any perception of the living among the dead, they would thus be most ungracious, ill-treating themselves and bearing their misfortunes heavily; whereas they would most gratify us by bearing them lightly and with moderation. For our own affairs will now have the end which is the noblest for men; so that it befits to adorn them rather than to lament. But by caring for our wives and children and rearing them, and turning their mind there, they would most be in forgetfulness of their fortune, and would live more nobly and more rightly and more dear to us. These things, then, are enough to report to our own from us. And to the city we give this charge: that they care for our fathers and our sons, the one educating fitly, the other supporting worthily in old age. But now we know that, even if we do not charge them, they will care for them sufficiently.' These things, then, parents and children of the dead, those men charged you to report, and I report them as most eagerly as I can." This style seems to be the finest in this speech of Plato. The most of it, indeed, is well done (for it does not seem false), except that its figure is that of political display, not of contest.

[88407] 31. Let us, then, set against this a passage of Demosthenes, taken from the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. It is not an exhortation of the Athenians to nobility and virtue, as in Plato, but an encomium of the city, that it counts all other things of less worth than the honour and glory which noble deeds bring, even if one is not going to bring them to success. The passage is this: "But since he insists greatly on what has happened, I wish to say something even paradoxical; and let no one, in the name of Zeus and the gods, marvel at the exaggeration, but with good will consider what I say. For if it had been plain to all what was going to happen, and all had foreknown it, and you had foretold it and protested, crying and shouting—you who did not even utter a word—not even so ought the city to have stood aside from these things, if it had any regard for glory, or for its ancestors, or for the age to come. As it is, it seems to have failed of its purpose—which is common to all men, whenever the god so wills; but then, having claimed to stand at the head of the Greeks, and then having stood aside from this, it would have incurred the charge of having betrayed all to Philip. For if it had given up without a struggle those things for which our ancestors endured every danger whatsoever, who would not have spat upon you? Not, surely, upon the city or upon me. With what eyes, in the name of Zeus, should we have looked upon the men coming into the city, if matters had come round to what they now are, and Philip had been chosen leader and lord of all, while the struggle to prevent these things had been waged by certain others apart from us—and that when the city had never before, in all past time, chosen inglorious safety rather than danger for the sake of the noble? For who, of Greeks or of barbarians, does not know that both from the Thebans, and from the Spartans who were strong still earlier than they, and from the king of the Persians, it would gladly and with much gratitude have been granted to the city to take whatever it wished and keep its own, on condition of doing what it was bidden and allowing another of the Greeks to be at the head? But these things, it seems, were not for the Athenians of that day either ancestral or endurable or inborn, nor could anyone, in all time, ever persuade the city to attach itself in safe servitude to those who were strong but acted unjustly; but, struggling for primacy and honour and glory, it kept on facing danger throughout the whole of time. And these things you suppose to be so august and noble and befitting your characters that you most of all praise those of your ancestors who did them—and rightly. For who would not admire the virtue of those men, who endured to abandon both their land and their city, embarking on the triremes, rather than do what they were bidden—choosing as general Themistocles, who counselled these things, and stoning to death Cyrsilus, who declared that they must submit to what was commanded—not only him, but your wives also stoned his wife? For the Athenians of that day did not seek either an orator or a general through whom they might prosperously be slaves, but did not even think it right to live, if they were not to be allowed to do this in freedom. For each of them held that he had been born not to his father and mother alone, but also to his fatherland. And what is the difference? That the man who thinks he was born to his parents alone awaits the death appointed by fate and the natural death; but the man who thinks he was born to his fatherland too will be willing to die rather than see it enslaved, and will hold more terrible than death the outrages and dishonours that one must bear in an enslaved city. If, then, I had now undertaken to say this—that I led you to think things worthy of your ancestors—who would not reasonably have censured me? But as it is, I declare these resolutions to be your own, and show that even before me the city had this spirit; though of the service in each of the things done I say that I too had a share. But this man, accusing the whole and bidding you be bitter against me as the cause of fears and dangers to the city, is eager to rob me of the honour of the present moment, and takes away from you the praises of all time to come. For if, on the ground that I did not act for the best in public life, you shall vote against this man, you will seem to have erred, and not to have suffered what befell through the unkindness of fortune. But it cannot be that you erred, men of Athens, in taking up the danger for the freedom and safety of all—no, by those of our ancestors who faced the first danger at Marathon, and those who stood in array at Plataea, and those who fought at sea at Salamis and at Artemisium, and the many other brave men who lie in the public monuments, all of whom the city, judging them worthy of the same honour, buried, Aeschines—not those alone who prevailed among them or those alone who succeeded—and justly. For what was the work of brave men, all of them have done; but the fortune which the deity allotted to each, this they have used."

[93544] 32. There is no one who would not agree—if only he had moderate perception in matters of style, and were neither malignant nor contentious—that the passage just now set down differs from the former by as much as weapons of war differ from those of a procession, and true forms from images, and bodies reared in sunlight and toils from those that pursue shade and ease. For the one practises nothing beyond comeliness, and its beauty consists in things not true; the other has nothing that does not lead to the useful and the true. And it seems to me that one would not err in likening the style of Plato to a flowery spot affording pleasant lodgings and ephemeral delights, and the style of Demosthenes to a fruitful and all-bearing land lacking neither the necessities of life nor the superfluities for enjoyment. And though I could, if I wished, examine in detail the particular successes of each, and show by how much the style of Demosthenes is superior to the Platonic—not only in respect of the true and the suited to contests (for this, as toward men who all alike know it, I think needs no argument), but also in respect of the figurative, in which Plato above all seems to be formidable—and though I have many starting-points for discussion, I put off this inquiry to another occasion, if time remains to me; for I shall not shrink from bringing out a separate treatise about it. But now, what fitted the present occasion has been said. And since it was not possible for us to pass Plato by, to whom some assign the first prize, while to wear out the discourse on this single inquiry alone would have been to forget the subject, let my account of these matters be thus circumscribed. But I wish also to gather up what has been said from the beginning, and to show that I have done everything that I promised when I began the inquiry into the topic of expression.

[95417] 33. My purpose and the announcement of my discourse was to show that Demosthenes employed, most moderately of all, the best style, and one fitted to every human nature; and this I tried to establish by giving the proofs not from that style alone (for I knew that nothing is self-sufficient when contemplated by itself, so as to be seen for what it is, and clearly), but by setting against it the styles of the other orators and philosophers that seem to be the best, and making the better one manifest by the test of comparison. So that my discourse might take the natural road, I enumerated the most noteworthy characters of style, and went through the men who took the first rank in them; then, having shown all those men to be incomplete, and having reckoned up briefly in what respect I supposed each to fall short of the goal, I came to Demosthenes. Declaring that he became the emulator of no single character nor of any single man, but, having chosen the best from all, constructed a common and humane mode of expression, and that in this above all he differs from the others, I offered proofs of this, dividing his style into the three most general characters—the plain, the elevated, and the one between these—and showing that in all three kinds he succeeds beyond the others, taking certain passages of his, against which I set, in examination, others of the same kind, worth notice indeed, yet not wholly beyond reproach, nor, like his, possessing all the excellences. For the mention and comparison of Isocrates and Plato—admirable men though they are—was made by me not unreasonably, but because, since these became the emulators of the middle and best character and obtained the greatest reputation, it was so that I might show that, even if they are better than the others, they are not worthy to contend with Demosthenes for the prize of excellence. Having added a little more to these matters concerning style, I shall pass over to the remaining part of the inquiry.

[97402] 34. These are the things which accompany the three styles alike, and are characteristic and inalienable marks of every Demosthenic speech. I shall remind you first of those things which I said belonged to the other styles . . . the peculiar excellences that have befallen the style of Demosthenes, that my account may become easier to survey. It seems to me, then, that, compared with those who use an elevated, excessive, and divergent style, Demosthenes is superior in employing a clearer and more common mode of expression. For these he aims at in every construction that has greatness, and he uses these as his most characteristic excellences in the elevated and strange diction, so far as may be. But compared with those who practise the plain, thin, and unadorned phrasing, he seemed to me to differ by the tension of his style, and by the weight and the compactness and the bitterness, for the most part; for these are characteristic of that style in him, and the like of these. But compared with those who have practised the middle mode of expression—which indeed I declare to be the best—I supposed him to differ in these respects: in variety, in symmetry, in timeliness, and besides these in the passionate and the contentious and the active, and last of all in the fitting, which in Demosthenes touches the very stars. These things, then, I said accompany each of the three styles severally, and from these I thought it right that the power of Demosthenes . . . by nature accompanying the other styles too, but having its strongest and most conspicuous appearance in these places. But if anyone shall think fit to bring a malicious charge against the division, because, distributing the excellences that accompany all the styles in common into three parts, it assigns to each its own, I would say this to him: that I think it right to assign each of the excellences to that place where it has the most pleasing appearance and the most useful application—since the writers of handbooks too declare the narrative to be the place of clarity and conciseness and persuasiveness, not as though these excellences should not be examined anywhere else (for that would be quite absurd), but as though they are most needed in the narrative.

[99644] 35. Come now, these things having been said by us, let us now speak also of the arrangement of words which the man employs. That the harmony of Demosthenes' style is excessive, and differs by a great deal from that of the other orators, is not my own tale. For all, I am sure, would testify this excellence to him who are not wholly inexperienced in political speeches—seeing that even those who flourished in the same age as he are plainly admiring and emulating him most of all for this skill, and that too some who were not even kindly disposed toward him, so as to incur a reputation for flattery, but some of whom had even taken up against him hostilities most bitter and irreconcilable. Among these was Aeschines the orator, a man who possessed a most splendid natural gift for speech, and who seems not to fall far short of the other orators, and to be reckoned, after Demosthenes, second to none. Now this man, of the other formidable power that belonged to this man in respect of style, in some points carps and brings malicious charge, doing the work of an enemy. For he fastens upon him novelty of words and unpleasantness and over-elaboration, and this so-called obscurity and bitterness, and many other such things—being malignant, as I said, in these too, yet still taking some reasonable starting-points for his malicious charge. But concerning the arrangement of words he says nothing either greater . . . or such as to bring ridicule. And this is not yet the thing worth marvelling at, but that he is plainly even testifying in many places to the excellence of the orator, and emulating it. This would become clear from what he himself has said, writing in one place somewhat thus: "But when a man composed of words—and those bitter and over-elaborate" (for in these he does not, by Zeus, praise the choice of his words; for what emulation could there be of a bitter and over-elaborate diction?); and in another place saying thus: "for I dread to see you suffer harm, having delighted in the arrangement of Demosthenes' words." For here again he does not fear lest the Athenians should delight in the beauty and magnificence of his words, but lest, unawares, being bewitched by the arrangement, they should let him off even from his manifest crimes because of the Sirens of his harmony. From these things it is not hard to see that, while testifying to him a formidable power such as belonged to no other, and likening his music to the Sirens, and admiring him not for the choice of his words but for the arrangement, he has indisputably conceded to him this excellence.

[102233] 36. This part, then, as needing not much discussion—I mean that Demosthenes is an excessive arranger of words, confirmed by trustworthy testimonies and by no one's being able to say the contrary—I shall let go. But what the character of his harmony is, and from what kind of practice it became such, and how one might recognize it by examining it against others—these I shall try to say, having first premised the following. Among the ancients there was a great desire and forethought for arranging words well, both in metre and apart from metre; and all who wished to bring out serious writings sought not only to name their thoughts well, but also to embrace the words themselves in a well-ordered arrangement; only they did not all practise the same harmony, so that they did not all come by the same roads. Of this I think there were many causes. The first is each man's nature, by which different men are well fitted by birth for different things; the second, the opinion that grows in us from reasoning and choice, through which we welcome some things and are weighed down by others; the third, the conviction built up by long habit, that the things whose customs we have taken on are worth serious regard; the fourth, the reference and imitation toward those with whom we happen to be in rivalry, whatever they may emulate. One could mention others too, but I, having said the most evident, let the rest be. Hence some practise the steady, weighty, austere, antique-loving, dignified harmony that flees everything elegant; others the polished, clear, theatrical kind, displaying much elegance and softness, by which festal gatherings and the mixed crowd are charmed; and others, composing from each the most useful elements, have emulated the mixed and middle manner.

[104009] 37. For these are the three most general characters of serious arrangement, and the others, besides and from these, are constructed—being very many, and differing from one another by intensification and relaxation. A pure harmony, then, and an unmixed character throughout, could not be found in any poet, whether of metrical or of prose speech, nor should one demand such testimonies from anyone. For where not even the first elements, out of which the nature of the whole is constituted—earth and water and air and fire—is any one pure, but all share in all, and each is named after what predominates, what wonder is it if the harmonies of style, three in number, do not have a pure and unmixed nature, but, from what for the most part befalls them, have been judged worthy of a name and a character of their own? So that, whenever I produce samples of each and bring testimonies, setting down certain passages of the poets and writers who used them, let no one bring a malicious charge against the intermixtures and the qualities of the parts in them, but let him consider each of the passages cited according to what predominates, judging if the thing shown is of such a kind in many places, not if it is so in all.

[105230] 38. Of the austere and antique-loving harmony, then, which practises not the elegant but the dignified, such is the character. It loves to use words that are great and of long syllables . . . and that have their seats very firmly planted, and to distinguish one element from another by the inclusion of considerable intervals of time. This shape of harmony is produced by the juxtaposition of vowel letters, whenever the preceding word ends in one of them and the one joined to it takes its beginning from one of them. For it was necessary that a considerable interval of time be left between the two. And let no one say: "What is this, or how could there be an interval of time which . . . sets words apart from one another by the meetings of the vowels?" For it is shown by musicians and metricians that the interval through the meeting of vowels can be filled up by the insertion of other, semi-vocal letters. And this could not happen unless some considerable silence separated the vowels from one another. This, then, is the first peculiarity of this harmony, for the most part. Another is of this kind: it wishes to take on checks and counter-supports and roughnesses in the interweavings of the words, gently astringing the hearing. Here again the power of the mute and semi-vocal letters is the cause, whenever the letters that end the leading members are . . . and have no nature to be either elided or fused with the leading ones in what follows. For much resistance arises in the meetings of these, just as also in the words themselves, whenever the so-called syllables are composed of letters that roughen the voice. And much craft is needed here, lest such conjunctions become, unawares, ill-sounding or unpleasant or bringing some other annoyance to the ears, but rather that there should bloom upon them a certain antique bloom and an unforced grace. For it is enough, speaking as to those who know, to say only this much: that no serious utterance has by nature any lack of its own loveliness and grace.