WORK: Antiquitates Romanae  (slug: dionysius-of-halicarnass-antiquitates-romanae-97af98)

CHAPTER: 11-book-11



[110042] 46.5. There was impeached also Marcus Claudius, who had attempted to lead away the maiden as a slave, by her betrothed Icilius; and referring the blame to Appius, who had ordered him to act lawlessly, he was acquitted of death, but punished with perpetual exile. Of the others who had performed any lawless service for the oligarchs, none had a public trial, but immunity was granted to all. He who proposed this measure was Marcus Duillius the tribune, the citizens being now weary and expecting the enemy to come.

[110559] 47.1. When the disturbances in the city had ceased, the consuls, having assembled the senate, ratified a decree to lead the army against the enemy with all speed. And the people having confirmed what was voted by the senate, Valerius, the one of the consuls, taking the half part of the army, led it out against the Aequians and Volscians; for both peoples had joined together.

[110938] 47.2. And knowing that the Aequians, from their former successes, had taken on much pride and had come to great contempt of the Roman power, he wished still more to lift them up and make them more presumptuous, by giving a false impression that he dreaded to come to grips with them, and did everything as one afraid.

[111257] 47.3. For he chose for his camp a high and inaccessible place, and threw round it a deep trench and raised high ramparts. And when the enemy challenged him often to battle and reproached his cowardice, he held off, remaining quiet. But when he learned that the strongest force of the enemy had gone out to forage in the country of the Hernicans and Latins, and that in the camp the guard left was neither numerous nor good, thinking this the suitable occasion, he led out his army marshalled and drew it up as for battle.

[111780] 47.4. And when none came out against him, that day he held off; but on the next he led against their baggage, which was not very strongly defended. Learning that the camp was besieged, those who had gone out beforehand to forage came quickly, but not all together nor in order, scattered and in small numbers as each chanced; and those in the camp, when they saw their own men approaching, having become bolder, came out in a body.

[112213] 47.5. And there was a great struggle and much slaughter on both sides, in which the Romans, conquering, routed those who fought hand to hand, and pursuing the fugitives, some they slew, some they took prisoner; and, having mastered their camp, they got round much money and abundant booty. Valerius, then, having accomplished this, now fearlessly went over the enemy's land and ravaged it.

[112604] 48.1. Marcus Horatius, against the war with the Sabines, when he learned how matters stood with his colleague, having himself led his forces from the camp, advanced the more quickly with his whole power against the Sabines, no fewer in number and most experienced in war; for they showed great spirit and daring, from their former successes, against their adversaries, both all in common and individually their leader; for he was not only a good general but also

[113068] 48.2. a noble warrior in his own person; and the cavalry having shown great eagerness, he won a most brilliant victory, having killed many of the enemy, and taken still many more prisoners, and mastered their camp left empty, in which he found much baggage of the enemy and all the booty which they had plundered from the Roman land, and recovered very many prisoners of his own. For the Sabines had not, through contempt, packed up their spoils in time.

[113524] 48.3. Now the enemy's money he permitted the soldiers to take as booty, having first set apart from the spoils whatever he intended to consecrate to the gods; but the booty he restored to those from whom it had been taken.

[113748] 49.1. Having accomplished this, he led back his forces to Rome; and about the same time Valerius came, and there was for both, who took great pride in their victories, a hope of bringing back conspicuous triumphs.

[113963] 49.2. But the matter did not turn out for them according to hope. For the senate, assembled against them while they were encamped outside the city in what is called the Field of Mars, and having learned what had been done by both, did not permit the triumphal sacrifice to be made — many others openly opposing them, but most of all Gaius Claudius;

[114313] 49.3. and he was uncle, as I said, to that Appius who established the oligarchy and had lately been put to death by the tribunes; and he brought forward the laws ratified by them, by which they diminished the power of the senate, and all the other measures which these men carried through their administration; and last the affair of the Ten men, whom they had given up to the tribunes — the death of some, the confiscation of others — as being contrary to the oaths and the covenants,

[114800] 49.4. while he went through these things. For the things agreed upon at the altars by the patricians toward the commons were that there should be impunity for all and amnesty of the former wrongs; and the death of Appius, he said, had not come about by his own hand, but treacherously, by the tribunes, before trial, that he might obtain neither speech nor pity in his judgment; since, if the man had at least come to trial, he would have escaped, bringing forward the dignity of his family, and having done the commonwealth much good, calling upon the oaths and pledges by which men, trusting them, come together to reconciliations, and bringing his children and kindred and his very lowly garb and many other things that draw the multitude to compassion.

[115558] 49.5. When Gaius Claudius had poured forth all these accusations against the consuls, and all present, it seemed good that they should be content if they were not made to pay penalties; but of the celebration of triumphs, or of any such concessions, that they should not be in the least worthy to obtain it.

[115867] 50.1. When the senate had voted against the triumph, Valerius and his colleague, indignant and supposing themselves outrageously insulted, summoned the multitude to assembly; and having made much accusation against the senate, with the tribunes speaking in support of them and proposing a law, they obtained from the people the granting of the triumph, being the first of all the Romans to introduce this custom.

[116281] 50.2. From this the commons again fell into accusations and quarrels against the patricians; and the tribunes provoked them, holding assemblies daily and saying many things against the senate. And what most irritated the many was the suspicion which they contrived to make strong, increased by ownerless rumours and no few conjectures, that the patricians intended to abolish the laws which Valerius and his colleague had ratified as consuls; and a strong opinion, not far from being a conviction, held the many. And such were the things done in the time of these consuls.

[116855] 51.1. Those who held the consulship the following year were Larus Herminius and Titus Verginius; and those who received the office from them, Marcus Geganius . . . . . .

[117026] 52.1. When they made no answer, but showed indignation, Scaptius again came forward to the tribunal and said: 'You have it conceded, fellow citizens, by the very disputants themselves, that they lay claim to our land, which belongs in no way to them; in view of this, looking to what is just and to what your oath requires, cast your votes.'

[117369] 52.2. When Scaptius said this, shame came upon the consuls, considering that the trial would reach neither a just nor a seemly end, if the Roman people, chosen as judge of a land disputed by others and never having laid claim to it, should adjudge it to itself, taking it from the disputants; and very many speeches were made by the consuls and the leaders of the senate to turn the matter aside, but in vain.

[117780] 52.3. For those who had taken the votes, saying it was great folly to look on while others held their property, and supposing they would bring it to no pious end if they should declare the Aricians or the Ardeates masters of the disputed land, having sworn to adjudge it to those they should find it to belong to; and being angry at the litigants, because they had thought fit to take as judges those who were being deprived of it, that it might not even afterward be in their power to recover their own possession, which they themselves, having judged on oath, had recognized to be another's —

[118376] 52.4. reckoning these things and being indignant, they ordered a third urn to be set up, on behalf of the city of the Romans, for each tribe, into which they should cast their votes; and the Roman people became, by all the votes, master of the disputed land. These things, then, were done in the time of these consuls.

[118696] 53.1. When Marcus Genucius and Gaius Quinctius had taken over the office, the civil disputes arose again, the commons demanding that it be permitted to all the Romans to receive the consular office — for hitherto the patricians alone had canvassed for it, being appointed in the centuriate assemblies — and the tribunes of that year, having drafted a law concerning the consular elections, brought it in, all the rest save one, Gaius Furnius, agreeing together, in which they made the people master of the decision, year by year, whether it wished patricians to seek the consulship, or plebeians.

[119294] 53.2. At this the members of the senatorial council were indignant, seeing their own dominion being dissolved, and thought they ought to endure anything sooner than suffer the law to take effect; and there were continual angers and accusations and counter-workings, both in private gatherings and at the common meetings, all the patricians being estranged from all the commons.

[119673] 53.3. And many speeches were made, some in the senate, some in the assemblies, by the leaders of the aristocracy — the milder by those who supposed the commons were erring through ignorance of their interest, the harsher by those who held the matter to be framed out of design and out of envy toward them.

[119980] 54.1. While the time was being dragged out to no purpose, there came to the city from the allies messengers saying that the Aequians and Volscians were about to march against them with a great army, and begging that succour be sent to them speedily, as lying in the path of the war.

[120264] 54.2. It was said also that the Etruscans called the Veientines were preparing for revolt, and that the Ardeates were no longer subject to them, being angry over the disputed land which the Roman people, chosen as judge, had adjudged to itself in the past year.

[120527] 54.3. The senate, learning this, voted to levy an army and that both the consuls should lead out forces. But those who were bringing in the law opposed what had been decreed by them — and the tribunes have the power to oppose the consuls, taking away those who are being led by them to the military oath, and not permitting any punishment to be inflicted on the disobedient.

[120903] 54.4. And though the senate often demanded that they lay aside their contentiousness for the present time, and that, when the wars should reach their end, then they should bring forward the law concerning the elections, these men were so far from yielding to the occasions that they said they would oppose the senate's decrees in other matters too, and would suffer no decree to be ratified about any matter, unless it should first pass a preliminary vote upon the law

[121373] 54.5. they were introducing. And not only in the senate were they brought to threaten the consuls thus, but also in the assembly, swearing oaths — which are the greatest among them — against their own faith, that it might not be lawful, even should they be persuaded, to abolish anything that had been resolved by them.

[121694] 55.1. Against these threats, then, the eldest and foremost of the leaders of the aristocracy considered what was to be done, being assembled in a private gathering by the consuls, by

[121878] 55.2. themselves. Gaius Claudius, then, being least of all popular and having inherited this principle of policy from his ancestors, brought in a more arrogant opinion: to yield to the people neither the consulship nor any other office whatever; and to restrain by arms those who attempted the contrary, if they would not be persuaded by words, sparing neither private man nor magistrate. For all who attempted to disturb the ancestral customs and to corrupt the ancient order of the constitution were, he said, aliens and enemies of the city.

[122423] 55.3. But Titus Quinctius would not have the opposing party coerced by force, nor have them go against the commons by arms and by the blood of fellow citizens, especially as the tribunes would oppose them, whom our fathers voted to be sacred and inviolable, having made the gods and divinities sureties of the covenants, and having sworn the greatest oaths to the destruction of themselves and their descendants, if they should transgress anything of what was agreed.

[122892] 56.1. When the others too who had been called to the council had assented to this opinion, Claudius took up the word: 'I am not ignorant,' he said, 'of how great a foundation of calamities will be laid for us all, if we permit the people to take a vote upon the law; but not knowing what to do, nor being able, single-handed, to gainsay so many, I yield to your wishes.'

[123264] 56.2. 'For it is just that each declare what he thinks will profit the commonwealth, but obey what is decided by the greater number. This, however, I am able to counsel you, as in difficult and unwished-for circumstances: to yield the consulship neither now nor hereafter to any save the patricians, to whom alone it is holy and

[123594] 56.3. lawful to obtain it; but when you are shut up into necessity, as now, to share with the rest of the citizens too the greatest power and office, appoint military tribunes in place of the consuls, having fixed their number at whatever you please — for to me eight or six seems sufficient — and among these men let the patricians be not fewer in number than the plebeians. For doing thus, you will neither cast down the consular office to lowly and unworthy men, nor will you seem to be contriving unjust dominions for yourselves, by sharing no office with the commons.'

[124169] 56.4. When all had praised the opinion and none said the contrary, 'Hear,' he said, 'what I have to counsel you consuls also. Having proclaimed a day on which you will ratify the preliminary decree and what the senate has decided, give leave of speech to those who would plead for the law and to those who accuse it; and when the speeches have been made, when it is time to ask the opinions, begin neither from me nor from this Quinctius nor from any other of the elders, but from the most pro-popular of the senators, Lucius Valerius, and after him ask Horatius if he wishes to say anything. And when you have examined the opinions of these, then bid us, the elders, speak.'

[124846] 56.5. 'I, then, will declare the opinion opposing the tribunes, using all frankness — for this profits the commonwealth — but the measure concerning the military tribunes, if it is agreeable, let Titus Genucius here introduce; for the opinion would be most becoming, and would afford least suspicion, if this man, your

[125166] 56.6. brother, Marcus Genucius, should speak it.' It seemed that he counselled these things rightly too, and they departed from the gathering; but fear fell upon the tribunes at the secret meeting of the men, as having been held for some great evil to the people, since they had taken counsel privately and not in the open, and had taken none of the leaders of the people into partnership of their deliberations; and after this they themselves, again gathering a council from the most pro-popular men, contrived defences and safeguards against the plots which they suspected would come upon them from the patricians.

[125784] 57.1. When the time came at which the preliminary decree had to be made, the consuls, having summoned the senate and made many exhortations to concord and good order, gave leave first to the tribunes who had introduced the law to speak.

[126022] 57.2. And one of them, Gaius Canuleius, came forward and neither taught nor mentioned anything about the law's being just or expedient; but he said he marvelled at the consuls, that, having already deliberated and decided among themselves what must be done, they had attempted to bring it into the senate as a matter untested and needing deliberation, and had given leave of speech about it to whoever chose — introducing an irony unsuited to their years and unbefitting the greatness of their office.

[126525] 57.3. And he said they were introducing the beginnings of wicked measures, gathering secret councils in private houses, and not even calling all the senators to these, but those most suited to themselves. Now of the other senators excluded from the household council he said he marvelled less; but at the disdain of inviting Marcus Horatius and Lucius Valerius — those who had abolished the oligarchy, consular men and second to none in fitness to deliberate the common affairs — into the council he was astonished, and could not conjecture by what just reasoning; but he guessed at one cause: that, being about to introduce wicked and inexpedient opinions against the commons, they did not wish to summon to these councils the most pro-popular men, who would obviously be indignant and would not overlook any unjust measure being framed against the people.

[127384] 58.1. When Gaius Canuleius said such things with much complaint, and the senators not taken into the council received the matter with anger, Genucius, the other of the consuls, came forward and tried to defend himself and to soften their angers, teaching that they had taken in their friends not in order to contrive anything against the people, but in order to deliberate with their nearest, in doing what they would seem to lessen neither of the alternatives — whether they should give the senate a speedy decision about the law, or a

[127922] 58.2. more leisurely one. And that they had not taken Horatius and Valerius into the council for no other reason than that there might be no suspicion concerning them, beyond their desert, among the commons, as though they had changed their political principles, if they should come to be of the other opinion — that which thought fit to put off the decision about the law to another, more suitable occasion. And since to all who had been taken in the briefer decision seemed better than the slower, they acted as seemed good to them.

[128458] 58.3. Having said this, and having sworn by the gods that he spoke the truth, he said that those of the senators who had been called in would clear themselves of all calumny not by words

[128646] 58.4. but by deeds. For when those who wished to accuse and to defend the law had gone through their pleas, they would, in asking the opinion, count first not the eldest and most honoured of the senators, to whom from ancestral custom this privilege too had been granted, nor those held in suspicion among the commons as neither saying nor thinking anything good on their behalf, but from among the younger men those reputed most pro-popular.

[129090] 59.1. Having promised this, and given leave to those who wished to speak, since none came forward either to accuse or to defend the law, he came forward again and asked first Valerius what was advantageous to the commonwealth, and what he counselled the senators to pass in their preliminary decree.

[129391] 59.2. He, rising, and going through many words concerning himself and his ancestors, how they had stood forth on behalf of the popular party for the advantage of the city, and reckoning up from the beginning all the dangers that had beset the city from those who pursued the contrary policy, and showing that hatred of the commons had proved unprofitable to all who had been hostilely disposed toward it, and making much praise of the people, as having been the chief cause to the city not only of its liberty but also of its dominion — when he had gone through these things and the like, he said at last that a city could not be free from which one should take away equality;

[130069] 59.3. and he said it seemed to him that the law was just which thought fit that all the Romans should have a share in the consular office — those, at least, who had led a blameless life and shown deeds worthy of this honour — but that the occasion was unsuitable for the decision about it, while the city was in the disturbances of war;

[130407] 59.4. and he counselled the tribunes to allow the levy of soldiers to be made and not to hinder the going-out of those enrolled, and the consuls, when they should have set the best end to the war, first of all to bring before the people the preliminary decree concerning the law. And he proposed that these things be both written down at once and agreed upon by both parties.

[130784] 59.5. When Valerius had declared this opinion, and after him Horatius — for to him second they gave leave to speak — the same experience befell all present. For those who wished to do away with the law, gladly hearing of the postponement of the decision about it, received with difficulty the clause that after the war they should be obliged to pass the preliminary decree about it; while those who chose that it be ratified by the senate gladly heard the admission that the law was just, but took with anger the clause that the preliminary decree should fall to other times.

[131361] 60.1. When tumult, as was natural, arose over the opinion, because it pleased not both parties in all its parts, the consul came forward and asked third Gaius Claudius, who was thought the most arrogant and the most powerful of the leaders of the other order, the one opposed to the commons.

[131654] 60.2. This man, with preparation, delivered a speech against the commons, recalling all that had ever seemed contrary to the fair and ancestral customs, the sum of which, to which his opinion pointed, was that the consuls should give the senate no decision about the law, neither in the present time nor hereafter, as being introduced for the abolition of the aristocracy and likely to confound the whole order of the constitution.

[132087] 60.3. When still more tumult arose over the opinion, the fourth, Titus Genucius, the brother of one of the consuls, was called and rose; and having discoursed briefly about the occasions then gripping the city — that of necessity one of two most grievous things must befall it, either through the political strifes and ambitions to make the enemy's affairs strong, or, wishing to repel those attacking from without, to dissolve ill the domestic and civil war —

[132549] 60.4. he said that, there being two evils, one of which they must unwillingly endure, this seemed to him the more profitable: to allow the senate to concede to the people some part of the order of the ancestral constitution, rather than to make the city a laughing-stock to aliens and enemies.

[132844] 60.5. Having said this, he introduced the opinion approved by those present at the household council, which Claudius, as I said, had proposed: that in place of consuls military tribunes be appointed, three from the patricians and three from the commons, holding consular authority; and that, when these should complete their office and it was time to appoint new magistrates, the senate and people, again assembling, should decide whether they wished consuls or tribunes to take over the office. And whatever should seem good to all when they cast their votes, that should be binding. And that the preliminary decree should be carried out year by year.

[133498] 61.1. When Genucius had declared this opinion, there was much praise from all, and those who rose after him nearly all agreed that these things were best. The preliminary decree, then, was written by the consuls; and the tribunes, having received it with much joy, came forth into the Forum. Then, having called the multitude to assembly, they bestowed many praises on the senate, and bade such of the commons as wished to canvass for the office along with the patricians.

[133972] 61.2. So light a thing, then, is desire that arises without reason and quickly shifts to the other side — and most of all that of crowds — that those who had hitherto made everything of sharing in the office, and, if it were not given them by the patricians, were ready either to abandon the city as before, or to take it by arms, when they got the concession, at once abandoned the desire and turned their zeal to the opposite course.

[134409] 61.3. For though many plebeians canvassed for the military tribunate and made earnest entreaties, they supposed none worthy of this honour, but, having become masters of the vote, appointed as tribunes the illustrious men from the patricians who sought it — Aulus Sempronius Atratinus and Lucius Atilius Luscus and Titus Cloelius Siculus.

[134749] 62.1. These were the first to take over the office in place of the consuls, in the third year of the eighty-fourth Olympiad, when Diphilus was archon at Athens. Having held it only seventy-three days, they laid it down of their own accord, according to the ancient custom, certain heaven-sent signs forbidding them

[135065] 62.2. to transact the public business. When these had renounced the authority, the senate, assembling, appointed interreges. And they, having proclaimed elections and giving the people the decision, whether it wished to appoint tribunes or consuls, since it decided to remain by the original customs, gave it to those of the patricians who wished to seek the consular office; and there became consuls again from the patricians Lucius Papirius Mugillanus and Lucius Sempronius Atratinus, brother of one

[135568] 62.3. of those who had laid down the tribunate. These two magistracies, possessing the greatest power among the Romans, arose in the same year; save that not in all the Roman chronicles are both recorded, but in some the tribunes only, in some the consuls, and in not many both — to which we, not without reckoning, give our assent, trusting to the testimonies from the sacred and secret books.

[135964] 62.4. Now nothing else worthy of history, either military or civil, was done during the office of these men, but a treaty was made with the city of the Ardeates concerning friendship and alliance; for they sent envoys, laying aside their complaints about the land, inviting that they should become friends and allies of the Romans. This treaty the consular magistracy ratified.

[136343] 63.1. In the following year, the people having again voted that consuls be appointed, Marcus Geganius Macerinus for the second time and Titus Quinctius Capitolinus for the fifth time took over the consular office on the fifteenth of the month of December.

[136600] 63.2. These, having instructed the senate that many other matters had been neglected and left undone through the continual campaigns of the consuls, but that of all the most necessary was the institution concerning the assessments of property — from which both the number of those of military age was known and the amount of money from which each had to pay his contributions for the war — no assessment having been made within seventeen years, from the consulship of Lucius Cornelius and Quintus Fabius; so that the most wicked and licentious of the Romans had abandoned [it], and gone to occupy a place in which it is open to them to live as they have chosen.