WORK: On Literary Composition  (slug: dionysius-of-halicarnass-on-literary-composition-1d20aa)

CHAPTER: 01-on-literary-composition



[110036] This expression—that it does not have smooth or accurately smoothed harmonies, nor is fluent and soft and slipping imperceptibly through the hearing, but displays much that is resistant, rough, and harsh; and that it does not touch even slightly upon festive or theatrical grace, but exhibits a certain archaic and self-willed beauty—as to all the well-educated, who know it equally with me, I need not say, the more so as the writer himself has agreed that his writing is less delightful to hear, and that it is composed to be a possession for ever rather than a prize-essay to be heard for the moment. What the theorems are which this man used to make the harmony rugged and austere, I shall indicate in few words; for it will be easy for small things to be samples of great, for those who do not pass with difficulty to the study of the like and consequent.

[110898] First, at the beginning, to the appellative "Athenian" the verb "wrote [xynegrapse]" being fitted parts the harmony notably; for the s is not set before the x by a co-utterance arising within a single syllable; rather, the s must be caught up in silence and then the x become audible. This affection produces roughness and resistance. Next, the syncopations of sounds that arise after this—the x, the s, the n, the s, and the g lying beside one another four times in a row—well grate the hearing and notably shake up the harmonies, when he says "the war of the Peloponnesians and the Athenians"; for of these parts of the expression there is none that must not be caught up in silence and pressed first by the mouth about the last letter, that the one joined to it may take its own power clear and pure. Besides this, the juxtaposition of vowels that occurs at the end of this clause in "and the Athenians" has broken the continuity of the harmony and parted it, taking a very perceptible time between; for the sounds of the a and the e are unmixed and cut off the sound; whereas it is continuous and smoothed sounds that make good flow.

[112037] And again, in the second period, the leading clause, this—"beginning as soon as it broke out"—the man, having fitted it moderately so that it appears most euphonious and soft, the part after this he again roughens and tears apart by the gapings of the harmonies: "and expecting that it would be great and the most notable of those that had gone before"; for three times in a row, at no great distance, vowels are set beside one another, producing clashings and checks and not allowing the hearing to take the impression of one continuous clause; and the period, ending for him in "of those that had gone before," has not a well-traced and rounded cadence, but appears, as it were, headless and unrounded, as if it were a part of the second rather than an ending.

[112801] The same thing the third period has suffered too; for of it the cadence is uncircumscribed and unseated, its last part being "some intending to," it too comprising at once many resistances of vowels against vowels and of semivowels against semivowels and mutes, which produce the roughnesses of things not concordant by nature. To put it in brief, there being some twelve periods that I have set out, if one should divide them in due measure for the breath, and there being clauses comprised in them not fewer than thirty, one could not find six or seven clauses in all composed with good flow and smoothed in their harmonies; but clashings of vowels in the twelve periods one would find nearly thirty, and juxtapositions of semivowels and mutes that are resistant, harsh, and hard to pronounce so many in number that there is something of the kind for nearly every part of the expression. Great too is the disproportion of the clauses to one another, and the irregularity of the periods, and the novelty of the figures, and the disdain of consequence, and all the other things I reckoned to be characteristic of the unadorned and austere harmony. For to go through all of them again on the examples and to waste time on this I do not think necessary.

[114054] 23. The polished composition, which I placed second in order, has a character such as this. It does not seek that each word singly be seen from every side, nor that all stand upon a broad and secure seat, nor that the times between them be long; nor in general is this slow and steady quality dear to it; rather it wishes the wording to be in motion, and some words to be carried over others, and the chain of connection to be borne along, taking its footing like things that flow and never rest still; and it requires that the parts be blended together by elision and woven together so as to produce, as far as possible, the appearance of a single word. This the precisions of the harmonies effect, comprising no perceptible time between the words; and in detail it resembles finely woven fabrics, or paintings in which the lights are blended with the shadows. It wishes all the words to be euphonious, smooth, soft, and maidenly, and is somewhat hostile to rough and resistant syllables; and everything bold and hazardous it holds in wary avoidance.

[115107] And it wishes not only the words to be suitably fitted and smoothed together with the words, but also the clauses to be well woven with the clauses and all to end in a period, defining the length of a clause—which shall be neither shorter nor greater than the mean—and the measure of a period, which a man's full breath shall command; an unperiodic expression, or a period without clauses, or a disproportionate clause, it could not endure to make. It uses rhythms too, not the greatest but the middle and shorter ones; and it wishes the cadences of the periods to be well-rhythmed and set, as it were, by the rule, doing the opposite in the fitting of these to what it does in the fitting of the words; for those it blends together, but these it parts and wishes them to be conspicuous, as from a watch-tower. As for figures, it loves to use, for the most part, not the more old-fashioned ones, nor those to which some dignity, weight, or tone belongs, but the dainty and flattering ones, in which there is much that is deceptive and theatrical. And, to speak more generally, it has the opposite form to the former in the greatest and most important respects, about which I need not speak again.

[116305] It would follow to enumerate those who took first place in this style too. Of epic poets, then, Hesiod seems to me to have worked out this character most beautifully; of lyric poets Sappho, and after her Anacreon and Simonides; of tragic poets Euripides alone; of prose writers, accurately no one, but rather than the rest Ephorus and Theopompus; of orators Isocrates. I shall set down examples of this harmony too, choosing of poets Sappho, of orators Isocrates. And I shall begin from the lyric poet:

[116809] Many-throned, immortal Aphrodite, child of Zeus, weaver of wiles, I beseech you: do not with surfeits and with griefs subdue, O lady, my heart; but come hither, if ever at another time you heard my voice from afar and hearkened, and, leaving your father's house, came in your golden chariot, having yoked it. Fair swift sparrows drew you about the dark earth, beating their thick wings, from heaven down through the mid-air; and at once they arrived. And you, O blessed one, smiling with your immortal face, asked what I had suffered this time, and why this time I called, and what I most wished to happen for me in my maddened heart: "Whom this time shall I persuade to lead you back into her love? Who, O Sappho, wrongs you? For if she flees, soon she shall pursue; and if she takes not gifts, yet she shall give; and if she loves not, soon she shall love, even against her will." Come to me now too, and loose me from hard cares, and all that my heart longs to accomplish, accomplish; and you yourself be my ally.

[117827] The good flow and grace of this expression have arisen from the continuity and smoothness of the harmonies. For the words lie beside one another and are woven together according to certain natural affinities and conjunctions of the letters; for the vowels are joined to the mutes and semivowels almost throughout the whole song—all those that naturally precede and follow one another, brought out together within a single syllable; while collisions of semivowels with semivowels or mutes, and of mutes and vowels with one another, which shake the sounds, are very few in it. I, at any rate, examining the whole song, find in so many words, verbs, and other parts perhaps five or six interweavings of semivowel and mute letters that are not naturally apt to be blended with one another, and even these do not greatly roughen the good flow; and of juxtapositions of vowels, those that occur within the clauses themselves are still fewer than these, and those that join the clauses to one another a little more numerous. Reasonably, then, the expression has become fluent and soft, the harmony of the words in no way breaking the sound into waves.

[118973] I would have stated the rest of the peculiarities of this composition too, and shown by the examples that they are such as I say, were the discourse not going to become long and to give some appearance of repetition. For it will be possible for you and for anyone else, taking up one by one each of the things I have enumerated in the foregoing description of the character, to consider them upon the examples at much leisure and ease; but for me it is not possible to do this. It is enough only to point out sufficiently what I wish to those who are able to follow.

[119541] I shall set down the expression of one more man fashioned into the same character, Isocrates the orator, whom I think to have refined this harmony more accurately than all who have used prose. The expression is this, from the Areopagiticus:

[119783] "Many of you, I think, wonder what mind I had in coming forward about safety, as if the city were in dangers or its affairs were tottering, and not rather possessing more than two hundred triremes, keeping peace about the land, ruling the sea, and having besides many allies—some ready to help us if there be any need, and far more who pay their contributions and do what is enjoined. With these things ours, one might say it is reasonable for us to be confident, as being far from dangers, and that it befits our enemies to be afraid and to take counsel for their safety. You, then, I know, using this reasoning, both despise my coming forward and hope to hold all Hellas under this power; but I, for these very reasons, happen to be afraid. For I see those of the cities that think they fare best taking the worst counsel, and those that are most confident falling into the greatest danger. The cause of this is that none of the goods or the evils comes by itself to men, but with wealth and dominion are ranged and follow folly, and with folly licence; and with want and lowliness, temperance and much moderation. So that it is hard to discern which of these two portions one would pray to leave to one's own children; for one might see, from the one that seems the meaner, affairs for the most part advancing to the better, and from the one that appears the stronger, accustomed to change for the worse."

[121193] That these are blended together and shaded together, and that not each word singly stands upon a conspicuous and broad seat, nor is divided by long intervening times and stands apart from the others, but they appear to be in motion and in continuous flux and flow, and the harmonies that join the expression are gentle and soft and headlong—to this the irrational feeling of the hearing bears witness. And that the causes of these things are none other than those I stated before about this conduct of discourse, it is easy to see. For one would not find a single clashing of vowels, at least in the passages I have set out, and, I think, not in the whole speech, unless something has escaped me; and of semivowels and mutes, few and not very conspicuous nor continuous. These, then, are the causes of the good flow in the expression, together with the proportion of the clauses to one another, and the cycle of the periods, having something rounded and well-traced and dispensed to a nicety in its proportions. And above all these, the figures, having much that is fresh; for they are antitheses and assonances and balanced clauses and the like, out of which festive diction is wrought. I do not think it necessary to be prolix in going through the rest; for enough has been said about this composition too, so far as fitted.

[122521] 24. The third and middle of the two harmonies mentioned, which I call well-blended for want of a proper and better name, has no peculiar form of its own, but is blended moderately, as it were, out of those two, and is a kind of selection of the best in each. This seems to me fitted to bear away the first prize, since it is a kind of mean—and the mean is virtue, in lives and in deeds, as Aristotle thinks and the others who philosophize after that school—but it is seen, as I said before too, not by exact definition but in breadth, and has many specific differences; and those who have used it have not all pursued the same things nor in like manner, but some these more, some those, and different men intensified and relaxed the same things differently, and all became worthy of note in all the kinds of discourse. The summit, then, and the goal of all,

[123380] from whom all rivers and the whole sea and all springs flow—

[123442] would rightly be said to be Homer. For with him every passage, wherever one lays hold of it, is embroidered to the utmost with both the austere and the polished harmonies. Of the others who pursued the same mean, those who are later than Homer would appear far behind him when examined beside him, but, if one should regard them by themselves, they are worthy to be looked at: of lyric poets Stesichorus and Alcaeus, of tragic poets Sophocles, of prose writers Herodotus, of orators Demosthenes, of philosophers, in my opinion, Democritus, Plato, and Aristotle; for it is impossible to find others who have blended their discourse better than these. And about the characters this is enough. For examples of these I do not think it necessary to bring, since they are quite manifest and need no discussion.

[124248] But if it seems to anyone that these things are worthy of much toil and great labour, he is quite right to think so, in the words of Demosthenes; yet if he reckons up the praises that follow upon them when rightly done, and how sweet is the fruit from them, he will count the toils a pleasure. The chorus of the Epicureans, however, who care for none of these things, I beg off; for the writing not being laborious—as Epicurus himself says—to those who do not aim at the standard, which shifts constantly, it was an antidote against much idleness and clumsiness.

[124812] 25. These things being at an end for me, I think you still long to hear this: how unmetrical expression becomes like a fine poem or song, and how a poem or song becomes like fine prose. I shall begin first from bare prose, choosing one of the men whom I think to have copied poetic phrase most of all—wishing to choose more, but not having time enough for all. Come, then, who would not agree that the discourses of Demosthenes resemble the best poems and songs, and especially the harangues against Philip and the public forensic contests? Of which it will suffice to take the proem of one, this:

[125411] "Let none of you, men of Athens, suppose that I have come to accuse Aristocrates here, neither for the sake of any private enmity, nor that, seeing some small and slight fault, I so readily bring myself into hostility on this account; but if I reckon and consider rightly, all my zeal is about this: that you hold the Chersonese safely and be not again, deceived, deprived of it."

[125793] I must try to say what I think about these things too. They are now like mysteries, and cannot be brought out among the many, so that I should not be vulgar if I should invite those for whom it is lawful to come to the rites of the discourse, and should bid the profane shut the doors of their ears. For some take the most serious things for laughter through inexperience, and perhaps they suffer nothing strange. What I wish to say is this.

[126236] All expression composed without metre cannot take on poetic inspiration or lyric grace, at least as regards the composition itself—since the selection of words too has great power, and there is a kind of poetic naming, of glossematic, foreign, figurative, and coined words, in which poetry delights, when these are mingled to satiety into the unmetrical expression, which many others do, and not least Plato. But I do not speak of the selection; let the inquiry about these things be set aside for the present. Let the study be about the composition itself, which displays poetic graces in common and worn and least poetic words. As I said, then, bare expression cannot become like the metrical and tuneful, unless it comprise certain metres and rhythms set within it imperceptibly. It is not, however, fitting that it should seem to be metrical or rhythmical—for thus it will be a poem and a song, and will simply depart from its own character—but it suffices only that it appear well-rhythmed and well-metred; for thus it would be poetic, yet not a poem, and tuneful, yet not a song.

[127323] What the difference of these is, is very easy to see. The expression that comprises like metres, preserves ordered rhythms, and is carried through, line by line, period by period, or strophe by strophe, by the same figures, and then again uses the same rhythms and metres in the following lines, periods, or strophes, and does this for a long time, is rhythmical and metrical, and to such expression the names metre and song belong; but the expression that comprises wandering metres and disordered rhythms and displays neither consequence among them nor combination nor responsion, is well-rhythmed, since it is embroidered with certain rhythms, but not rhythmical, since not with the same ones nor in the same way. Such, I say, is all unmetrical expression that displays the poetic and the lyric; and such I say Demosthenes too used. And that this is true and that I am introducing nothing new, one might gain conviction even from the testimony of Aristotle; for the philosopher has said, among other things about civic expression in the third book of the Rhetorical Art, what its nature ought to be, and especially about good rhythm, from what kind such a thing would arise; in which he names the most suitable rhythms and shows in what respect each of them is useful, and sets down certain expressions by which he tries to confirm his account. But apart from the testimony of Aristotle, that it is necessary for certain rhythms to be comprised in prose, if the poetic beauty is to bloom upon it, one will know from experience itself.

[128862] For instance, the speech against Aristocrates, which I mentioned a little before, begins from a comic tetrameter line composed of anapaestic rhythms, but falls short by a foot of the complete one, owing to which it escapes notice: "Let none of you, men of Athens, suppose that I." For if this should take on the missing foot, either at the beginning or in the middle or at the end, it will be a complete anapaestic tetrameter, which some call Aristophanean:

[129321] Let none of you, men of Athens, suppose that I am present,

[129381] equal to:

[129392] I shall tell, then, of the ancient education, how it stood.

[129453] Perhaps someone will say to this, that this came about not by design but of itself; for nature improvises many metres. Let this be true. But the clause joined to this also—if one should dissolve its second elision, which has made it indistinct by linking it to the third clause—will be a completed elegiac pentameter, this:

[129778] For the sake of any private enmity whatever,

[129824] like these:

[129837] Maidens, lightly lifting the traces of their feet.

[129889] And this too let us suppose to have come about, according to the same spontaneity, without design. But, one clause in between being composed in the prose manner—"to have come to accuse Aristocrates here"—the clause again woven with this is composed of two metres: "nor that, seeing some small and slight fault, so readily on this account." For if one should take that Sapphic epithalamium, this—

[130286] For there was no other maiden, O bridegroom, such as this—

[130346] and take the last three feet and the cadence of the comic tetrameter, the so-called Aristophanean, this—

[130452] When I, speaking justice, flourished, and temperance was held in honour—

[130526] and join them in this fashion:

[130558] For there was no other maiden, O bridegroom, such as this and temperance was held in honour—

[130652] it will differ in nothing from "nor that, seeing some small and slight fault, so readily on this account." And what follows is equal to an iambic trimeter with its last foot removed: "to bring myself into hostility"; for it will be complete on taking a foot and becoming such:

[130930] to bring myself into some hostility.

[130968] Shall we pass over these too as having come about not by design but by spontaneity? What, then, does the clause close upon this wish again? For this too is an upright iambic trimeter:

[131153] but if I reckon and consider rightly,

[131192] the conjunction taking its first syllable long. And what of "and consider [kai skopo]," falling in between, by which the metre is overshadowed and obscured? The clause taken up after this is composed of anapaestic rhythms and proceeds to eight feet, preserving the same figure:

[131471] that you hold the Chersonese safely and not deceived—

[131526] like this in Euripides:

[131551] King of the land of many clods, Cisseus, the plain gleams with fire.

[131621] And the part of the same clause set after this—"be again deprived of it"—is an iambic trimeter falling short by a foot and a half; it would have been complete thus:

[131787] be again deprived of it in turn.

[131821] Shall we still say that these are improvised and undesigned, being so varied and so many? I do not think fit; for one can find the things following upon these too of the same kind, full of many metres and rhythms of all sorts.

[132049] But that no one may suppose this speech alone to have been so constructed by him, I shall lay hold of another again, of the one thought to be expressed quite divinely, the one On behalf of Ctesiphon, which I declare to be the best of all speeches. I see in this too, after the address to the Athenians, immediately the cretic rhythm—or, if one wishes to call it a paean, it will make no difference—composed of five times, not, by Zeus, improvised but woven as deliberately as possible through the whole of this clause:

[132569] To all the gods I pray, and to all the goddesses.

[132620] Is not that rhythm too of such a kind?

[132660] In Cretan rhythms let us sing the child.

[132702] To me, at least, it seems so; for, apart from the last foot, the rest are altogether equal. Let this too, if one wishes, be improvised; but the clause joined to this also is an upright iambic, falling short of the complete by a syllable, so that here too the metre may be indistinct, since, one syllable being added, it will be complete:

[133041] as much goodwill as I continue to feel.

[133082] And then that paean or cretic, the five-timed rhythm, will come in what follows these: "toward the city and all of you, that as much may be granted me by you toward this contest." For this seems, except that it has two broken feet at the beginning, in all the rest like that in Bacchylides:

[133374] It is no work of sitting still nor of delay, but to the gold-shielded Itonian we must go to the well-wrought temple and show some delicate thing.

[133521] I suspect a certain onslaught against these things by men inexperienced in liberal education, who pursue the vulgar part of rhetoric apart from method and art; against whom it is necessary to make a defence, lest we seem to have left the contest unfought. They will say this: "Was Demosthenes, then, so wretched that, when he wrote his speeches, setting metres and rhythms beside him like modellers, he tried to fit the clauses into these moulds, turning the words up and down and watching over the lengths and times and cases of the nouns and the moods of the verbs and busying himself with all the accidents of the parts of speech? Surely such a man would be foolish to give himself over to such elaborate trifling." These things, then, and the like, deriding and mocking, one might without difficulty repel by saying this: First, that there was nothing strange if the man thought worthy of such reputation as none of those named before him for power of speech, composing works for eternity and giving himself accountable to all-testing time, wished to take up nothing at random, neither matter nor word, but to have much forethought for both these—the management of the thoughts and the comeliness of the words—especially as the men of that time brought out their discourses resembling not painted but carved and chased works, I mean Isocrates and Plato the sophists. For the one composed the Panegyricus, as those who write the shortest time declare, in ten years; and Plato did not cease combing and curling his dialogues and weaving them in every way until, having reached eighty years, he died; for the stories told of the man's industriousness are surely familiar to all lovers of letters—among others, the one about the tablet which they say was found, after his death, with the beginning of the Republic arranged in various ways, having this opening: "I went down yesterday to the Piraeus with Glaucon the son of Ariston." What, then, was strange if Demosthenes too had a care for euphony and melodiousness, and for setting down neither word nor thought at random and untested? For it seems to me to befit far more a man constructing civic discourses as eternal monuments of his own power not to neglect the least of things, than for the sons of painters and engravers, in perishable matter, displaying the skill and toil of their hands, to wear out the precision of the art upon little veins and feathers and down and such minutiae. Using these arguments, then, one might, I think, claim nothing beyond what is reasonable, and might add this too: that, while he was a youth and just laying hold of the subject, it was not unreasonable for him to look round at everything that could fall within human practice; but when long exercise, gaining much strength, had wrought certain moulds and impressions in his mind of every thing practised, he then did these things from the readiest source and from habit.

[136437] Just such a thing happens in the other arts also, whose end is some activity or production. Thus those who know how to play the lute, to pluck the strings, and to play the flute to perfection, when they hear an unfamiliar piece, without much trouble reproduce it at once upon their instruments, simultaneously with the thought; but in learning they take up the powers of the notes by much time and toil, and their hands were not at once in the habit of doing what was enjoined, but only at last, when much exercise made the practice into the strength of nature, then they became successful in their works. And why need one speak of the others? What we all know is enough to cut through their whole nonsense. What is this? When we are taught our letters, first we learn thoroughly their names, then their shapes and powers, then in this way the syllables and their affections, and after this the words and their accidents—I mean lengthenings and shortenings and accents and the like; and when we have gained the knowledge of these, then we begin to write and to read, syllable by syllable and slowly at first; but when considerable time, coming on, has wrought strong impressions of them in our souls, then we do them from the readiest source, and read through whatever book one may give us without stumbling, with habit and speed. Just so one must suppose it to be also with the composition of words and the good flow of clauses among the athletes of the work. But for those inexperienced or unpractised in this to wonder and disbelieve if something is achieved with mastery by another through art, is not unreasonable. Against those, then, accustomed to scoff at the precepts of the arts, let this be said.

[138146] 26. About tuneful and metrical composition, which has much likeness to prose expression, I have some such things as these to say: that the first cause here too, in the same manner as in unmetrical poetry, is the fitting of the words themselves; the second, the composition of the clauses; the third, the proportion of the periods. He who wishes in this department to succeed must turn and fit together the parts of expression in manifold ways, and make the clauses at intervals proportionately, not rounding them off with the lines but cutting the metre across, and make them unequal and unlike, and often gather them into commata shorter than clauses, and make the periods, at least those lying next to one another, neither equal in size nor alike in form; for that which wanders about the rhythms and metres appears closest to prose. Now those who construct epic and iambic verse and the other metres of like kind cannot divide their poems with many metres or rhythms, but must always remain in the same figure; whereas lyric poets may throw many metres and rhythms into a single period. So that those who compose in a single metre, when they break up their lines, dividing them by clauses now this way, now that, dissolve and do away with the precision of the metre, and, when they make the periods varied in size and figure, they cast us into forgetfulness of the metre; while the lyric poets, working out their strophes in many metres, and making the divisions of the clauses—each time again unequal and unlike one another—unequal and unlike, and through both these not allowing us to take hold of a uniform rhythm, wrought much likeness to prose in their songs; and, with figurative, foreign, glossematic, and the other poetic words remaining in the poems, it is none the less possible for them to appear like prose.

[139970] Let no one suppose me to be ignorant that the so-called prosaic quality is held to be a fault in a poem, nor condemn me for this stupidity, as though I were ranking a fault among the virtues of poems or discourses; but let him hear and learn how I think one ought to distinguish, in these things too, the excellent from the worthless. Knowing that of discourses one is that of the ordinary man—I mean the babbler and trifler—and the other the civic, in which there is much that is constructed and artful, whatever of poems I find resembling the trifling and babbling discourse I count worthy of laughter, but whatever resembles the constructed and artful I think fit to receive emulation and zeal. If, then, each of the discourses happened to have a different name, it would follow to call by different names each of the poems that resemble them; but since both the excellent and the worthless are alike called discourse, one would not err in counting the poems that resemble fine discourse fine, and those that resemble bad discourse bad, in no way disturbed by the common name of discourse. For the likeness of the naming, applied to different things, will in no way prevent one from seeing the nature of each.

[141184] Having now spoken about these matters too, I shall close my discourse, setting down here a few examples of what has been said. From epic poetry, then, these will suffice:

[141356] But he from the harbour went up by the rugged path—

[141409] this, then, is one clause. Another:

[141446] over a wooded place—

[141468] shorter than the former and cutting the line in two. A third, this:

[141537] through the heights—

[141559] a small comma, less than a clause. A fourth:

[141605] to where Athene showed him the noble swineherd—

[141654] composed of two half-lines and in no way like the former. Then the last:

[141728] who, of his substance, most of all cared for the household which noble Odysseus had won—

[141818] making the third line complete, but the fourth deprived of its precision by the addition. Then again:

[141921] But him in the forecourt he found seated—

[141964] this too not running out with the line.

[142005] There he had a court high-built—

[142039] this too unequal to the former. And then the following sense is unperiodic, spoken in clauses and commata. For having set down—

[142168] in a conspicuous place, he will again add:

[142212] fair and large—

[142229] a comma shorter than a clause; then:

[142267] running round about—

[142289] a word having by itself some sense. Then in order he will construct the rest in the same manner; for why need one be prolix?

[142415] From iambic poetry, these of Euripides:

[142456] O fatherland, which Pelops bounds, hail—

[142498] this is the first clause, up to this point.

[142543] you who tread the wintry rock of the Arcadians—

[142592] the second, up to this.

[142617] thence I claim my birth—

[142643] this is the third. The former were larger than a line, this one less.

[142714] For Auge, daughter of Aleus, bore me secretly to the Tirynthian Heracles—

[142789] after this:

[142802] Mount Parthenion knows it too—

[142834] neither of these measured by a line. Then again another, both less than a line and greater than a line:

[142939] there my mother, released from her travail, Eileithyia loosed—

[143003] and the things following these are similar.

[143048] From lyric poetry, these of Simonides. They are written according to divisions not those which Aristophanes or anyone else constructed in clauses, but those which prose demands. Attend, then, to the song and read it according to the divisions, and be assured that the rhythm of the ode will escape you, and you will not be able to make out either strophe or antistrophe or epode, but it will appear to you one continuous discourse. It is Danae, borne over the sea, lamenting her own fortunes:

[143542] When in the carven ark the wind blowing bore her, and the heaving sea, she shivered with fear, her cheeks not unwetted, and threw her loving arm about Perseus and said: "O my child, what trouble I have; but you sleep, and in your milk-fed temper you slumber in this joyless brass-nailed timber, sent forth in the night unlit and in the dark-blue gloom. The deep brine over your hair, as the wave passes above, you heed not, nor the wind's voice; lying in your crimson cloak, your fair face against my breast. But if to you the dreadful were dreadful, you would have lent your delicate ear to my words. I bid you sleep, my babe; let the sea sleep, let the measureless evil sleep. And may some change of purpose appear, Father Zeus, from you; but if any bold word I pray, beyond justice, forgive me."

[144342] Such are the metres and songs that resemble fine discourses, coming about for the causes I told you before.

[144451] This you shall have as my gift, Rufus, worth many others, if you should be willing to keep it continually in your hands, like anything else of the very useful kind, and to train yourself in it by the daily exercises. For the precepts of the arts are not of themselves sufficient to make able combatants of those who wish to do without practice and exercise; rather it rests with those who are willing to toil and endure hardship whether the precepts shall prove serious and worth discourse, or paltry and useless.