WORK: On Demosthenes  (slug: dionysius-of-halicarnass-on-demosthenes-b4fa20)

CHAPTER: 01-on-demosthenes



[107251] 39. In the smallest and most elementary parts of style, then, these are characteristic of the first harmony; but in the so-called clauses, which are composed of words and fill up the periods, not only these things, but also that the rhythms which measure them out should not be mean nor soft nor ignoble, but elevated and manly and magnificent. For rhythm in speech is no trifling thing, nor one that holds the place of some unnecessary addition, but, if one must speak the truth, as my opinion is, it is the most authoritative of all things that can bewitch and charm the ears. And besides the rhythms, that the figures too should be noble and dignified—not only those that consist in the thoughts, but also those that arise in the very style. To enumerate now how many kinds of figures there are, both the named and the unnamed, and in which of them this kind of harmony most naturally delights, I have not time. Further, it is proper to this harmony that the periods should be self-made, as it were, and simple, and neither rounding off the sense by themselves, nor measured out to the breath of the speaker, nor using needless redundancies of words with respect to the underlying thought, nor ending in any theatrical and polished rhythms. And in general this arrangement does not, for the most part, welcome the period, but wishes to be constructed somewhat artlessly and simply, and for the most part in short members, making the unconstructed nature its model. And if at any time a well-rhythmed cadence accompanies the unstudiedly arranged members or periods or feet, it does not reject what comes from spontaneous chance. And these too are still characteristic of the ancient and austere harmony: not to use many conjunctions, nor continuous articles, but sometimes even fewer than are necessary; not to let the speech linger over the same cases, but frequently to change them; to hold the phrasing superior to the sequence of what has gone before, and not in correspondence; to yoke the parts together in an excessive and peculiar way, and not according to the supposition or wish of the many. Examples of it, among poets and lyric writers, are the style of Aeschylus, well-nigh all of it, and that of Pindar—except in so far as the Maiden-songs and the like require other constructions; and yet even in these there shows through a like nobility and dignity of harmony, preserving the antique bloom. Among prose writers, the most splendid and the one who succeeds most in this kind is Thucydides. And if anyone thinks the discourse still needs testimonies, passing over the poets, let him take from the style of Thucydides this: "Of this war the length advanced to great extent, and sufferings befell Greece such as no others in an equal time. For never were so many cities taken and laid waste, some by barbarians, others by themselves making war on one another, and there are some that even changed their inhabitants on being captured; nor so many flights of men and slaughter, some in the war itself, some through faction. And the things formerly told by report, but more rarely confirmed in fact, became not incredible—concerning earthquakes, which prevailed over a very great part of the earth at once and were most violent, the same; and eclipses of the sun, which occurred more frequently than is remembered from former time; and droughts in some places, great, and from them famines; and the not least harmful, and partly destructive, the plague-like disease." Such, then, is the first of the harmonies in its character—the noble and austere and high-minded, pursuing the antique-fashioned.

[110861] 40. The one after this—the polished and theatrical, which chooses the elegant before the dignified—is of this kind. It always wishes to take the smoothest and softest of words, hunting for euphony and good melody, and from these for the pleasant. Then it thinks fit to set these down not just anyhow, nor to fit one to another without consideration, but, distinguishing what kinds set beside what kinds will be able to make the sounds more musical, and observing in what shape, when taken, they will produce more graceful conjunctions, so it tries to fit each together, taking very great care that all of them be polished smooth and fused together, and that the harmonies of all of them be smoothly running. And on this account it flees with all zeal the meetings of vowels, as tearing apart the smoothness and good utterance; and it flees, so far as it can, the conjunctions of semi-vocal and mute letters, all those that roughen the sounds and can disturb the ears. For since it is not possible for every word signifying a body or a thing to be composed of euphonious and soft letters, but it sometimes happens that the same words are also ill composed—which nature does not grant—it tries to take this in the conjunctions themselves, and so to make the voices more pleasant and softer. And indeed it even submits to insert among the necessary words certain others, with respect to the underlying sense neither necessary nor perhaps useful, but which will serve as a kind of bond or glue to the words placed before and after them—so that words ending in a rough letter and words taking their beginning from some such letter may not, on being joined to one another, make convulsions of the sounds and resistances; but, resting against the interposed word, may make the sounds appear soft and continuous. For its whole intention and great concern is that all the parts of the period be drawn together and woven together, producing the impression of a single word, and besides this, that the whole style, as in musical concords, be pleasant and clear. Of these things, the one is produced by the precisions of the harmonies, the other by the powers of the letters being congenial to one another in their sympathies according to the rules—about which the inquiry belongs to another science. The flow of the style, then, becomes tripping and downward-running, like streams borne down a sloping ground with nothing resisting them, and it runs through the hearing pleasantly somehow and welcomely, no less than the strains and melodies set to music through song and instrument. Further, it belongs to this arrangement that the members too are wonderfully like poems, soft-sounding and smooth, having much that is prattling, yoked to one another according to a certain natural affection, out of which the period is constituted; for it composes nothing outside the period. Further, of the rhythms into which it divides the periods, it does not wish to take the dignified, but the most graceful. They appear, therefore, well-crested and well-formed on this account, and end in a safe seat. And of the figures it pursues those most able to move crowds; for it adorns itself and blossoms with these, so far as it may proceed without paining the ears—among which are the balanced clauses and the similar endings and the antitheses and the words alike in sound, and those that turn back, and those repeated at the beginning, and many other such instruments of poetic and lyric style. Such, then, seem to me to be the characteristics of this harmony also. I make examples of it, among poets, Hesiod and Sappho and Anacreon, and, among those who used prose style, Isocrates the Athenian and those who came near him. Now certain passages have already been quoted before, in which I sketched the whole character of his style; from these the points concerning arrangement too, if they are such as we say, one might not hard see. But, lest we seem to break up the sequence by bidding the readers turn back to the examples given at the beginning, let a passage be taken here too from his Panegyric speech, one that will not detain the readers long, in which he runs through what the Athenians did about the sea-fight at Salamis. It is this: "For since they were not able to array themselves against both forces at once, taking the whole crowd from the city they sailed away to the neighbouring island, that they might face the danger in turns and not against both at once. And yet how could men be shown to be better, or more lovers of Greece, than these, who endured to look on—rather than to become to the many the cause of slavery—their city becoming desolate, their land being ravaged, their temples being plundered and shrines set on fire, and the whole war coming to be about their own fatherland? And yet not even this contented them, but they did not hesitate to fight at sea, alone, against twelve hundred triremes; nor, indeed, were they allowed to. For the Peloponnesians, shamed by their valour, and thinking that, if our men were first destroyed, they themselves too would not be saved, but that, if they succeeded, they would bring their own cities into dishonour, were compelled to share the dangers. And the tumults that arise in the action, and the shouts and the exhortations, which are common to all who fight at sea, I do not know why we should linger over telling. But the things that are peculiar, and worthy of the leadership, and in agreement with what has been said before—these it is my task to tell. For our city so far excelled, when it was whole, that, even after it had been laid waste, it contributed more triremes to the danger on behalf of Greece than all who fought at sea together, and triremes able to face twice as many. And no one is so ill-disposed toward us as not to agree that through the sea-fight we prevailed in the war, and that of this the city was the cause. And yet, when an expedition against the barbarians is to be, who ought to hold the leadership? Not those who most distinguished themselves in the former war, and often faced danger in their own behalf, and in the common contests were judged worthy of the prizes of valour? Not those who abandoned their own land for the salvation of the others, and of old became founders of most of the cities, and again preserved them from the greatest disasters? How would we not suffer terrible things, if, having shared the largest portion of the evils, we should be judged worthy to have a smaller share in the honours, and, having then been ranked before the rest, should now be compelled to follow others?"

[117448] 41. Of the third harmony, which I said was mixed from both, choosing the most useful elements from each, there is no character of its own; but, according as those who pursue it have the preference or power to flee some things and take others, so the mixtures are blended, just as in painting. Of this harmony the best standard was the poet Homer, and no one could name a style better fitted than his to both these ends—I mean both the pleasant and the dignified. He was emulated by many poets of epic and of lyric, and besides by tragedians and comedians, and by ancient prose writers and philosophers and orators. To mention all of these would be a great task; it will be enough to bring forward only two of those who held sway in prose, whom I am convinced to be the best—of prose writers, Herodotus, and of philosophers, Plato; for both dignity and grace run over their harmonies. And whether I have judged rightly and reasonably about them, anyone who wishes may examine and consider. Come, then, who would not agree that this style is midway between the austere and the pleasant harmony, and has taken the best from each—the style which Herodotus has used, putting the speech into the mouth of Xerxes, when he was deliberating about the campaign against the Greeks? The passage has been transferred into the Attic dialect: "Men of Persia, I shall neither be the first to introduce this custom among you, but, having received it, shall use it. For, as I learn from my elders, we have never kept quiet, ever since we took over this leadership from the Medes, when Cyrus overthrew Astyages; but a god so leads us on, and to us ourselves, as we follow many courses, things turn out for the better. The nations which Cyrus and Cambyses and my father Darius subdued and added to our dominion, no one need tell to those who know. But I, since I took over this throne, took thought how I might not fall short of those who came before me in this office, nor acquire less power for the Persians. And taking thought, I find that at once glory accrues to us, and a land not less nor poorer than the one we now possess, but more fruitful, and at the same time vengeance and requital come about. For these reasons I have now gathered you together, that I may lay before you what I purpose to do. I intend, having yoked the Hellespont, to drive an army through Europe against Greece, that I may take vengeance on the Athenians for all they have done to the Persians and to my father. You saw, indeed, that Darius too was eager to make war on these men; but he has died, and it was not granted him to take vengeance. But I, on behalf of him and of the other Persians, shall not cease before I take and burn Athens—they who first began doing wrong to me and to my father. First, coming to Sardis with Aristagoras the Milesian, our slave, they burned the groves and the temples; and secondly, what they did to us when we landed on their soil, when Datis and Artaphernes were generals, you all, I suppose, know. For these reasons I have set myself to make war on them, and reckoning I find these good things in it: if we subdue these men and those who border on them, who inhabit the land of Pelops the Phrygian, we shall make the Persian land border on the upper air of Zeus. For the sun shall look down on no land bordering on ours, but I, together with you, shall make all of them into one land, passing through the whole of Europe. For I learn that it is thus: there is no city of theirs, nor any nation of men, left to us that will be able to come to battle, once these I have named are taken away. So both those who have done us wrong and the guiltless shall wear the yoke of slavery. And you would gratify me by doing this: whenever I signify to you the time at which it seems good for us to come, every one of you must eagerly be present. And whoever comes with an army most finely equipped, to him I shall give the gift which is held most honourable in our country. So, then, these things must be done thus. But, that I may not seem to take counsel by myself, I set the matter in the midst, and bid whoever wishes among you declare his opinion."

[121590] 42. I should have wished to bring forward still more examples of the writer's manner; for thus the proof would have become stronger. But as it is I am restrained, hastening to the matters set before me, and at the same time suspecting a reputation for untimeliness. The wonderful Plato too will forgive me, if I shall not set down passages of his as well; for the reminder, as toward those who know, is enough. These things I went through—the differences of the harmonies, and their characters, and those who took the first rank in them—wishing this, that, whenever I declare my opinion that Demosthenes practised the middle and mixed harmony, no one may interrupt me, saying these things: "But what are the extreme harmonies? And what is the nature of each of them, and what is this mixture or blending?"—for none of the . . . extremes. First, then, for this reason, as I said, I was compelled to premise those things; and next, that my discourse might not be one-limbed or austere, but might have some well-educated diversions. For neither to confirm such additions, nor, when the discourse does not require it, to leave them out, would be well.

[122739] 43. Now that the orator's choice has been shown by me, let everyone now consider for himself the things that have been said, that they are of such a kind, observing both how much the man has constructed with dignity and austerely and weightily, and how much delightfully and pleasantly. And if here too some proof shall seem to be needed, let him take up whichever of his speeches he wishes, and beginning from whatever part he wishes, let him go down through it and consider each of the things said—whether some have their harmonies suspended and set apart, and others glued and condensed together; and whether some roughen and embitter the hearing, while others soothe and smooth it; and whether some turn the hearers toward passion, while others lead them down to character, and others work yet other and many differences in the very arrangement. Of such a kind are these (I shall use examples not chosen of set purpose, but such as I happened upon, taking them from one of the Philippics): "But if any of you, men of Athens, seeing Philip prosperous, thinks him on that account formidable to fight against, he uses the forethought of a prudent man; for there is a great inclination—or rather fortune is everything—in all human affairs. Nevertheless, for my part, if anyone gave me the choice, I would choose the fortune of our city, provided you are willing to do, even in small part, what you ought, rather than his." In these three periods all the other words are composed euphoniously and pleasantly, by the very continuous and soft nature of their harmonies. There are only a very few that set the harmonies apart and make them appear rough: in the first period, in two places, the vowels clashing, both in the "men of Athens" and in the "seeing prosperous," which set apart the continuity; and in two or three other places the semi-vocal and mute letters falling next to one another, those that have no nature to be fused together—in the "Philip" and in the "on that account formidable to fight against"—disturb the sounds moderately and do not allow them to appear soft. In the second period the arrangement is roughened in the "for there is a great inclination," through the two letters r-r not being fused, and in the "human affairs" through the n not being smoothed into what follows. And it is torn apart in the "or rather fortune is everything," short vowels enclosing a long interval of time between them. In the third period the vowels, if one should wish to fuse and elide them, like the "I think" and "necessary," he would not find interlaced with one another. But of the consonants, in two or three places, those not preserving the smoothness with the words beside them will be found, in the "should give me the choice" and in the "the fortune of our city." Up to these points, then, the second harmony carries off the prize; but in what follows, the former (for it is more torn apart than the other): "For I see far more starting-points for having the goodwill of the gods present in you than in him. But, I think, we sit doing nothing; and it is not possible for a man who is himself idle to lay commands even on his friends, much less on the gods." For in these the vowels are plainly clashing in many places, and the semi-vocal and mute letters too, from which the harmonies take their stays and seatings, and the voices take frequent roughnesses. Then the periods that follow upon these take on no separations of vowels, and on this account their arrangement is tripping, but, scored across by the meetings of mute and semi-vocal letters, they roughen the voice in due measure. And the rest too has all been constructed in the same way. For why should one lengthen the discourse by saying more? It is not only the conjunctions of words that take on the mixed and middle harmony in him, but also the constructions and arrangements of the clauses, and the lengths and shapes of the periods, and the rhythms that embrace both them and the clauses. For much has been said by the man in short phrases, and . . . the most has been so constructed, and not a little in periods. And of the periods, some are well-crested and rounded as if from a lathe, while others are supine and diffuse and do not have their bases excessive. In length, some are shorter, so as to be measured to a man's breath, others much larger, such as proceed even to the fourth pause and then come to an end. And of the figures, in one place one would find the dignified and austere and ancient predominating, in another the clear and polished and theatrical. And of the rhythms, in many places the manly and dignified and noble, but rarely somewhere the dance-like and broken in the Ionic manner. About these we shall speak a little later; for there will be a more suitable place for them. But now, having added still what the discourse seems further to demand, I shall pass over to the rest of what was set before me.

[127650] 44. And what is this? Since I said that the mixed arrangement is the best, and declare that Demosthenes used it most moderately of all the rest, and made in it noteworthy intensifications and relaxations, now making the manner more dignified, now more becoming—with what intention does he not always travel one and the same road? And by what standards does he define the predominance of this or that character in a given place? It seems to me that the man, taught by nature and by experience, learned first this: that the crowds streaming together to festal assemblies and lectures do not demand the same constructions of style as those who meet in the law-courts and the assemblies; but the former crave deception and entertainment, the latter teaching about the things they seek, and benefit. He thought, therefore, that the speech in the law-courts ought not to prattle and trill, nor the display speech to be full of dryness and patina. Now we cannot bring forward festal speeches of his; for I am convinced that all those attributed to him are spurious, and have not in the least his character, neither in the thoughts nor in the words, and fall short in arrangement wholly and entirely. Of this kind are the vulgar and empty and childish funeral oration, and the encomium to Pausanias, full of sophistic nonsense. But this is not the occasion to give the proofs about these.

[129032] 45. From his contentious speeches, all those that were made for law-courts or assemblies, I conjecture that the man held this opinion. For I see him, whenever he took up matters that needed more graceful construction, giving them a festal harmony of style—as he has done in the speech Against Aristocrates, in many places and especially where he renders the account about the laws and about the courts for homicide, for whatever use each of them has been appointed; and in the speech Against Leptines, On the Immunity, in many parts, and especially in the encomia of the benefactors of the city, Chabrias and Conon and certain others; and in the speech On the Crown, and in many others. This, then, having first considered, he seems to me to fit the character of his arrangement to the subjects, and still further, having learned this, that not all kinds of speech demand the same ornament either of word-choice or of arrangement, but some the more polished, others the more austere; and following the use of these, to make the prooemia and the narratives have more of the pleasant than of the dignified, but the proofs and epilogues a smaller share of the pleasant arrangement and a larger of the austere and patinaed. For in those passages where the hearer must be flattered and must follow the matters, hearing narratives of others' evils, sometimes dry and unpleasant—there, if the arrangement does not bring in something to sweeten, or to console the weariness of the thought, the proofs will have no sure base; but in those passages where things tending toward the truth and the advantageous must be said—these the many demand to learn somehow simply and nobly and with austere dignity, while the prattling and deceptive in these has no charm, in speeches of contest. Knowing, then, that the nature of all is not the same, he thought that the same ornaments did not befit all, but that to the deliberative speeches the dignity and the grand utterance fit better, and to the forensic—where the judge becomes a hearer of others' evils, and the contest is for the soul and for all the other things most precious to men—the charm and the pleasure and the deception and the like. For this reason in the deliberations, and especially in those against Philip, he has used the austere harmonies more profusely; but in those composed for the law-courts the polished. And again, of the forensic speeches themselves, in the public ones, where the dignity of the city had to be guarded, he used the more magnificent harmonies more abundantly; in the private ones, less.

[131597] 46. To speak briefly, not only with respect to the peculiarities of the speeches and the variations of the subjects did he think it right to make different blendings of the characters in the arrangement, but also, with respect to the very kinds of arguments—the completing parts having different natures, as he saw—he tried to adorn them with differing constructions of harmony: composing the maxims in one way, the enthymemes in another, the examples differently. It would be a long discourse, if I should wish to tell all the differences which that divine man, observing, and ever shaping his speech to each colour, dispensing each of the two harmonies by relaxation and intensification, moulded those fine speeches. And I do not think examples are needed here, in order that my discourse may gain more credit when the works of the orator are examined, whether they are such as I say. For the composition would take on much length, and there is fear that it might pass over from the form of a memorandum into the form of a school-treatise. But a few things taken from the many are sufficient evidence, and at the same time, toward those who know (for I am not writing these things for those inexperienced in the man), it is enough to show the matters symbolically. I return, then, to the rest of what I proposed at the beginning to speak about.

[132945] 47. The second main point, then, was to show by what theorems he used, and through what kind of practice, advancing, he took the best part of the . . . harmony. I shall speak about these too, as I hold my opinion. There being two ends, so to speak, in every work—of which nature is the craftsman and the arts are the mothers—the beautiful and the pleasant, he saw that in speeches too, both those constructed in metre and those outside metre . . . it was going to be sufficiently provided with both of these. For each of them, separated from the other, besides not being perfect, also has its own excellence dimmer. Having understood this, then, and having supposed the beautiful to be the end of the austere, and the pleasant of the polished, he sought what things are productive of beauty and what of pleasure. He found, then, that the same things are causes of both—the melodies and the rhythms and the changes, and the fitting that accompanies all of them—yet not each shaped in the same way. What relation each of these has, I shall try to teach.

[133998] 48. The first parts of style, which by some are called elements—whether these are three, as Theodectes and Aristotle think, nouns and verbs and conjunctions, or four, as those of the school of Zeno the Stoic think, or more—two things accompany alike: melody and time. By the acuteness and gravity of them the melody is determined, and by the lengths and shortnesses the time. This becomes rhythm, whether it begins to be constituted from two short syllables, as some think (and they call the rhythm so constructed the "leader," having the first ratio of equal times in raising and lowering), or from three shorts, as those of the school of Aristoxenus held, which is constructed first in the double ratio. And to the parts composed of the first parts of style the melody too now advances together toward increase, and the rhythms proceed into the so-called metres. And whenever each of these is about to overstep the measure, the change, entering in then, dispenses the proper good of each. And whenever these take their fitting place, then the fitting renders to them their proper loveliness. And this is not hard to learn from the works of music. For come, if someone, setting the most beautiful melody to songs or to the strains of instruments, should make no account of rhythm, could anyone endure such music? And what? If he provided moderately for both of these, but remained in the same melody and the same rhythms, changing nothing and varying nothing—would he not destroy the whole good of it? And if he aimed at this too, but appeared to have no forethought of the fitting for the subjects, will not all his toil about those things be useless to him? To me, at least, it seems so. Having learned these things, then, Demosthenes, reckoning up the melodies of the words and clauses and their times, tried so to fit them together that they should appear melodious and well-rhythmed; and he tried to vary and diversify each of them by countless figures and turns, and made such a grant to the fitting as none of those earnest about speeches made. And having considered, as I said, that the pleasant speech and the beautiful are produced through these same theorems, he examined again what then was the cause that the same things were not productive of the same effects. He found that there are differences of the melodies, which make some of them appear dignified and others polished, just as in music the colour-mode stands to the harmony; and that something similar happens in the rhythms too, so that some of them appear dignified and magnificent, others delicate and soft; and in the changes, that now the antique-fashioned and austere, now the honey-sweet and novelty-loving shows through. And the fitting, most of all, affords a great inclination toward each of them. Having understood these things, then, whenever he supposed that he needed more of the beautiful in his construction, he made the melodies magnificent and the rhythms dignified and the changes noble; but whenever the style appeared to him to need the other arrangement, he brought all these down to the more musical. And let no one suppose the argument strange, if I say that even prose style needs melodiousness and good rhythm and changes, like songs and instruments, if, on hearing the style of Demosthenes, he lays hold of none of these, nor let him suppose that I do violence in attributing to bare prose the qualities belonging to it. For these things the well-constructed style possesses, and most of all the style of this orator. But by its timeliness and quantity it escapes perception; for some things are confused together, others fused away, and others in some other way have passed beyond the precision of the construction, so that it seems wholly changed and to resemble poems in nothing.

[137781] 49. Will anyone, then, demand of me here an account of melodies and rhythms and the figures in the changes and the fitting in each, claiming to hear what among them are those by which the antique-loving harmony is adorned, and what would belong to the prattling harmony? Or rather, bringing in the more proper good musical taste that he has from childhood, which he got from music and grammar (which have these theorems), and laying hold of the fact that the discourse lingers among the common and familiar things, will he not bring a malicious charge—especially seeing the measures of the occasion? I think, indeed—as I have a fair opinion about the rest, beginning from you, dearest Ammaeus, and drawing it from your good musical taste—that he will not. But if anyone shall demand to learn these things too, how they stand, let him take up the memoranda we have composed about the arrangement of words, and he will know all that he longs for of the things here omitted. I, having here somehow circumscribed the discourse about these matters, shall come to the part that remains.

[138863] 50. For I promised to show this also still, how one might recognize the character of Demosthenes' arrangement, and by what signs one might distinguish it from the others. There is, then, no single mark of it so conspicuous as for it alone, and for none of the others, to accompany; but the concurrence and abundance, by which the knowledge of every matter and body is naturally tested, becomes its peculiar character. I shall use, for clarity's sake, a plain image—the bodies of men. For to all, of course, belong size and colour and shape and limbs, and a certain rhythm of the limbs, and the like. If, then, anyone should think fit to consider the character from one of these, he will know nothing precisely. For in many forms one would find some such other thing as he set down as the token of one form. But if he puts together all the attributes of the form, or the most, or the most authoritative, he will both take the knowledge very quickly, and will not be . . . by the resemblances. This, then, I would think right for those too who wish to know precisely the arrangement of Demosthenes—to test it from many peculiarities, I mean the strongest and the most authoritative: first, from the melodiousness, of which the best criterion is the irrational sense. But this needs much practice and long instruction; for not even modellers and the children of painters, unless they take much experience, having long worn down their eyes upon the works of the ancient craftsmen, would easily recognize them, nor could they say with assurance that this is the work of Polyclitus, this of Phidias, this of Alcamenes, and of the paintings that this is by Polygnotus, that by Timanthes, this by Parrhasius. And shall some men, then, from a few precepts and a brief instruction, precisely know the nature of melodious harmony in speeches? Far from it. This, then, I think one must consider first, with knowledge and habit, and after this the good rhythm. For there is no style of Demosthenes which has not embraced rhythms and metres, some complete and finished, others incomplete, having such interweaving among one another and so fitted together that it is not plain that they are metres. For political style could not otherwise become, in its very arrangement, like poems, unless it contained metres and certain rhythms placed within it imperceptibly. It is not, however, proper for it to seem metrical or rhythmical, lest it become a poem or a song, departing from its own character; but it is enough that it appear well-rhythmed and well-metred. For thus it would be poetic, yet not a poem, and melodizing, yet not a song. And what difference these have is not hard to see. The style that takes on similar metres and ordered rhythms, whether by the line or by the period (which the musicians call a strophe), and then again, with the same rhythms and metres, upon the same lines or periods (which they call antistrophes), and proceeds with this shape of construction from beginning to end, is metrical and rhythmical, and to such a style the names metre and song are given; but the style that embraces wandering metres and disordered rhythms, and preserves neither their sequence nor their pairing nor any other ordered likeness, is well-rhythmed and well-metred, since it is diversified with certain metres and rhythms, yet not rhythmical nor metrical, since they do not have the same ones nor in the same way. Such, I say, is all political style, in which the poetic beauty shows through. And I see that Demosthenes too has used it. The proofs about this part, having given them in what I wrote about arrangement, I do not think it necessary to state here too. A third and fourth peculiarity of the orator's arrangement was the varying in all manner of ways and the shaping in manifold fashion of the clauses and the periods. For there is no place at all that is not diversified with the variations and the figures, as all know; and these things seem to me to need no discussion, being familiar even to the most worthless.

[142887] 51. These, then, seem to me to be the inalienable and characteristic marks of Demosthenes' arrangement, from which one might recognize the whole of it, if one wished to examine it. But if anyone shall, against these, take up the matter, saying that he marvels whether so great a man was so wretched that, when he wrote his speeches, he turned the parts of his style and the clauses composed from them upside down, fitting melodiousnesses and rhythms and metres—matters proper to the theory of music and of poetry—into political phrasing, in which there is no share of any of these: let him first consider this, that a man judged worthy of such great repute for speeches as no one before him, composing works that were to be eternal and handing them over to all-testing time, wrote nothing at haphazard. But just as he made a great grant to the management of the thoughts, so also to the harmony in the words, seeing, indeed, those men admired for wisdom and held to be makers of the best speeches—Isocrates and Plato—bringing forth speeches like things carved and chased; and considering that the good speaking has a twofold division, into the topic of the matter and into the topic of expression, and that, these two again being divided into equal sections—the matter into the preparation, which the ancients call invention, and into the use of what has been prepared, which they call management; and the expression into the choice of words and into the arrangement of those chosen—in each of these the latter parts have a larger share than the former: the management in the topic of matter, and the arrangement in the topic of expression. About these it is not the occasion now to be long. For these things one would consider, if one were not utterly dull or contentious, and would not marvel if Demosthenes took thought of melodies and rhythms and figures, and of all the other things by which the arrangement becomes pleasant and beautiful. Rather, one would the more suppose—a man neither little-toiling nor easily sated nor superficially clever—that it is hopeless and impossible either that the orator took no care, or only a poor one, of the harmony of his speeches, while wishing to leave behind immortal memorials of his own thought. For surely modellers and painters, displaying the dexterity of their hands in perishable material, bring to bear so many toils that they work out to perfection even the little veins and feathers and down and the like, and melt down their arts into these; and shall the craftsman of political speech, then—having surpassed all of his time both by nature and by toil—have made light of one of the smallest things toward speaking well, if indeed these too are of the smallest?

[145606] 52. I should wish those still ill-persuaded toward what has been said to consider these things too: that, while he was still a youth and had only recently laid hold of the study, it was not unreasonable that he should hold both these and all the rest with much care and forethought; but that, when his long practice had wrought in him a great habit and had stamped strong impressions of the things he was ever practising, then he did it with the greatest ease and from habit. Such a thing happens also in the other arts, and not least in the so-called grammar. For this is sufficient to give evidence about the others as well, being the most evident of all and the most marvellous. For when we learn it thoroughly, first we take up the names of the elements of the voice, which are called letters; then their shapes and powers. And when we have learned these, then their syllables and the affections concerning these. And having mastered these, the parts of speech—I mean nouns and verbs and conjunctions—and the things that belong to these: contractions, lengthenings, acutenesses, gravities, genders, cases, numbers, moods, and the countless other things like these. And when we have embraced the knowledge of all these, then we begin both to write and to read, syllable by syllable and slowly at first, since the habit is still young; but as time advances and lays a strong intelligence upon the soul through the continuous practice, then, without stumbling and with much ease, we go through whatever book one gives us, no longer running over any of those many theorems, but reading with the very act of perceiving. Some such thing one must suppose to happen also about this art: that the habit, growing from the small and meagre theorems, comes in time easily to master them, so that the work of it is, with the very act of perceiving, both discriminating and unstumbling. And if to anyone these things seem to be works of much toil and great labour, he is quite rightly of that opinion, according to Demosthenes; for nothing great is to be bought for small toils. But if one will reckon up the fruits that follow upon them—or rather, if one will reckon up even the single fruit, the praise which time renders both to the living and after death—he will hold all the labour less than is fitting.

[147906] 53. One discourse still remains to me, that concerning delivery, how the man has adorned his style with it—an excellence necessary to speeches, and especially the political. When it is present, there comes to be room and place for the other excellences too; but when it is absent, there is no benefit whatever from any one of them. And one might conjecture how great strength this element has, by learning how much those who act tragedies and comedies differ from one another. For, speaking the same poems, they do not all charm us in like manner; rather, with some we are vexed, and, as though wronged by their playing the part badly and corrupting the intentions of the poems, we are angry. This excellence, I say, speeches of contest much need, if they are to have much of the true and living. And of this above all, as of the rest, this man took forethought. Seeing its nature to be twofold, he was earnest about both its parts. For both the affections of the voice and the postures of the body, that he might have them at their best, he worked out with no small toil—and that, too, having used by nature no very fortunate gift toward these things, as Demetrius of Phalerum says, and all the others who have written his life. "And how do these things bear upon his style?" someone might say. The style, indeed, I would say, has been suitably constructed toward these things, being full of many characters and passions, and teaching what kind of delivery it needs. So that those who read this orator must observe carefully, in order that each thing may be said in this manner, the manner in which he wished. For the style itself teaches those who have a soul easily moved, with what kind of delivery it will need to be brought out. And this I shall make clear upon the examples.

[149689] 54. For come, let someone try to bring out these numbers: "Olynthus indeed and Methone and Apollonia and thirty-two cities on the Thracian coast I pass over, all of which he has destroyed so cruelly that one could not easily say, on coming up to them, whether they had ever been inhabited. And the so great nation of the Phocians, destroyed, I keep silent about." Here the style itself teaches what delivery it needs. For having distinguished the multitude of cities on the Thracian coast destroyed by Philip, he says he will not speak of them. Must one not, then, say these things ironically, and at the same time with some indignation, and straining the tone? Then, even if he says he cannot tell them, as being terrible and beyond terrible, nevertheless he laments the catalogue of cities and goes through the complete destruction, as of cities having not even a trace left of their ancient habitation. Does it not, then, befit these things to be said with surpassing anger and pity? What, then, are the tones and inclinations of anger and lament, and the shapes of the face and the movements of the hands? Such as those who have truly suffered these things perform. For it is quite silly to seek some other school of delivery, abandoning the truth. And again the man brings on: "But how does Thessaly fare? Has he not taken away their constitutions and established tetrarchies, that they may be slaves not only by cities but also by nations? And are not the cities in Euboea already under tyrannies—and that in an island near Thebes and Athens?" These again demand a different delivery. For he questions, then puts a counter-answer, and at each point is indignant and heightens the dread. And there is a peculiar shape of question, a peculiar one of counter-answer, a peculiar one of amplification; these cannot be said with one tone and one form of voice. To these the following succeed: "And he does not write these things and fail to do them in deed, but he has gone off to the Hellespont, before that he came against Ambracia, he holds Elis, so great a city in the Peloponnese, he has plotted against Megara; neither Greece nor the barbarian land contains the greed of the man." Can these be brought out with pleasure, in passing strains, as if it were a piece of history? Do they not themselves cry out and teach how they must be said, all but uttering a voice: here a courteous tone; these say hurriedly; these in a drawn-out manner; here leave off the continuity; here join on what follows; with these grieve together; these despise; at these be terrified; these tear to pieces; these amplify? To me, at least, it seems so. Is it possible, then, for a man having the soul of an irrational creature—or rather, the dull nature of a stone, insensible, unmoved, unfeeling—to bring out the style of Demosthenes? Far from it; for the fairest good of it will perish, the breath, and it will differ in nothing from a body fair indeed, but unmoved and dead. One could say much upon this part; but the treatise having already taken on sufficient length, the discourse must somewhere here be brought to a stop—after rendering still this one thing, by Zeus, in addition to what has been said: that the style of Demosthenes, having all the excellences, is lacking in pleasantry, which the many call wit. For of it there is the largest share . . . for "the gods did not give all things at once to men," so as to grant also the urbanities . . . in the speeches of Demosthenes. For of none of the good things which the deity gave to certain others did he grudge them to that man.

[153265] 55. As for the things which Aeschines writes about him, bringing malicious charge, as I said—now that he uses bitter and over-elaborate words, now unpleasant and vulgar ones—they have easy defences. If indeed one should wish to consider each of the charges separately, he will find some of them worthy of praise rather than of accusation, and others not truly said by him. For to make the diction bitter, whenever the occasions demand it—and they often demand it, and most of all in the passionate arguments—is an encomium of the orator, if indeed it is from the rhetorical power that we demand, either alone or most of all, the making of the hearer an austere guardian of the laws and a bitter examiner of crimes and an inexorable avenger of lawbreakers. But it is impossible, while adorning the diction with dainty words, to stir anger or hatred or any of the like passions; rather, one must both find out thoughts that will be productive of such passions, and embrace them in such words as the hearing is naturally embittered by. If, then, he had shown him using the embittering diction not at its proper occasion, or being excessive in it and missing the right quantity, he might reasonably have attacked him as erring. But, being able to show neither of these, and attacking in common the passionate diction, which is most fitted to be taken up into political speeches, he is transferring, unawares, encomia into accusations, as I said.

[154708] 56. The same things one might say to Aeschines about the over-elaborate diction too, since he mocks this excellence of his as well. Let one understand the over-elaboration of words, as spoken of by him, to be spoken of now as excessive workmanship and divergence from what is customary. For surely, if our present-day life, setting many other names at random upon things, also turns this word "over-elaboration" round indifferently to mean meddlesomeness, it is not likely that the ancients too used it so. If, then, deriding the untimeliness or the excess of the divergent interpretation, he has said these things as though Demosthenes erred in each of these, he lies manifestly. For the man, in the deliberative speeches and the public contests, looking to the greatness and dignity of the subjects, has often used such construction; but in the private speeches, which he wrote about small contracts for private persons, he practises the common and customary diction, and rarely the excessive—and not even this caught in the act, but so as to escape notice. But if here too, making war on the whole kind of divergence, Aeschines has said these things, he does a strange thing, deriding the very formidable power of which the orator has most need. For the not bringing out the thoughts like the many, but driving the diction up toward the more dignified and more poetic, we most of all demand of the political power. These things, then, being encomia of the formidable power of Demosthenes, Aeschines, bringing them as faults—not truly, but perhaps plausibly, being an enemy and able to slander him in no other way—inconsiderately, as I judge, brings malicious charge.

[156379] 57. But as for his asserting that the man used vulgar and unpleasant words—whence it came upon him, I have marvelled above all things. For I find none of these things lying in Demosthenes which Aeschines says he said—for example, that "one must not break off the alliance from the friendship," and that "certain men prune the city," and "the sinews of the people have been cut under," and "we are sewn up in matting," and "certain men thread us through the narrow ways like needles"—to which he himself adds, making comedy: "But these, you fox, what are they—words or wonders?" Nor have I been able to find any other vulgar and unpleasant words in any of the speeches of Demosthenes, and that too when the man has left behind five or six myriads of lines. If, however, there are in the spuriously-titled speeches certain unpleasant and vulgar and rustic constructions—as in the second Against Aristogeiton, and in the Defence about the Bribes, and in the speech On Not Surrendering Harpalus, and in the speech Against Neaera, and in the speech On the Compacts with Alexander, and in many others which Demosthenes did not write—the matters concerning Demosthenes are made clear by me in another treatise. And as for the things about which

[157618] 58. Aeschines has censured him, these are enough. But there is also that point which some have noted, some as characteristic, some as a fault of the orator—I mean the sometimes signifying the same matter by many words, such as these: "It will be possible for Philip both to do and to accomplish whatever he wishes"; and "this Meidias, not knowing who in the world he is, nor recognizing him"; and "in the presence of his sister, while she was still a girl and a child"; and all such things. Now those who declare this to be a peculiarity of Demosthenes' character speak rightly; for the man has used it usefully, just as he has used the cutting brevity too, more than any other and more opportunely. But those who carry it in the rank of a fault, not having examined the causes for which he was sometimes wont to be abundant in his words, accuse him improperly; rather, those who bring this malicious charge seem to demand brevity at all costs—which, as I said, he provides more than any other and more opportunely—but none of the other excellences, no longer perceiving that the orator must aim also at clarity and vividness and amplification and the good rhythm in the arrangement of words, and, above all these, at making the style passionate and ethical and contentious, in which lies the largest share of persuasiveness. Of these excellences brevity cannot best produce each, but so can the abundance of certain words, which Demosthenes too has used. I would bring you examples of what has been said, were I not going to appear wearisome to you in saying them. These things, most excellent Ammaeus, we had to write to you about the style of Demosthenes. And if the deity preserve us, we shall render to you the discourse also about his formidable power in matters—a still greater and more wonderful theory than this—in what shall be written hereafter.