WORK: Antiquitates Romanae  (slug: dionysius-of-halicarnass-antiquitates-romanae-97af98)

CHAPTER: 09-book-9



[110200] 45.2. remains. For there will be no end or release from the divine wraths, until this malignant Fury and canker, sitting within, rots and corrupts all that is fair. But concerning these things there will be another speech and a fitter occasion; now, since one must settle present matters well, laying aside all dissembling, I say this to you: neither this law nor any other which the senate has not first deliberated shall be valid during my consulship; but I will both contend in words for the aristocracy, and, if it come to deeds, neither in these will I be behind my opponents; and if you did not before know how great the power of the consular office is, under my magistracy you shall learn.

[110898] 46.1. Appius, then, said this; and of the tribunes the eldest and of greatest dignity, Gaius Laetorius, a man known to be no coward in the wars and not incapable in civic affairs, rose to answer this; and he delivered a long speech on behalf of the people, beginning from earliest times: how many hard campaigns the poor, slandered by him, had served—not only under the kings, when one might allege necessity, but also after their expulsion, winning freedom and dominion for their country;

[111389] 46.2. yet they received no recompense from the patricians, nor enjoyed any of the common goods, but, as though captured in war, were robbed by them even of their freedom; which, wishing to recover, they were forced to abandon their country in longing for another land, in which it should be possible for them, being free, not to be outraged; and neither by forcing the senate nor by compelling it with war did they obtain their return to their own, but yielded to it when it asked and entreated them to recover what had been abandoned.

[111926] 46.3. He recounted the oaths and recalled the compacts made at the return; in which there was first amnesty for all, then power for the poor to appoint magistracies that should be avengers for themselves,

[112132] 46.4. and adversaries to those wishing to oppress them. Having recounted these, he pointed to the laws the people had lately ratified, both the one transferring the courts—how the senate had given the people authority to judge whatever patricians they pleased—and the one concerning the voting, which made not the centuriate assembly but the curiate sovereign of the votes.

[112507] 47.1. Having gone through the speech on behalf of the people, turning upon Appius, he said: Then do you dare to revile these men, through whom the city has become great from small and illustrious from obscure? And do you call others factious, and reproach them with a fortune of exile, as though all these did not still remember your own case—that your ancestors, having quarrelled with the magistrates and abandoned their own country, settled here as suppliants? Unless, indeed, you, abandoning your own country in longing for freedom, did a fine thing, but the Romans, having done

[113091] 47.2. the like to you, did no fine thing. And do you dare to revile the power of the tribunes as having entered the city for evil, and persuade these men to abolish the holy and immovable protection of the poor, secured by great compulsions both of gods and of men—O most people-hating and most tyrannical of men? And could you not learn even this, that in saying these things you revile both the senate and your own office? For the senate too, rising against the kings, whose arrogances and outrages it no longer thought fit to bear, established the consular office, and before driving those men from the city made others masters of the royal power.

[113743] 47.3. So that what you say of the tribuneship, that it entered for evil, since it got its origin from sedition, this you say also against the consulship. For no other pretext introduced that either, but the patricians'

[113963] 47.4. faction against the kings. But why do I argue these things with you as with a good and moderate citizen, whom all these know to be perverse by birth and bitter and people-hating, and unable ever to tame his savage nature? Why do I not rather close with you, putting deeds before words, and show how great a power the people has, unknown to you—whom you were not ashamed to call homeless and foul—and how great a power this office has, which the law compels you to turn aside from and yield to? Laying aside, I too, all dissembling, I will lay hold of action.

[114529] 48.1. So saying, and having sworn an oath, the greatest among them, either to ratify the law or to let go of life, when silence fell from the multitude and an anxious expectation of what he meant to do, he ordered Appius to withdraw from the assembly. When he would not obey, but, placing the lictors before him and the throng he had brought ready from home, fought to avoid yielding the forum, Laetorius, having proclaimed silence, declared that the tribunes ordered the consul led off to prison.

[115028] 48.2. And the attendant, ordered by him, came forward to lay hold of his person; but the first of the lictors who met him drove him off with a blow. A great outcry and indignation arising from those present, Laetorius himself rushed forward, exhorting the throng to defend; and those about Appius, having a numerous and strong band of young men, stood firm. After this unseemly words passed between them, and outcries and pushings of bodies; and at last the strife broke out into blows, and began to advance to throwing of stones.

[115560] 48.3. The cause of checking this and of the dreadful things not advancing further was Quintius, the other consul, beseeching and entreating all, together with the eldest of the council, and thrusting himself into the midst of those skirmishing. And the remaining part of the day was

[115844] 48.4. brief, so that they parted from one another unwillingly. On the following days the magistracies accused each other—the consul the tribunes, that they had thought fit to dissolve his office by ordering the consul led to prison; and the tribunes the consul, that he had laid blows on bodies sacred and consecrated by the law (and Laetorius still had the marks of the blows visible on his face)—and the whole city, swelling and grown savage, stood divided.

[116305] 48.5. Then the people, together with the tribunes, kept guard over the Capitol, leaving their watch neither by day nor by night; and the senate, assembling, made much and laborious search how the dissension should be ended, considering the magnitude of the danger, and that not even the consuls were of the same mind. For Quintius thought fit to yield to the people in moderate things, but Appius to resist to the death.

[116727] 49.1. When no end came of it, Quintius, taking each separately, the tribunes and Appius, begged and entreated and asked them to hold the common interest more pressing than the private. Seeing the tribunes already grown milder, but his colleague remaining in the same stubbornness, he persuaded those about Laetorius to make the senate sovereign over all the charges, both the private

[117112] 49.2. and the public. When he had managed this, he convened the senate; and having praised the tribunes much and begged his colleague not to oppose the city's safety, he called upon those accustomed to declare their opinions.

[117339] 49.3. First called, Publius Valerius Publicola declared this opinion: that whatever charges the tribunes and the consul brought against one another, for what they had suffered or done in the disturbance, since they had come to these not from design or private greed but from zeal for the common good, be publicly dropped, and that there be no trial concerning them; but concerning the law, since the consul did not allow a law to be brought before the assembly without a preliminary decree, that the council deliberate first upon it; and that the tribunes, together with the consuls, take care for the concord of the citizens, when the vote on it should be taken, and for good order.

[118024] 49.4. When all approved the opinion, Quintius at once gave over to the council the vote concerning the law; and though Appius accused much and the tribunes argued much in reply, the opinion which thought fit to bring in the law prevailed by many votes. The preliminary decree being ratified, both the private quarrels of the magistrates were dissolved, and the people, gladly receiving the senate's concession, voted the law. From that time the elections of the tribunes and aediles, down to our own day, the tribal assemblies vote without auspices and all the rest of the religious observance. This was the resolution of the disturbance that then held the city.

[118688] 50.1. Not long after, it seemed good to the Romans to enrol armies and send out both consuls against the Aequians and Volscians. For great forces from both peoples were reported to have marched out and to be plundering the allies of the Romans. The forces being quickly prepared, Quintius went to make war on the Aequians, Appius on the Volscians, having divided the commands by lot. And it befell each of the consuls to fare as was fitting:

[119131] 50.2. for the army assigned to Quintius, loving the fairness and moderation of the man, was eager for everything ordered, and undertook most hazards unbidden, working glory and honour for its commander; and it traversed much of the Aequians' country, ravaging it, the enemy not daring to come to grips, from which it gained much booty and great gains. Spending no long time in the enemy's country, it came to the city unscathed, bringing its general illustrious for his deeds.

[119609] 50.3. But the force that went out with Appius, out of hatred for him, neglected much of their ancestral discipline. For it continued in deliberate cowardice throughout the whole campaign and in contempt of its commander; and when it had to fight the Volscian army, being drawn up by the officers into order, it would not come to grips with the enemy; but the centurions and front-rank men, some throwing down the standards, others abandoning their post, fled to the camp.

[120082] 50.4. And had not the enemy, marvelling at the strange flight and fearing it might be some ambush, turned aside from a longer pursuit, the greater part of the Romans would have been destroyed. They did this out of envy of their commander, that the man might not, by performing some fine exploit, be made illustrious by a triumph and the other honours.

[120435] 50.5. On the following day, when the consul partly censured them for their inglorious flight, partly exhorted them to redeem a most shameful deed by a fine contest, and partly threatened, if they would not stand amid dangers, to use the laws against them, they persisted in disobedience and clamour, and bade him lead them out of the enemy's country, as men no longer able, from their wounds, to hold out; for most of them had bound up their sound flesh as though wounded. So that Appius was forced to lead the army out of the enemy's country, and the Volscians, following them as they departed, killed many of them.

[121053] 50.6. When they were in friendly territory, the consul gathered them into assembly, and after reproaching them much, said he would use the punishment for deserters. Though the legates and others in office begged him much to be moderate and not add calamity to calamity for the city, taking account of none of them, he confirmed the punishment.

[121398] 50.7. And after this the centurions whose companies had fled, and the standard-bearers, as many as had lost their standards, were—some beheaded with the axe, others beaten to death with rods; and of the rest of the multitude, from every decade one man chosen by lot died before the others. This is the Roman ancestral punishment for those who leave their ranks or abandon their standards. And after this, the general, himself hated, and bringing back what was left of the army downcast and dishonoured, when the elections came round, returned to his country.

[121958] 51.1. After these were designated consuls Lucius Valerius for the second time and Tiberius Aemilius. The tribunes, holding off a short time, again brought in the question of the land-allotment; and approaching the consuls, asked them to confirm to the people the promises the senate had made in the consulship of Spurius Cassius and Proculus Verginius, begging and entreating.

[122336] 51.2. And both consuls supported them—Tiberius Aemilius bearing the senate a certain old grudge, not without reason, because, when his father asked a triumph, it did not permit him to lead it; and Valerius wishing to assuage the people's anger against him for the death of Spurius Cassius, whom he had killed for attempting kingship when Valerius was quaestor—a man the most distinguished of those of his time in commands of wars and civic deeds, who first introduced into the city the measure concerning the land-allotment, and was chiefly hated for it by the patricians, as one taking up the people's cause before them.

[122959] 51.3. So then, the consuls having promised them to bring forward in the senate the question of dividing the public lots, and to join in ratifying the law, the tribunes, trusting them, came before the senate and went through reasonable speeches. To these the consuls, opposing nothing, that they might not bear the imputation of contentiousness, asked the eldest to declare their opinions.

[123349] 51.4. The first called by them was Lucius Aemilius, father of one of the consuls; who said it seemed to him both just and profitable to the city that the common property be of all and not of a few, and advised yielding to the people's persuasion, that their concession might be a favour. For, he said, having given them many other things not of their own choice but yielded under necessity, and those holding the possessions, of the produce of which they had reaped unnoticed, ought to feel grateful, and, when prevented, not to cling to the land.

[123898] 51.5. He said that, along with justice—which all would agree to be strong—the public property was indeed common to all, but the private to each who had acquired it by law; and that the matter had already become necessary by the senate's decree, voted seventeen years before, to divide the land. And he declared that it had then deliberated this with a view to advantage, that the land should not be waste, and the poor throng that kept house in the city should not be idle—as now, envying others' goods—but that youth should be reared for the city at the hearth and on ancestral lots, having something to take pride in from being well reared.

[124542] 51.6. Since, for the landless, scantily nourished from others' possessions which they work for hire, either no desire for offspring grows in them at all from the start, or, if it grows, it brings forth bad and unlucky fruit, gathered as one might expect from lowly marriages,

[124819] 51.7. and reared in beggared circumstances. I, then, he said, declare my opinion: that the consuls confirm what was deliberated beforehand by the council and dragged out through the intervening disturbances, and that they appoint the men who shall make the division.

[125087] 52.1. When Aemilius had said this, the second called, Appius Claudius, who had been consul the year before, declared the contrary opinion, teaching that the senate had had no purpose of dividing the public lands—for long ago what it resolved would have taken effect—but had put it off to a time and another decision, eager to put down the faction that then held the city, which the consul aiming at tyranny was introducing, and who afterward paid a fitting penalty;

[125554] 52.2. nor had the consuls who drew the lot after the preliminary decree carried out what was voted, seeing what a beginning of evils would enter the city if the poor became accustomed to allotting the common property among themselves; and the fifteen consulships after them, though many dangers were brought upon them by the people, endured nothing that was not profitable to the commonwealth to do, because it was not even permitted them by the preliminary decree to appoint land-distributors,

[126050] 52.3. but only to those first consuls. So that for you too, he said, O Valerius, and you, Aemilius, to bring in redistributions of land, which the council did not order you to do, is neither honourable, for men of good ancestors, nor safe. And concerning the preliminary decree—that you who became consuls so many times later are not bound by it—

[126398] 52.4. this is enough. Concerning some having appropriated the public property by force or by stealth, a brief speech suffices me. For if anyone knows of someone enjoying what he cannot show a lawful possession of, let him bring information to the consuls and let it be judged by the laws, which it will not be necessary to write anew; for they were written long ago, and no time has effaced them.

[126796] 52.5. Since Aemilius also spoke about the profit, that the land-allotment would be for the good of all, I wish to leave this part too unrefuted. For it seems to me that he sees only the present and does not look ahead to the future—that what seems a small thing in the public lands for the idle and

[127096] 52.6. poor will be the cause of many great evils. For the habit that enters along with it and remains in the city will be ruinous and dreadful forever; for getting them does not remove the wicked desires from the soul, but increases them and makes them worse. Let the deeds be your proof of this; for why should you heed my words or Aemilius'?

[127441] 53.1. You all know, surely, how many enemies we have overcome, how much land we have plundered, how much booty we have taken from the captured places—of which the enemy, deprived, who were prosperous before, are now in great want; and that of none of these were robbed, nor got a smaller share in the distributions, those who lament their poverty.

[127790] 53.2. Do they, then, by these acquisitions, appear to have mended any part of their old fortune and advanced to distinction in their lives? I could have wished, and prayed to the gods, that they were less burdensome billet-quarterers to the city; but as it is—for you see and hear them lamenting that they are in extreme poverty. So that not even if they got what they now ask, and still more than this, would they mend their lives.

[128224] 53.3. For their poverty dwells not in their fortunes but in their characters; which not only this small lot will not fill up, but not even all the gifts of kings and tyrants. And we shall do, if we concede these things to them too, the like of physicians who tend the sick to their pleasure. For not the sick part of the state will be healed, but the sound part too will catch the disease. And in general, O senate, you have need of much care and forethought, that you may save, with all zeal, the manners of the city that are being corrupted.

[128769] 53.4. For you see to what the people's disorder has advanced, and how it no longer thinks fit to be ruled by the consuls; which felt no repentance for what was done here, but showed the same disorder even in the camp, throwing down its arms and abandoning its ranks and giving up its standards to the enemy and using a shameful flight before coming to grips—as though it would rob me alone of the glory of victory, and not also the country of the blow against its foes.

[129240] 53.5. And now the Volscians set up trophies over the Romans, and their shrines are adorned with our spoils, and they are in such boasts as never before—they who till now begged our commanders for the enslavement and razing of their cities.

[129481] 53.6. Is it, then, just or honourable that you should feel grateful to them for such achievements, and adorn them with public gifts, allotting to them the land of which the enemy hold, so far as depends on these men, a part? But why should I accuse these men, to whom, through their lack of education and low birth, fine things are of small account, when I see that not even in all your characters does the ancient spirit any longer dwell, but dignity is called arrogance by some, justice folly, manliness madness, and self-control simplicity? And what was hateful among our forebears is now exalted and appears wonderfully good to the corrupt—cowardice and buffoonery and malice and crafty cleverness and recklessness toward everything and obedience to none of one's betters; which, taking hold of many strong cities before now,

[130312] 53.7. have overturned them from their foundations. These things, O senate, whether they are pleasant for you to hear or grievous, I have spoken with all truth and frankness—to those of you who will be persuaded, if indeed you are persuaded, both useful for the present and safe for the future; but to me, who for the common good take on private hatreds, the cause of many dangers to come. For I am able to foresee what will happen by reckoning, and I make others' sufferings examples of my own.

[130808] 54.1. When Appius had said this, and almost all the others had declared the same opinion, the senate was dissolved. The tribunes, holding the failure in anger, departed, and afterward considered how they should take vengeance on the man; and it seemed best to them, after much deliberation, to bring Appius to a trial carrying the penalty of death. And after this, having accused the man in assembly, they exhorted all to come on the appointed day to cast their vote concerning him.

[131292] 54.2. The charges they meant to bring were these: that he had proposed wicked measures against the people, and introduced faction into the city, and laid hands on a tribune contrary to the sacred laws, and, having commanded an army, returned with great loss and disgrace. Having proclaimed these before the multitude, and appointed a certain fixed day on which they said they would bring the trial to a conclusion, they summoned him to be present then to make his defence.

[131766] 54.3. When all the patricians were indignant and prepared with all zeal to save the man, and exhorted Appius to yield to the occasion and assume a demeanour suited to present fortunes, the man said he would do nothing either ignoble or unworthy of his past deeds, and would endure ten thousand deaths sooner than clasp anyone's knees; and he prevented those prepared to plead for him, saying he would be doubly ashamed to see others doing on his behalf what he did not think it becoming to do for himself.

[132273] 54.4. Saying these and many like things, and neither changing his garb nor altering the proud look of his face nor abating any of his spirit, when he saw the city upright and on tiptoe in expectation of the contest, a few days still remaining, he made away with himself.

[132545] 54.5. His kinsmen, then, pretended that a sickness had been the cause of his death; and when the body was brought into the forum, his son, approaching the tribunes and the consuls, asked them to convene for him the lawful assembly and to permit the speech customary among the Romans at the burials of good men to be delivered over his father.

[132889] 54.6. The tribunes opposed, while the assembly was still being convened by the consuls, and ordered the youth to carry off the corpse. The people, however, did not endure it, nor overlook the outrage, that the body be cast out dishonoured, but permitted the youth to render his father the customary honours. Appius, then, met with such an end.

[133234] 55.1. The consuls, having enrolled their forces, led them out of the city—Lucius Valerius to make war on the Aequians, Tiberius Aemilius on the Sabines. For these too, during the time of the faction, had invaded Roman territory, and after greatly damaging it had departed, carrying off abundant booty. The Aequians, then, after often coming to grips and receiving many blows, fled to their camp, lying in a strong place, and thereafter no longer came out to battle.

[133701] 55.2. Valerius attempted to take their camp by siege, but was hindered by the divine power. For while he was already at work, darkness came from heaven and much rain, and lightnings and harsh thunders. When the army was dispersed, the storm at once ceased, and great clear weather held the place. Taking this for an omen, the consul, the soothsayers also forbidding him to besiege the place any longer, turned aside and ravaged their land, and allowing the soldiers to profit by all the booty he got, led his force

[134217] 55.3. home. As Tiberius Aemilius traversed the enemy's country at first with much contempt and expecting no adversary, the Sabine force came upon him, and a pitched battle took place, beginning about the middle of the day and lasting till sunset. When darkness fell, the forces withdrew to their own camps, neither victorious nor defeated.

[134558] 55.4. On the following days the commanders buried their dead and entrenched their camps, and both held the same view—to keep their own positions under guard and no longer to begin battle. Then in time, breaking up their tents, they led away their forces.

[134814] 56.1. In the year after these consuls, in the seventy-eighth Olympiad, in which Parmenides of Posidonia won the stadium-race, Theagenides holding the yearly office at Athens, there were appointed consuls of the Romans Aulus Verginius Caelimontanus and Titus Numicius Priscus. They had but just taken up the office when a large Volscian army was reported at hand. And not long after, one of the Roman outposts, taken by assault, was burning; it was not far from Rome, and the smoke announced the disaster to those in the city.

[135341] 56.2. Then—for it was still night—the consuls, sending out some horsemen for reconnaissance, and stationing guards on the walls and themselves drawing up before the gates with the lightest-armed, awaited the reports from the horsemen; and when day came and the force in the city had assembled to them, they led it against the enemy. But these, having plundered and burned the fort, departed in haste.

[135743] 56.3. Then the consuls, having put out what was still burning and left a guard at the place, returned to the city; and a few days later, with their own forces and those of the allies, both marched out—Verginius against the Aequians, Numicius against the Volscians; and to both the war went according to

[136047] 56.4. their wish. For the Aequians did not dare to come to grips with Verginius as he ravaged their country, but, having set an ambush of picked men in woods, who were to attack the enemy when scattered, they failed of their hope, the Romans quickly perceiving it and a stout battle ensuing, in which the Aequians lost many of their own; so that they did not even attempt another battle.

[136436] 56.5. As Numicius led his army against the city of the Antiates, which was then among the first of the Volscian cities, no force opposed him, but each was forced to defend from the walls. Meanwhile most of their land was cut down, and a certain seaside town was taken, which they used as a port and market for the necessities of life, drawing most of their gains from the sea and by piracy. Slaves, then, and money and cattle and merchants' wares the army plundered by the consul's permission, but the free persons, as many as the war had not already destroyed, were taken off to the slave-market. There were taken also twenty-two long ships of the Antiates and other ships' tackle and equipment.

[137134] 56.6. After this, by the consul's order, the Romans set fire to the houses and pulled down the dockyards and razed the wall from its foundations, so that even after their departure the fort might be of no use to the Antiates. These things, then, were done by each consul separately; and to both there was further a new campaign against the Sabine land, which, having ravaged, they led their force home, and this year came to an end.

[137568] 57.1. In the following year, Titus Quintius Capitolinus and Quintus Servilius Priscus having assumed the consular office, the whole native force of the Romans was under arms, and the allied contingents came of their own accord, before any campaign was announced to them. After this the consuls, having made prayers to the gods and purified the army, marched out against the enemy.

[137950] 57.2. The Sabines, against whom Servilius marched, neither came to battle nor went out into the open field; but remaining in their forts, they endured their land being cut down and their houses burned and their slaves deserting; so that the Romans departed from their country with much ease, heavy with spoils and brilliant with boasts. Such was the issue of Servilius' campaign.

[138331] 57.3. Those who campaigned with Quintius against the Aequians and Volscians—for from both peoples those who would fight before the rest had gathered in the same place and encamped opposite, before the city of the Antiates—advancing faster than at a walk, appeared before them; and not far from their camp, at the first place where they were seen and saw the enemy, which lay low, they laid down their baggage, wishing to make it appear that they did not fear an enemy far superior in number.

[138824] 57.4. When all was ready for battle on both sides, they went out into the plain, and joining battle, fought till midday, neither yielding to the enemy nor gaining, each side ever equalizing the hard-pressed part with those posted in reserve. Herein especially the Aequians and Volscians, exceeding the Romans in number, held up and prevailed, the enemy not having a number equal to their zeal.

[139219] 57.5. Quintius, seeing many of his own dead and most of the survivors wounded, was minded to recall his force; but fearing he might give the enemy the impression of flight, he resolved that they must hazard all. Choosing the best of the horse, on the right, which was most hard pressed, he came to the aid of his men.

[139538] 57.6. And partly reproaching the officers themselves for their cowardice, partly reminding them of former contests, partly recounting the disgrace and the danger that would overtake them in flight, at last he said a thing not true, which most of all put courage in his own men and fear in the enemy. For he said that the other of their wings had already driven back the enemy and was now near their camp.

[139944] 57.7. So saying, he charged the enemy, and dismounting from his horse, with the picked horsemen about him fought hand to hand. Thereupon a certain daring fell on those till then hard pressed, and all pushed forward as though they had become other men; and the Volscians—for they were drawn up there—after holding out a long time, gave way. When Quintius had driven these back, mounting his horse he rode along to the other line, and pointed out to the foot there the beaten part of the enemy, and exhorted them not to fall short of the others in valour.

[140499] 58.1. After this none of the enemy held their ground any longer, but all fled together to the camp. The pursuit of them, however, was not long, but the Romans at once turned back, their bodies slack with toil and their arms no longer in like condition. After a few days had passed, which they had spent in truce for the burial of their own dead and the tending of the worn-out, having repaired what was lacking for the war, they fought another battle around the Roman camp.

[140974] 58.2. For another force having joined the Volscians and Aequians from the surrounding places, which were not far off, their general, lifted up because his own men were five times the enemy, and seeing the Roman camp not in a strong position, supposed it the best occasion to attack them. With this in mind, about midnight he led his force against the Roman camp, and ringing it about, kept guard, that they might not depart unnoticed.

[141410] 58.3. Quintius, when he learned the multitude of the enemy, received it gladly, and waiting until day came and the hour of full market, perceiving the enemy now worn out by sleeplessness and skirmishes, and not advancing in companies or in order but poured out in many places and scattered, opened the gates of the camp and ran out with the picked horsemen; and the foot, closing up their companies, followed.

[141821] 58.4. The Volscians, terrified at their boldness and the frenzied onset, holding out a short time, were thrust back and at the same time gave way from the camp; and—for there was a tolerably high hill not far from the camp—up this they ran, to rest and form again into order. But it was not granted them to form and recover themselves, for the enemy followed hard upon them, closing up their companies as much as possible, that they might not be dashed back forcing their way against high ground.

[142319] 58.5. There ensued a great contest for much of the day, and many dead fell on both sides. And the Volscians, though exceeding in number and having got the safety of the ground, enjoyed no benefit from either of these, but, forced by the zeal and valour of the Romans, abandoned the hill, and

[142612] 58.6. fleeing to the camp, most of them died. For the Romans did not let them go in pursuit, but followed hard on foot, and did not turn back before they had taken their camp by storm. Becoming masters of persons and of all that was left in the camp—horses and arms and very much money—they encamped there that night; on the following day the consul, having prepared what was needful for a siege, led his force against the city of the Antiates, no more than thirty stades distant.

[143094] 58.7. There happened to be present, for the sake of guarding, certain Aequian auxiliaries of the Antiates, watching the walls; who then, fearing the boldness of the Romans, attempted to make their escape from the city. When the Antiates learned of it, being prevented by them from departing, they resolved to hand over the city to the Romans as they approached.

[143457] 58.8. The Antiates, learning this from an informer, yielded to the occasion, and after deliberating in common with those men, handed over the city to Quintius on these terms: that the Aequians depart under truce, and the Antiates receive a garrison and do what the Romans commanded. On these terms the consul became master of the city, and having taken pay and all else the army needed, and established a garrison, he led his force away; in return for which the senate received him with a kindly meeting and honoured him with the procession of a triumph.

[144013] 59.1. In the following year the consuls were Tiberius Aemilius for the second time and Quintus Fabius, son of one of the three brothers who had led the garrison sent to Cremera and perished there with their clients. The senate, the tribunes again stirring up the multitude over the land-allotment, and one of the consuls, Aemilius, supporting them, ratified a decree—wishing to court and conciliate the poor—to divide among them a certain portion of the Antiate territory, which they had taken by the spear and held the year

[144539] 59.2. before. And there were appointed leaders of the colony Titus Quintius Capitolinus, to whom the Antiates had surrendered, and with him Lucius Furius and Aulus Verginius. The division of the country was no object of eagerness to the mass of the poor Romans, as men being driven from their country; and few having registered, it seemed good to the senate, since the colony was not of sufficient number, to permit those Latins and Hernicans who wished to share in the settlement. So those sent to Antium divided the land among their own, leaving a portion of it to the Antiates.

[145121] 59.3. In the interval there was a campaign of both consuls—Aemilius into the Sabine country, Fabius into the Aequian. To Aemilius, remaining a long time in the enemy's country, no force came out to fight for the land, but having ravaged it without fear, when the time of the elections came, he led his forces home. The Aequians, before being driven to the necessity of having their army destroyed or their walls taken, made overtures to Fabius for reconciliation and friendship.

[145601] 59.4. The consul, having exacted two months' provisions for the army and two tunics per man and money for six months' pay and anything else that was pressing, made a truce with them, until they should come to Rome and obtain a settlement from the senate. The senate, learning this, entrusted to Fabius full authority to settle with the Aequians on whatever terms he himself chose.

[145983] 59.5. After this, treaties were made for the cities, the consul mediating between them, of this sort: that the Aequians be subjects of the Romans, holding their own cities and lands, and send the Romans nothing but troops, whenever ordered, dispatching them at their own expense. Having agreed to this, Fabius led his force home and, together with his colleague, appointed the magistrates for the coming year.

[146394] 60.1. Those designated consuls by them were Spurius Postumius Albinus and Quintus Servilius Priscus for the second time. Under these the Aequians were thought to transgress the agreements lately made with the Romans, from such a cause as this.

[146639] 60.2. Of the Antiates, as many as had hearths and lots remained in the land, tilling both their allotted possessions and those marked off by the colonists, on certain fixed and appointed shares which they paid them from the produce; but those who had none of these abandoned the city, and the Aequians receiving them readily, setting out from there, they plundered the lands of the Latins. From this, as many of the Aequians as were bold and needy joined them in their raidings.

[147119] 60.3. When the Latins lamented this before the senate and asked either that an army be sent or that they themselves be permitted to repel those who began the war, the councillors, learning of it, neither themselves voted to send an army nor permitted the Latins to lead one out, but choosing three envoys, led by Quintus Fabius who had made the treaty with the nation, they sent them, giving them instructions to inquire of the leaders of the nation whether they sent out the raiders by common counsel into the country both of the allies and of the Romans—for there had been some incursions of the exiles into it too—or whether the commonwealth was the cause of none of these doings; and if they should say the deeds were those of private men without the people's sanction, to demand back what had been plundered and the surrender of the perpetrators of the wrongs.

[147986] 60.4. When the envoys arrived and heard the speeches, the Aequians gave them evasive answers, saying the deed had not been by common counsel, but refusing to give up the doers, men who had lost their city and become wanderers and were suppliants of theirs in their

[148252] 60.5. poverty. At this Fabius, indignant and recalling the broken agreements they had made, when he saw the Aequians dissembling and asking time for deliberation and detaining him under pretext of hospitality, undertook to spy out matters in the city, and going about every public and sacred place under pretence of sightseeing, and seeing all the workshops full of weapons of war, some already finished, others still in hand, he discerned their intent.

[148707] 60.6. And coming to Rome, he reported to the senate what he had heard and seen. And it, no longer doubting, voted to send the fetiales to declare war on the Aequians, unless they drove the Antiate exiles from the city and submitted to justice for those they had wronged. The Aequians gave the men bolder answers, and agreed to receive the war not unwillingly.

[149068] 60.7. But the Romans were not able to send an army against them that year, whether the divine power hindered, or because of the sicknesses that held the multitude for a large part of the year; but, for the guarding of the allies, a small force went out, led by Quintus Servilius, one of the consuls, and tarried on the borders of the Latins.

[149411] 60.8. In the city, the temple of Jupiter the Faithful was consecrated by Spurius Postumius, his colleague, on the so-called Nones of the month June, on the hill of Enyalius—a temple built by the last king Tarquinius, but which had not received from him the dedication customary among the Romans. Then, the senate so resolving, Postumius took the inscription of it for himself. Nothing else worthy of mention was done under these consuls.

[149850] 61.1. In the seventy-ninth Olympiad, in which Xenophon of Corinth won, Archedemides being archon at Athens, Titus Quintius Capitolinus and Quintus Fabius Vibulanus assumed the consulship—Quintius being designated to the office by the people for the third time, Fabius for the second. To both of these the senate, having handed over large and well-prepared armies, sent them out.

[150230] 61.2. Quintius, then, was assigned to guard their own land, as much as bordered on the enemy, and Fabius to ravage the Aequians'; and he found the Aequians awaiting him on the borders with a large force. When both sides had pitched their camps in the strongest places, they went out into the plain, the Aequians having challenged and begun the battle, and they continued through much of the day, fighting ardently and laboriously, each placing the victory in himself and no other.

[150712] 61.3. When the swords of most of them had become useless from the continual blows, the commanders sounded the recall, and they withdrew to their camps. After this action there was no longer a pitched battle between them, but certain skirmishes and clashes of light-armed troops over water and in the escorting of provisions, continual; yet in these too they were mostly

[151083] 61.4. evenly matched. While these things were happening, a part of the Aequian army, going round by other roads, invaded the part of the Roman territory that lay farthest from the border and for that reason was unguarded; from which it carried off many persons and much property, and, eluding those patrolling their land with Quintius, departed to its own. This happened repeatedly and brought much disgrace upon the consuls.

[151510] 61.5. Then Fabius, learning through scouts and prisoners that the best of the Aequian force had gone out from the camp, leaving the eldest in his own camp, himself went out by night, bringing horsemen and the freshest of the foot. The Aequians, having plundered the places they had invaded, were departing, carrying off much booty; and Fabius appeared upon them when they had not gone far, took away the booty, and in battle conquered those who stood their ground, who proved themselves brave men; the rest, scattered, escaping their pursuers through knowledge of the roads, fled to the camp.

[152104] 61.6. When the Aequians had been checked by this disaster, which had come upon them contrary to expectation, they broke up their camp by night and departed, and no longer thereafter came out of the city; but they endured to see their grain, then at its height, gathered by the enemy, and their herds of cattle driven off, their property plundered and their farmsteads given to fire and many prisoners led away. Having accomplished this, Fabius, since he had to hand over the office to others, roused his force and led it away; and Quintius did the same.

[152659] 62.1. Coming to Rome, they designated as consuls Aulus Postumius Albus and Servius Furius. These had but lately taken up the office when messengers from the Latin allies, dispatched in haste, came to the Romans. These, standing before the senate, made plain that the affairs of the Antiates were unstable, the Aequians sending embassies to them in secret and openly, under pretext of trade, many Volscians entering the city—whom those Antiates who had earlier abandoned the city when it was being allotted, owing to poverty, and had deserted to the Aequians, were bringing in,

[153237] 62.2. as I said. They reported that many of the natives and many of the colonists had been corrupted along with them; and that, unless they were forestalled with a worthy garrison, some unexpected war would rise against the Romans from there too. Not long after these, others sent by the Hernicans reported that a large Aequian force had gone out and, settled in their country, was plundering and pillaging everything, and that, together with the Aequians, the Volscians too were in the field, furnishing the greater part of the army.

[153773] 62.3. To this the senate voted to send another garrison against those Antiates who were disturbing affairs—for some of them had come to make defence and were plainly meditating nothing sound—a garrison which should keep the city in safety; and to lead the army against the Aequians, the other of the consuls, Servius Furius; and the sortie of both was swift.

[154133] 62.4. The Aequians, learning that the Roman army had gone out, rose up from the Hernican country and advanced to meet them. When they saw one another, that day they encamped not far apart, and on the next the enemy came to the Roman camp to make trial of their intent.

[154403] 62.5. When the Romans did not come out to battle, they used skirmishes, and having done nothing worth mention, departed with great boasting. The Roman consul, leaving the camp on the following day—for the place was not very safe—removed to a more suitable one, where he dug a deeper ditch and threw up a higher rampart. To the enemy, seeing this, much boldness accrued; and still more, when an allied force came to them from the Volscian and Aequian nations, they delayed no longer but led on against the Roman camp.

[154921] 63.1. The consul, considering that the force with him would not be a match fighting against both nations, sent some of the horsemen to carry letters to Rome, by which he asked that swift aid come to them, since the whole army with him was in danger of being destroyed.

[155191] 63.2. His colleague Postumius, having read this—it was about midnight when the horsemen arrived—through many heralds summoned the senators from their houses; and a decree of the senate was passed, before broad day, that Titus Quintius, who had been consul for the third time, taking the freshest of the young men, both foot and horse, adorned with proconsular authority, march against the enemy at once; and that Aulus Postumius, the other consul, gathering the rest of the forces, which needed more time to assemble, come to his aid as soon as he could get speed. And day already

[155773] 63.3. dawned, and Quintius gathered the volunteers, about five thousand men; and without much delay he led them out of the city. Suspecting this, the Aequians waited and, before the aid should come to the Romans, resolved to assault their camp, and, thinking to take it by force and numbers, came out in a body, dividing themselves into two.

[156116] 63.4. There ensued a great contest through the whole day, as they boldly mounted the outworks at many points, and neither javelins nor missiles from archers nor stones from slings, hurled in unceasing volleys, held them off. Thereupon the consul and the legate, exhorting one another, at one moment threw open the gates and ran out with the freshest against the enemy, and clashing with them at both points of assault, drove back those mounting the rampart. A rout taking place, the consul, pursuing those opposed to him a little, turned back;

[156661] 63.5. but his brother and legate, Publius Furius, borne on by his resolution and zeal, drove as far as the enemy's camp, pursuing and slaying. There were two cohorts about him, numbering no more than a thousand men. The enemy, learning this, becoming about five thousand, advanced against him from the camp; and these came on from in front, while their horsemen, riding round in a circle, fell upon the Romans from

[157077] 63.6. behind. Encircled in this fashion by them and cut off from their own, when it was open to them to save themselves by handing over their arms—for the enemy invited them to this and set great store on taking a thousand of the best Romans prisoner, hoping through them to find a fair settlement of the war—they, despising them and exhorting one another to do nothing unworthy of the city, fighting and killing many of the enemy, all died.

[157520] 64.1. These having been destroyed, the Aequians, lifted up by the advantage, came to the Roman camp, raising aloft the head of Publius fixed on a spear, and those of the other distinguished men, thinking thereby to terrify those within and force them to hand over their arms. But to them there came, toward the calamity of the fallen, a certain pity, and they bewailed their fortune; but toward the contest a double boldness grew, and a fine longing either to conquer or to die in the same manner as those men, before coming into the enemy's hands.

[158070] 64.2. That night, then, while the enemy lay encamped against the rampart, the Romans remained sleepless, repairing the damaged parts of the camp and making ready many and various other things with which to ward them off, if they should attempt again to assault the walls. On the following day the assaults began again, and the rampart was torn through at many points; and often the Aequians were driven off by sallies in bands from the camp, and often those who came out too boldly were beaten back by the others.

[158585] 64.3. And this went on through the whole day; whereupon the Roman consul, pierced through his shield with a javelin, was wounded in the thigh, and many others of the distinguished, as many as fought around him; and now, when the Romans were already worn out, unexpectedly toward late evening Quintius appeared, approaching, leading the volunteer aid of the freshest; whom the enemy, seeing approach, turned about, leaving the siege unfinished; and the Romans, sallying out upon them as they departed, slew the laggards.

[159106] 64.4. They did not, however, pursue long, being weak from wounds in most cases, but quickly turned back. And after this each side kept guard over themselves, remaining in their camps for a long time.

[159307] 65.1. Then another force of the Aequians and Volscians, supposing they had a fine occasion to plunder the Roman territory, since the best of their force was in the field, went out by night; and bursting into the farthest country, where the farmers thought there was no danger, they got much money and

[159609] 65.2. many persons. They did not, however, have a fine or fortunate end to their departure from there. For the other consul, Postumius, leading the aid that had been gathered to those being warred upon in the camp, when he learned what the enemy were doing, appeared upon them unexpectedly.

[159901] 65.3. They neither were dismayed nor feared his approach, but laying down at leisure their baggage and the booty in one strong place, and leaving a sufficient guard over these, the rest in order advanced to grips with the Romans; and engaging, they performed deeds worthy of mention, few fighting against many—for many, now scattered, streamed together upon them from the fields—lightly armed against men with their whole bodies under guard, and they made many of the Romans dead, and came near, being caught in a foreign land, to setting up trophies over those who had come against them.

[160491] 65.4. But the consul and the picked Roman horsemen with him, charging on unbridled horses against the strongest and best-fighting part of them, broke the line and struck down many. The front fighters being destroyed, the rest of the force, turning, gave way to flight; and those guarding the baggage, abandoning it, went off into the nearby mountains. In the contest itself, then, but few of them perished, but in the flight very many, being ignorant of the country and pursued by the Roman horse.

[160990] 66.1. While these things were happening, the other consul, Servius, having learned that his colleague was approaching to aid him, and fearing lest the enemy meet him and cut him off from the road to him, planned to draw them off by making assaults on the

[161246] 66.2. camp. But the enemy forestalled him; for when they learned of the disaster of their own men, which those who survived from the foray reported, they broke up their camp on the first night after the battle and departed to the city, not having accomplished all they wished.

[161524] 66.3. For, besides those who died in the battles and the forays, they lost in that flight many more than before. For those weighed down by toil and wounds, advancing slowly, when their limbs failed them fell, especially about the streams and rivers, burning with thirst; whom the Roman horsemen, overtaking, slew.

[161839] 66.4. Nor indeed did the Romans return having prospered in everything from that contest; for they had lost many brave men in the battles, and a legate who proved the most illustrious of all in the contest; yet they returned bringing the city a victory inferior to none. These things were done under their magistracy.

[162157] 67.1. In the following year, Lucius Aebutius and Publius Servilius Priscus having taken up the office, the Romans performed no deed worth mention either in war or in civic matters, being afflicted by a pestilential sickness such as never before; which first came upon the herds of grazing horses and oxen, and from these fell upon the flocks of goats and sheep, and destroyed nearly all the four-footed beasts; then it laid hold of the herdsmen and farmers, and, passing through all the country, fell upon the city.

[162674] 67.2. The multitude of slaves and hirelings and the poor throng that it destroyed it was not easy to discover. For at first the dead were carried off in heaps on wagons, but at last those of whom the least account was made were thrust into the channel of the river that flows by. Of those of the senatorial council a fourth part was reckoned to have perished, among whom were both consuls and most of the tribunes.

[163090] 67.3. The sickness began about the Kalends of the month September, and lasted that whole year, seizing and destroying every nature and age alike. When the neighbours gained knowledge of the evils holding Rome, the Aequians and Volscians, thinking it a fine occasion to overthrow her dominion, made compacts and oaths with one another concerning alliance; and having prepared the things needful for a siege, both as fast as they could, led out their forces.

[163548] 67.4. And that they might take from Rome the aid of the allies, they first invaded the land of the Latins and Hernicans. When an embassy came to the senate from each of the peoples being warred upon, asking for alliance, one of the consuls, Lucius Aebutius, happened to have died that very day, and Publius Servilius was near death; who, still breathing a little, summoned

[163922] 67.5. the senate. Of the senators most, half-dead, carried on litters and holding session, answered those present to report to their people that the senate permitted them to defend against the enemy through their own valour, until the consul should recover and the

[164188] 67.6. force that should fight with them be gathered to them. The Romans having so answered, the Latins, having brought into their cities from the fields what they could, kept guard of the walls, and let the rest perish. The Hernicans, vexed at the spoiling and plundering of their fields, took up arms and went out. Having fought brilliantly and lost many of their own, but killed far more of the enemy, being forced back, they fled to their walls and no longer attempted battle.

[164669] 68.1. The Aequians and Volscians, having plundered their country fearlessly, came to the lands of the Tusculans. Plundering these too, none defending, they reached the borders of the Gabini. Marching through this land too without fear, they came to Rome.

[164925] 68.2. They threw the city into sufficient confusion, but were not able to master it; for though the Romans were weak in body and had lost both consuls—for Servilius too had died lately—arming beyond their strength, they stood upon the walls. The circuit of the city at that time was as great as the circle of the city of the Athenians. The parts lying on hills and sheer rocks are fortified by nature itself and need little guarding; the parts walled along the Tiber river—whose breadth is about four plethra, and whose depth is such that large ships can sail it, and whose stream, swift like any other, makes great eddies—it is not possible for foot to cross except by a bridge, which at that time was a single one, made of wood, which they broke up in the wars.

[165690] 68.3. One spot, which is the most assailable of the city, from the gates called Esquiline to the Colline, is fortified by hand. For a ditch is dug before it, at its narrowest greater than a hundred feet wide, and its depth is thirty feet; and a wall stands above the ditch, held within by a mound high and broad, such that it can neither be shaken down by rams nor overturned when the foundations are undermined.

[166104] 68.4. This place is about seven stades in length and fifty feet in breadth; in which then the Romans, drawn up in numbers, held off the enemy's assault, the men of that time knowing neither how to build covered sheds for filling ditches, nor the engines called helepoleis. The enemy, then, despairing of taking the city, departed from the wall, and having ravaged the country through which they passed, led their forces home.

[166531] 69.1. The Romans, having chosen the so-called interreges for the elections—which they are accustomed to do whenever anarchy holds the city—designated as consuls Lucius Lucretius and Titus Veturius Geminus. Under their magistracy the sickness ceased, and the civic charges, both private and public, met with a postponement, one of the tribunes, Sextus Titius, attempting again to stir up the measure concerning the land-allotment, but the people preventing it and putting it off to more suitable occasions.

[167038] 69.2. Great eagerness fell upon all to take vengeance on those who had marched against the city in the time of the sickness; and at once, the senate having voted and the people ratified the war, they enrolled the forces, none of those of military age, nor even any whom the law released, thinking fit to be left out of that campaign. The force being divided into three, one part was left to guard the city, led by Quintus Furius, a man of consular rank; the two went out with the consuls against

[167535] 69.3. the Aequians and Volscians. This same thing had already happened among the enemy too. For the best force from each of the peoples, gathered together, was in the field under two commanders, and was about to set out from the Hernican land, where it then was, and overrun all the Roman subject territory; the less serviceable was left to guard their own towns, lest

[167905] 69.4. some sudden onset of enemies come upon them. The Roman consuls, deliberating on this, thought it best first to attack their cities, by some such reckoning: that their common army would be dissolved, if each learned that their own affairs were in extreme danger, and would think it far better to save their own than to destroy the enemy's. Lucretius, then, invaded the Aequian country, Veturius the Volscian. The Aequians, then, seeing all outside being destroyed, kept the city and the forts under guard.

[168417] 70.1. But the Volscians, led on by boldness and arrogance, and despising the Roman army as not a match to engage their own multitude, went out to fight for their land, and encamped near Veturius. As is wont to befall a newly levied army, gathered from a civic and farming crowd assembled for the occasion, in which much was unarmed and untried in dangers, it did not take courage even to come to grips with the enemy;

[168836] 70.2. but at the Romans' very first onset, the multitude, thrown into confusion and enduring neither the war-cry nor the clash of arms, fled headlong to the walls; so that many, caught in the narrows of the roads, died, and far more were thrust together at the gates while the horsemen pursued.

[169132] 70.3. The Volscians, then, having met with this disaster, blamed themselves for their folly and no longer attempted to hazard anything. The commanders holding the field armies of the Volscians and Aequians, learning that their own lands were being warred upon, resolved that they too should do something noble; and rising from the Hernican and Latin lands, they led their army against Rome with all speed and anger, by some such opinion of their own: that of two fine deeds one would fall to them to accomplish—either to take Rome, which was unguarded, or to drive the enemy out of their own country, since the consuls would be forced to aid their

[169781] 70.4. country being warred upon. With this in mind, they led their army on at speed, that, falling upon the city unexpectedly, they might at once set to work.

[169941] 71.1. Coming as far as the city of Tusculum, when they learned that the whole circuit of Rome was teeming with arms, and that before the gates four cohorts had taken the field, each of six hundred men, they turned aside from the road to Rome, and, settling in the country below the city, which in the former invasion they had passed over, ravaged it.

[170293] 71.2. When one of the consuls, Lucius Lucretius, appeared upon them and pitched his camp not far off, thinking it a fine occasion, before the other Roman force, which Veturius led, should come to Lucretius as an ally, to join battle, having placed their baggage on a hill and left two cohorts over it, the rest advanced into the plain; and engaging the Romans, they proved themselves brave men in the contest

[170703] 71.3. for a long time. But some of the guards in the rear, learning that an army was descending over a hill, supposed that the other consul had come, leading the force with him, and fearing lest they be encircled by both, no longer held their ground, but turned to flight. In this contest both their commanders, having performed the deeds of brave men, fell, and many others, good men, fighting around them; and those who fled from the battle, scattered, withdrew each to his own country.

[171193] 71.4. From this Lucretius, having gained much security, ravaged the Aequian land, and Veturius the Volscian, until the time of the elections came. Then, rousing their forces, they led them home, and both led in their triumphs of victory—Lucretius mounted on a four-horse chariot, Veturius entering on foot. For these two triumphs are given to commanders by the senate, as I said, equal in all else, but differing in this, that the one is mounted, the other on foot.