WORK: Antiquitates Romanae  (slug: dionysius-of-halicarnass-antiquitates-romanae-97af98)

CHAPTER: 04-book-4



[110218] 46.3. When he had ceased speaking, Turnus, the one who had reproached him for his lateness, came forward and would not allow the councillors to yield the leadership to the man, as belonging to him neither by right nor to be given for the advantage of the Latins; and he delivered many words on both points, saying that the agreements which they had made with his grandfather, handing over the leadership, had been dissolved after that man's death, because it had not been added in writing to the agreements that the same gift should belong also to the descendants of Tarquinius; and declaring the man who claimed to inherit his grandfather's gifts the most lawless and wicked of all men, and recounting his deeds which he had performed in order to

[110967] 46.4. seize the rule of the Romans. Having delivered many terrible accusations of him, at the end he taught that he did not even hold the kingship of the Romans according to the laws, having received it from willing subjects like the kings before him, but having prevailed by arms and force and established a tyrannical monarchy; that he killed some of the citizens, drove others from their country, cut off the property of others, and took away the free speech and freedom of all at once. He said it was great folly and god-stricken madness to expect and believe any good and humane thing from a wicked and impious character — as though one who had not spared his nearest and dearest kin would spare strangers; and he urged that, while they had not yet taken the bridle of slavery, they should fight that he might not put it on, conjecturing from the terrible things which others had suffered what would befall themselves.

[111892] 47.1. When Turnus had made such an attack and the multitude had been greatly moved by the words, Tarquinius asked for the following day for his defence and, having got it, when the council had been dissolved, calling together his most intimate associates, he considered with them in what manner he should deal with the matter. The rest, then, suggested the words he should say in his defence and reckoned up the ways in which he should win over the multitude. But Tarquinius himself said there was no need of any of these things for the affair, and declared his own opinion: not to refute the charges, but

[112499] 47.2. to make away with the accuser himself. When all praised the opinion, having arranged with them the matters concerning the attack, he undertook a thing least able to fall within human foresight and guard. For, finding out the most wicked of the servants who conveyed the baggage-animals and the gear of Turnus, and corrupting them with money, he persuaded them to take from him by night many swords and bring them into the lodging of their master and to lay them away, hidden among the baggage.

[113000] 47.3. On the next day, when the assembly had gathered, coming forward, he said that the defence concerning the charges was brief, and made the accuser himself judge of all the charges. "For this Turnus, councillors," he said, "having become judge of all those things of which he now accuses me, himself acquitted me, when he wished to take my daughter to wife.

[113362] 47.4. But when he was rejected from the marriage, as was natural — for who of those having sense would have spurned Mamilius, the noblest and most powerful of the Latins, and thought fit to take as kinsman this man, who cannot trace his line even to a third grandfather? — vexed at this, he now comes accusing me. But he ought, if he knew me to be such as he now charges, not to have been eager then to take me as father-in-law; and if he thought me good, when he asked for my daughter, not now to accuse me as wicked.

[113882] 47.5. And concerning myself I say so much; but for you, councillors, who run the greatest of dangers, it is not now to be considered whether I am good or wicked — for this it will be possible for you to consider even afterward — but concerning your own safety and the freedom of your countries. For you, the foremost in the cities and those who manage public affairs, are being plotted against by this fine demagogue, who has prepared, having killed the most distinguished of you, to attack the rule of the Latins, and has come for this very

[114425] 47.6. purpose. And these things I say not conjecturing, but knowing exactly, an information having come to me in the past night by one of those who shared in the conspiracy. And I will furnish you an indisputable proof of my words in deed, if you are willing to go to his lodging, by showing the weapons hidden in it."

[114745] 48.1. When he said this, all cried out and, fearing for the men, asked that the matter be proved and that he not deceive them. And Turnus, as one who had not foreknown the plot, gladly said he accepted the examination and called upon the presidents to the search of the lodging, and said that one of two things ought to happen: either that he himself should die, if he were found to have prepared weapons beyond those for the road, or that the man who had lied against him should

[115226] 48.2. undergo punishment. This seemed good; and those who went to his lodging found among the baggage the swords hidden by the servants. After this, no longer permitting Turnus to obtain a hearing, they cast him into a certain pit and, heaping the earth upon him while he yet lived, destroyed him forthwith.

[115535] 48.3. And Tarquinius, having praised before the assembly as a common benefactor of the cities, for having saved the best men, they make him leader of the nation on the same terms on which they had earlier made Tarquinius his grandfather and afterward Tullius; and writing the agreements on pillars and cutting victims over the keeping of the covenants, they dissolved the council.

[115917] 49.1. Having obtained the leadership of the Latins, Tarquinius sent embassies also to the cities of the Hernicans and to those of the Volscians, inviting these too to friendship and alliance. The Hernicans, then, all voted to make the alliance; but of the Volscian nation only two cities accepted the invitations, the Ecetrani and the Antiates. And taking forethought that the agreements should remain for all time for the cities, Tarquinius resolved to designate a common temple of the Romans and Latins and Hernicans and those of the Volscians enrolled in the alliance, that, coming together each year to the appointed place, they might hold festival and feast together and share in common sacred rites.

[116624] 49.2. When all had gladly accepted the matter, he designated a place where they should hold the assembly, a high mountain situated almost in the middle of the nations, which overlooks the city of the Albans, on which he enacted that festivals should be held every year and that there should be a truce for all toward all, and that common sacrifices should be performed to the so-called Latiarian Jupiter and common feasts held, ordering what each city should furnish for the rites and what portion each should receive. The cities that shared in the festival and the sacrifice were forty-seven.

[117219] 49.3. These festivals and sacrifices the Romans perform down to our times, calling them the Latin Festival; and the cities that share in the rites bring to them, some lambs, some cheeses, some a measure of milk, and some some similar kind of cake; and one bull being sacrificed in common by all, each receives its appointed portion. They sacrifice on behalf of all, and the Romans hold the leadership of the rites.

[117635] 50.1. When he had strengthened his rule by these alliances too, he resolved to lead out an army against the Sabines, having chosen of the Romans themselves those whom he least suspected, if they should become masters of arms, of aiming at freedom, and adding the force that had come from the allies, which was much greater than the citizen force.

[117983] 50.2. Having ravaged their fields and defeated in battle those who came to meet him, he led the force against the so-called Pometini, who inhabited the city of Suessa and were thought to be the most prosperous of all their neighbours, and through their great prosperity grievous and burdensome to all, charging them with certain plunderings and brigandages, for which, when asked for satisfaction, they gave arrogant answers. They were ready, awaiting the war and in arms.

[118457] 50.3. Joining battle with them about the borders and killing many, and routing the rest and shutting them up within their wall, when they no longer came forth from the city, he encamped beside them and surrounded them with a ditch and palisade and made continuous assaults upon the walls. Those within for a time fought back and held out long against the hardship; but when supplies failed them, weakening in body and getting no reinforcement nor rest, but toiling themselves both day and night, they are taken by storm.

[118979] 50.4. Having become master of the city, he destroyed those in arms, but permitted the soldiers to carry off as captives their wives and children and those who survived to become prisoners and the multitude of servants, not even easy to count, and to drive and carry off the other property of the city, whatever each might happen upon, both within the wall and in the fields; but the silver and gold, as much as was found, he gathered into one place and, taking out the tenth for the building of a temple, divided the remaining moneys among the soldiers.

[119534] 50.5. So great, then, was the silver and gold that was taken, that each of the soldiers received five minae of silver, and the silver tithed for the gods came to not less than four hundred talents.

[119733] 51.1. While he was still tarrying at Suessa, someone came announcing that the best youth of the Sabines had gone forth and, having invaded the Roman territory with two great armies, were plundering the fields — one having pitched its camp near Eretum, the other about Fidenae; and that, unless some force should oppose them, all there would be lost.

[120084] 51.2. When he heard this, leaving at Suessa a small part of the army with orders to guard the spoils and the baggage, taking up the rest of the force light-equipped, he led it against those encamped near Eretum and pitched his camp on high ground, leaving a small space between. When it seemed good to the commanders of the Sabines to give battle at dawn, having sent for the army at Fidenae, Tarquinius, learning their intention — for the one carrying the letters from the commanders there to those yonder was captured — used the following stratagem against what had befallen from chance.

[120675] 51.3. Dividing his force in two, he sent the one part by night, unobserved by the enemy, onto the road leading from Fidenae; the other, when bright day came, he drew up and led out of the camp as if for battle. And the Sabines, taking courage, came out against them, seeing the enemy not many and thinking their own force from Fidenae would presently be at hand. These, then, having taken their stand, fought, and the contest was for a long time equally balanced; but those sent forward beforehand by Tarquinius, turning back by night from the road and getting in the rear of the Sabines, came on.

[121274] 51.4. The Sabines, seeing these and recognizing them by their arms and standards, lost their reckoning and, throwing away their arms, tried to save themselves. But safety was impossible for most, surrounded in a circle by enemies, and the Roman cavalry, pressing on, shut them off on every side; so that some few got out from under the danger, but the greater part were cut down by the enemy or surrendered themselves. Nor did those left at the camp hold out, but the rampart too was taken at the first assault; and there, along with the Sabines' own goods, all the Romans' property, with many captives still untouched, was recovered for those who had lost it.

[121936] 52.1. When the first trial had gone according to his purpose, Tarquinius, taking up his force, came against the Sabines encamped at Fidenae, to whom the destruction of their own was not yet plain. They too chanced to have come forth beforehand from the camp and to be already on the road; and when they came near and saw fixed on spear-points the heads of their own commanders — for the Romans held them out to terrify the enemy — learning that their other army had been destroyed, they performed no further noble deed, but, turning to supplications and entreaties, surrendered themselves.

[122527] 52.2. Both armies having been so shamefully and miserably swept away, the Sabines, shut up into narrow hopes, and fearing for their cities lest they be taken by assault, sent embassies concerning peace, surrendering themselves to be subject to Tarquinius and henceforth tributary. Having made a treaty with them and received the cities on the same terms, he went off to Suessa. Thence, taking up the force left there and the spoils and the other baggage, he returned to Rome, bringing back the army enriched.

[123037] 52.3. After this also he made many incursions into the Volscian territory, sometimes with the whole force, sometimes with a part, and became master of much booty. And when most things were now going according to his mind, a war arose from his neighbours, both long in time — for it was waged for seven years continuously — and great by reason of grievous and unexpected sufferings. From what causes it began, and what end it had — since it was accomplished by treacherous deceit and an extraordinary stratagem — I will relate in a few words.

[123580] 53.1. There was a city of the Latin race, a colony of the Albans, distant from Rome a hundred stadia, lying on the road that leads to Praeneste; they called it Gabii. It is now no longer wholly inhabited, except for those parts where there are inns along the road; but at that time it was as populous as any and large. One might conjecture its size and dignity from beholding the ruins of houses in many places and the circuit of its wall,

[124021] 53.2. for most of it still stands. Into this city flowed together some of the Pometini who had escaped from Suessa when Tarquinius took their city, and many of the exiles from Rome; these, begging and importuning the Gabini to avenge them, and promising many gifts if they should return to their own, declaring the overthrow of the tyrant possible and easy, since those in the city too would join, persuaded them — the Volscians also having added their zeal, for they too sent embassies asking for alliance — to take up the war against Tarquinius.

[124570] 53.3. After this there were invasions and incursions with great armies into one another's land, and battles, as was natural, sometimes few against few, sometimes all against all, in which often the Gabini, routing the Romans up to their walls and laying many low, plundered the country without fear; and often the Romans, pushing back the Gabini and shutting them into the city, carried off many slaves and much booty of theirs.

[125000] 54.1. These things happening continually, both sides were compelled to fortify whatever was defensible in the country and to establish garrisons in them for the refuge of the farmers; from which, setting out, they destroyed the brigand-bands, and, if they saw any small part separated from a large army and, as is natural in foraging, undisciplined through contempt, descending in a body they destroyed it; and through fear of one another's sudden inroads they built up and fortified with ditches whatever of the cities was assailable and easy to take by ladders.

[125565] 54.2. But Tarquinius was the more active about these things, and he strengthened with abundant labour the part of the city's circuit that faced the Gabini, digging a wider ditch and raising a higher wall and dividing the place with closer towers; for at this part especially the city seemed to be unfortified, being elsewhere fairly secure and hard of approach throughout the rest of its circuit.

[125963] 54.3. And there was bound to befall — what is wont to happen to all cities in long wars, the land being ravaged by the continual inroads of the enemy and no longer bearing crops — a scarcity of all food in both, and terrible despondency about the future. But the lack of necessities pressed the Romans worse than the Gabini, and the poorest of them, suffering most, thought they ought to make agreements with the Gabini and conclude the war on whatever terms those should wish.

[126442] 55.1. Tarquinius being distressed at what had happened, neither enduring to conclude the war shamefully nor able to hold out any longer, but contriving all manner of attempts and putting together every kind of guile, the eldest of his sons, Sextus by name, having communicated his plan to his father alone, and being thought to attempt a bold thing involving great danger, yet not impossible — his father consenting that he should do as he wished — feigns a quarrel with his father about the conclusion of the war;

[126958] 55.2. and having been scourged by him with rods in the Forum and otherwise outraged, so that the matter became notorious, first he sent of his companions the most trustworthy as deserters to tell the Gabini secretly that he had resolved to make war on his father by going over to them, if he should receive pledges that they would protect him as they did the other exiles from Rome and would not give him up to his father, hoping to settle their own private enmities to their own

[127439] 55.3. advantage. When the Gabini had gladly heard the proposal and agreed to do him no wrong, he came, bringing with him many companions and clients, as a deserter, and, that they might the more believe him to be telling the truth about his revolt from his father, bringing much silver and gold; and there flocked to him after this many of those from the city, pretending to flee the tyranny,

[127833] 55.4. and there was now a strong band about him. The Gabini, thinking a great advantage had accrued to them, many having come over to them, and hoping that before long they would have Rome in their power, and still more deceived by what the deserter from his father did, going forth continually into the country and seizing much plunder — for his father, knowing beforehand to what places he would come, had provided abundant booty and the strongholds unguarded, and continually sent those who were to be destroyed by him, choosing from the citizens those whom he held in suspicion — from all these things thinking the man a faithful friend to them and a good general, and many of them too having been bribed by him with money, they bring him to the supreme command.

[128601] 56.1. Having become master of so great an authority, Sextus, by deceit and trickery, sent secretly, unobserved by the Gabini, one of his servants to his father, both to declare the authority he had received and to learn

[128822] 56.2. what he ought to do. Tarquinius, not wishing even the servant to know what he ordered his son to do, taking the messenger, came forth into the garden adjoining the palace. There chanced to be poppies growing in it, already full of seed and at the season of harvest; passing through these, with his staff he kept striking off the head of each poppy that overtopped the rest.

[129203] 56.3. Having done this, he sent off the messenger without any answer to him who often asked — imitating, as it seems to me, the device of Thrasybulus the Milesian. For he too, when Periander the tyrant of the Corinthians once asked, through the messenger sent to him, how he might most securely hold the rule, sent no word in answer, but bidding the one who had come from him to follow, led him through a field sown with grain and, breaking off the ears that overtopped, threw them on the ground, teaching that one ought to lop off and destroy the most eminent of the citizens.

[129782] 56.4. Tarquinius then having done much the like, Sextus, understanding his father's meaning — that he bade him do away with the most eminent of the Gabini — summoned the multitude into an assembly and, making a long speech about himself, that, having taken refuge in their faith together with his companions, he was in danger of being seized by certain men and given up to his father, was ready to lay down the command, and wished to depart from the city before suffering any terrible thing, weeping at the same time and bewailing his own fortune, like those who in truth are in agony for their lives.

[130385] 57.1. When the multitude was roused and with great eagerness inquired who they were that meant to betray him, he named the most distinguished of the Gabini, Antistius Petro, who, having taken many earnest measures in peace and fulfilled many commands in war, had become the most distinguished of all; and when the man defended himself and, conscious of nothing, submitted to every examination, Sextus said he wished to search his house, sending others, and that he himself would remain in the assembly with the man until those sent should come.

[130931] 57.2. For he had corrupted some of his servants with money, who had received the letters contrived for the destruction of Petro, sealed with his father's seal, and laid them away within. When those sent to the search — for Petro made no objection, but allowed his house to be searched — found where the letters were hidden, they came to the assembly bringing many other sealed letters and the one written to Antistius; and Sextus, saying he recognized his father's seal, broke it and, giving it to the secretary, ordered him to read it.

[131469] 57.3. It was written therein that, best of all, his son should be given up to him alive and the agreed-upon rewards received, but, if this were impossible, that his head should be cut off and sent. And for him who should do this, and for those who shared in the deed, besides the other rewards he had earlier promised, he said he would give the citizenship at Rome and enrol them all in the number of the patricians, and bestow houses and allotments and

[131924] 57.4. many other great gifts. At these things the Gabini, being enraged, kill Antistius — who was struck dumb at the unexpected calamity and could not even utter a voice for his misfortune — by pelting him with stones; and the search and punishment of the others who had planned the same things as Petro they entrusted to Sextus to carry out. He, entrusting the guarding of the gates to his own companions, that those under accusation might not escape him, sending to the houses of the most distinguished men, killed many of the Gabini, and good men.

[132476] 58.1. While these things were being done, there being a tumult in the city as over so great an evil, Tarquinius, learning what was happening through letters, came up leading his force, and about the middle of the night, having got near the city, when the gates were opened by those prepared for the purpose, entered and without effort became master of the city.

[132839] 58.2. When the calamity was known, all bewailing themselves as to what they would suffer, and expecting slaughters and enslavements and all the terrible things that befall those captured by tyrants — or, if they fared best, having condemned themselves to slavery and confiscation of goods and the like — Tarquinius did none of the things they expected and feared, although he was bitter in anger and inexorable in his punishments of enemies.

[133282] 58.3. For he neither killed any of the Gabini nor expelled them from the city nor punished them with loss of citizen rights or confiscation of goods; but, summoning the multitude into an assembly and changing from a tyrannical to a kingly manner, he said he gave them back their own city and conceded to them the property they had, and along with these granted to all the equal citizenship of the Romans — not through goodwill toward the Gabini, but that, by doing this, he might hold the rule of the Romans more securely; thinking the strongest guard of himself and his children would be the faith of those who beyond hope had been saved and had recovered all their own.

[133955] 58.4. And, that no fear about the future might remain to them, nor any doubt whether these things would remain firm for them, having written down on what just terms they should be friends, he completed the oaths concerning these matters in the assembly forthwith and swore over the victims. Of these oaths there is a memorial lying at Rome in the temple of Jupiter Pistius, whom the Romans call Sancus — a wooden shield covered with the hide of the ox sacrificed over the oaths at that time, inscribed in archaic letters with the agreements made by them. Having done these things and appointed his son Sextus king of the Gabini, he led off his force. The war against the Gabini, then, had such an end.

[134658] 59.1. After this deed Tarquinius, giving the people rest from campaigns and wars, busied himself about the building of the temples, being eager to fulfil the vows of his grandfather. For that man, fighting in his last war against the Sabines, had vowed to Jupiter and Juno and Athena that, if he should prevail in the battle, he would build them temples; and the crag where the gods were to be established he had worked out with great substructures and mounds, as I said in the preceding Book, but had not lived to complete the building of the temples. This work, then, Tarquinius, choosing to accomplish from the tithe of the spoils from Suessa, set all the craftsmen at the labours.

[135344] 59.2. Here, it is said, a certain marvellous prodigy underground occurred while the foundations were being dug and the digging had already gone to a great depth: there was found the head of a man newly slain, having the face like that of a living man, and the blood flowing down from the severing still warm and fresh.

[135664] 59.3. Seeing this prodigy, Tarquinius ordered the workmen to stay the digging; and summoning the native diviners, he inquired of them what the prodigy meant to signify. When they made no declaration, but referred the knowledge of such things to the Tyrrhenians, inquiring of them and learning who was the most distinguished of the prodigy-interpreters among the Tyrrhenians, he sent to him the most reputable of the citizens as envoys.

[136101] 60.1. When these men had come to the house of the prodigy-interpreter, they met a youth coming out, to whom, saying that they were envoys of the Romans wishing to meet the diviner, they asked him to announce it to him. And the young man said: "He whom you wish to meet is my father; he is busy at present, but it will be possible for you to go in to him after a little time.

[136477] 60.2. And while you await him, declare to me on what business you have come. For it will be to your advantage, if you are about through inexperience to err in the question, to be taught by me to make no mistake; for no small part of the observations in divination is a right question." It seemed good to the men to do so, and they tell him the prodigy. And he, when he had heard it, after a short pause, said: "Hear, men of Rome; the prodigy my father will interpret for you, and will lie in nothing — for it is not lawful for a diviner; but as to what, in speaking and answering the questions, you may say and be free from error and falsehood — for it concerns you to have foreknown these things — learn from me.

[137192] 60.3. When you have related the prodigy to him, saying that he does not exactly understand what you say, he will mark off with his staff a portion of the earth, some part or other; then he will say to you, 'This is the Tarpeian hill, and this part of it looks toward the east, this toward the west,

[137492] 60.4. this northern part, and this opposite, southern.' Pointing these out with his staff, he will inquire of you in which of these parts the head was found. What, then, do I advise you to answer? Not to admit that the prodigy was found in any of these places which he, pointing with his staff, may inquire about, but to say that it was at Rome, among us, on the Tarpeian hill. If you keep these answers and are in no way led aside by him, recognizing that what is fated cannot be altered, he will interpret to you what the prodigy means to signify, and will not conceal it."

[138069] 61.1. Having learned these things, the envoys, when the old man had leisure and someone came forth to fetch them, going in, tell the diviner the prodigy. And as he played the sophist, drawing on the earth circular lines and again other straight ones, and making concerning each place his questions about the finding, the envoys, untroubled in mind, kept the same answer, as the diviner's son had suggested to them, always naming Rome and the Tarpeian hill and asking the interpreter not to appropriate the sign, but to speak from

[138600] 61.2. the best and the most just. Not being able to deceive the men nor to appropriate the omen, the diviner says to them: "Men of Rome, tell your fellow citizens that it is fated that this place, in which you found the head, should become the head of all Italy." From that time the hill is called Capitoline, after the head found in it; for the Romans call heads capita.

[138973] 61.3. Hearing these things from the envoys, Tarquinius set the craftsmen to the works; and he wrought out most of the temple, but did not live to complete the whole work, being expelled from his rule sooner; rather it was in the third consulship that the city of the Romans brought it to completion. It was made standing upon a lofty foundation, eight hundred feet in circuit, having each side nearly two hundred feet; and one would find but a small difference of the excess of the length over the breadth, not a whole fifteen feet.

[139507] 61.4. For upon the same foundations the temple built after the conflagration, in the time of our fathers, was found to differ from the ancient one only in the costliness of the material — being surrounded, on the front part that looks toward the south, with a triple row of columns, and on the sides with a single row. In it are three parallel chambers having common sides: the middle that of Jupiter, and on either side that of Juno and that of Athena, covered by one pediment and one roof.

[140000] 62.1. There is told also another very marvellous piece of good fortune said to have belonged to the city of the Romans in the rule of Tarquinius, bestowed by the goodwill of some god or divinity; which not for a short time, but throughout the whole life of the city, has often saved it from great evils.

[140305] 62.2. A certain woman, not of the country, came to the tyrant wishing to sell nine books full of Sibylline oracles. When Tarquinius did not think fit to buy the books at the price asked, she went away and burned three of them; and after no long time, bringing the remaining six, she offered them for sale at the same price. Being thought foolish and laughed at for asking the same price for the fewer that she could not get even for the more, she went away again and burned half of those that remained, and bringing the remaining

[140836] 62.3. three, asked the same amount of gold. Marvelling at the woman's purpose, Tarquinius sent for the augurs and, relating the matter to them, asked what he ought to do. They, learning from certain signs that he had turned away a god-sent good, and declaring it a great misfortune that he had not bought all the books, bade him count out to the woman the gold she asked and take the oracles that remained.

[141244] 62.4. The woman, then, having given the books and bidden him keep them carefully, vanished from among men; and Tarquinius, choosing two distinguished men of the citizens and joining to them two public slaves, committed to those men the guarding of the books. Of these, one, Marcus Atilius, thought to have done some wrong concerning the trust and being denounced by one of the public slaves, he sewed up in an oxhide, as a parricide, and cast into the sea.

[141702] 62.5. After the expulsion of the kings the city, taking over the charge of the oracles, appoints the most distinguished men its guardians, who hold this care for life, being released from campaigns and from the other public business of the city; and it sets public slaves beside them, without whom it does not permit the men to make their inspections of the oracles. In short, the Romans guard nothing, neither holy nor sacred possession, so much as the Sibylline prophecies. They use them whenever the senate so votes, when sedition seizes the city, or some great misfortune befalls in war, or some prodigies and great apparitions, hard to interpret, appear to them, as has often happened. These oracles remained until the so-called Marsic War, lying underground in the temple of Capitoline Jupiter in a stone chest, guarded by ten men.

[142541] 62.6. But after the third year past the hundred and seventieth Olympiad, the temple being burned — whether from a plot, as some think, or of itself — these too, along with the other offerings of the god, were destroyed by the fire. Those now existing are collected from many places, some brought from the cities in Italy, some from Erythrae in Asia, by decree of the senate three envoys being sent for the transcription; and others copied from other cities and from private men; among which are found some interpolated into the Sibylline oracles, and they are detected by the so-called acrostics; and I say what Terentius Varro has recorded in his treatise on theology.

[143212] 63.1. Having accomplished these things in peace and in wars and having founded two colonies — the one called Signia not by deliberate purpose but of itself, the soldiers having wintered in the place and built the camp so that it differed in no way from a city; Circeii by deliberate reckoning, because it lay well, in relation to the Pomptine plain, the largest of those about Latium, and to the sea adjoining it; it is a peninsula-like crag, fairly high, lying on the Tyrrhenian sea, where the story is that Circe, the daughter of the Sun, dwelt — and having assigned both colonies to two of his sons as founders, Circeii to Arruns and Signia to Titus, having then no further fear concerning the rule, on account of the outrage to a woman, whom his eldest son Sextus violated, he is driven both from the rule and from the city, the divine power having foretold to him the calamity that was to come upon his house by many

[144135] 63.2. other omens, and by this last. Eagles, coming together into the garden adjoining the palace in the season of spring, built a nest on the top of a lofty palm-tree. While these eagles had their young still unfledged, vultures, flying upon them in a body, scattered the nest and killed the young, and the eagles coming back from foraging they drove from the palm-tree, tearing and striking them with their talons.

[144553] 63.3. Seeing these omens, and guarding himself, in case he might be able to ward off his fate, Tarquinius was not strong enough to overcome destiny; but, the patricians attacking him and the people uniting in mind, he was expelled from the rule. Who they were that began the uprising, and by what means they came to the deed, I will try to set forth in a few words.

[144920] 64.1. Tarquinius was besieging the city of the Ardeates, making the pretext that they received the exiles from Rome and helped them concerning their return; but, as the truth was, plotting against it on account of its wealth, it being the most prosperous of the cities in Italy. The Ardeates fighting back nobly and the siege becoming long, both those at the camp, worn out by the prolongation of the war, and those in the city, exhausted by the contributions, were ready for revolt, if any beginning should be made.

[145438] 64.2. At this very time Sextus, the eldest of the sons of Tarquinius, having been sent by his father to a city which was called Collatia to render certain military services, was lodged with a kinsman, Lucius Tarquinius

[145658] 64.3. surnamed Collatinus. This man Fabius says was the son of Egerius, concerning whom I have shown before that he was the brother's son of Tarquinius the former king of the Romans, and, appointed governor of Collatia, was himself called Collatinus from his stay in that city and left the same surname to his descendants; but I am persuaded that this man too was the grandson of Egerius, if indeed he was of the same age as the sons of Tarquinius, as Fabius and the other historians have recorded; for the chronology confirms this supposition for me.

[146211] 64.4. Collatinus, then, chanced to be at the camp at that time; but the wife who dwelt with him, a Roman, the daughter of Lucretius, a distinguished man, entertained him as a kinsman of her husband with much zeal and friendliness. This woman, the fairest and most virtuous of the women in Rome, Sextus attempted to corrupt, having earlier still restrained himself, whenever he was lodged with his kinsman, but then thinking he had a fitting occasion.

[146663] 64.5. When after supper he had gone away to sleep, having waited through a great part of the night, when he thought all were asleep, rising he came to the chamber in which he knew Lucretia was sleeping, and, unobserved by those sleeping at the doors of the chamber, entered, holding a sword.

[146956] 65.1. Standing over the bed — the woman being awakened at once with the sense of the noise and asking who it was — he told his name and bade her be silent and remain in the chamber, threatening to slay her if she should attempt to flee or cry out. Having terrified the woman in this way, he held out to her two choices, of which he asked her to choose which she preferred, death with

[147341] 65.2. shame or life with happiness. "For if you consent," he said, "to gratify me, I will make you my wife, and you shall reign with me — now over the city which my father has given me, and after his death over the Romans and the Latins and the Tyrrhenians and all the others over whom he rules. For I know that I shall receive my father's kingship, as is just, being the eldest of his sons. And as for all the good things which kings have, of all which you shall be mistress with me, what need is there to teach you who know it well?

[147877] 65.3. But if you attempt to resist, wishing to save your chastity, I will kill you, and, slaughtering one of the servants upon you, I will lay your bodies together and will say that, having caught you behaving shamefully with the slave, I punished you, avenging the outrage to my kinsman; so that your end will be shameful and reproachful, and your body will obtain neither burial nor any other of the customary rites."

[148298] 65.4. As he was vehement, both threatening and entreating and swearing he spoke the truth in each of his sayings, Lucretia came into a constraint, fearing the dishonour about her death, to yield and to suffer him to accomplish what he wished.

[148542] 66.1. When day came, he departed to the camp, having fulfilled a wicked and destructive desire; but Lucretia, bearing terribly what had happened, as quickly as she could, mounting her carriage, set off for Rome, clad in black raiment and hiding a small dagger beneath her robe, neither greeting any of those who met and saluted her, nor answering those who wished to learn what she had suffered, but thoughtful and downcast, with her eyes full of tears.

[148997] 66.2. When she came into her father's house — there chanced to be some kinsmen present with him — taking hold of his knees and falling about him, for a time she wept, uttering no word; then, when her father raised her up and asked her to say what she had suffered, she said: "I become your suppliant, father, having endured a terrible and irremediable outrage; avenge me and do not overlook your own daughter,

[149408] 66.3. who has suffered worse than death." When he marvelled, and all the others, and he asked her to say who had outraged her and what kind of outrage, she said: "You shall hear my calamities, father, before long; but grant me first this favour which I ask: summon as many friends and kinsmen as you can, that they may hear from me, who have suffered the terrible things, and not from others. And when you have learned the shameful and terrible constraints that seized me, take counsel with them how you will avenge me and yourself, and make not long the time between."

[149979] 67.1. When, by a swift and earnest summons, the most distinguished men had come together into the house, as she asked, she tells them the whole matter, taking it up from the beginning. And after this, greeting her father and making many supplications both of him and of those present with him, and praying to the gods and divinities to grant her a swift release from life, she draws the dagger which she kept hidden beneath her robes, and, dealing a single blow through her breast, drives the sword as far as the heart.

[150500] 67.2. An outcry and lamentation and beating of breasts of the women seizing the whole house, the father, throwing himself about the body, embraced and called upon her and tended her as if she would recover from the wound; but she, gasping in his arms and breathing out her life, dies. To the Romans present the calamity seemed so terrible and pitiable that with one voice they all cried out that it were ten thousand times better for them to die for freedom than to overlook such outrages committed by the tyrants.

[151016] 67.3. There was among them a certain Publius Valerius, a descendant of one of the Sabines who came with Tatius to Rome, an active and prudent man. He is sent by them to the camp, both to tell the husband of Lucretia what had happened and, with him, to bring about the revolt of the soldiery from the tyrants.

[151326] 67.4. Just as he had gone out of the gates, by divine providence Collatinus met him coming to the city from the camp, knowing nothing of the evils that had seized his house; and with him Lucius Junius, whose surname was Brutus — which, interpreted into the Greek tongue, would be "stupid"; concerning whom it is necessary to say a little beforehand, since the Romans declare him to have been the chief cause of the overthrow of the tyrants — who he was and from whom and why he obtained this surname which in no way belonged to him.

[151860] 68.1. This man's father was Marcus Junius, a descendant of one of those who set out with Aeneas on the colony, numbered among the most distinguished of the Romans for valour; and his mother was Tarquinia, the daughter of the former king Tarquinius; and he himself shared in all the nurture and education of the country, and had a nature opposing nothing of the noble things.

[152236] 68.2. But when Tarquinius, having killed Tullius along with many other good men, made away also with his father by a secret death, for no wrong, but led on to a desire for the wealth which he possessed from an ancient and ancestral prosperity, and with him his elder brother, who showed a noble spirit and would not have endured not to avenge his father's death — Brutus, being still young and utterly bereft of kindred help, undertook to do a thing most prudent of all, to falsely feign upon himself an assumed folly; and he continued all the time thereafter, until he thought he had the suitable occasion, keeping up the pretence of madness, from which he obtained this surname; and this saved him from suffering any terrible thing at the hands of the tyrant, while many good men were destroyed.

[153035] 69.1. For Tarquinius, despising the folly which seemed to be about him but was not in truth, took away all his ancestral property, supplying him a little for his daily living, and, as an orphan child still needing guardians, kept him under himself and permitted him to live with his own sons — not through honour, as he pretended to those near him, as being a kinsman, but that he might furnish laughter to the youths, saying many foolish things and doing things like those who are truly foolish.

[153533] 69.2. And indeed, when he sent two of his sons, Arruns and Titus, to consult the Delphic oracle concerning the plague — for a certain unaccustomed disease fell, in his reign, upon maidens and children, by which many bodies were destroyed, but most grievous and hard to cure for pregnant women, killing the mothers along with their infants in the birth — wishing to learn from the god both the cause of the disease and the remedy, he sent him too along with the youths, who begged it, that they might have one to mock and outrage.

[154064] 69.3. When the young men had come to the oracle and received the responses concerning the things for which they were sent, having honoured the god with offerings and laughed much at Brutus, because he dedicated a wooden staff to Apollo — but he had bored it through entirely like a flute and put in a golden rod, no one knowing — after this they asked the god to whom it was fated to receive the rule of the Romans; and the god answered them, "To him who first kisses his mother."

[154546] 69.4. The young men, then, ignorant of the meaning of the oracle, agreed with one another to kiss their mother at the same time, wishing to hold the kingship in common; but Brutus, understanding what the god meant to make plain, as soon as he set foot on Italy, stooping down kissed the earth, thinking this to be the mother of all men. Such, then, were the things that had befallen this man before.

[154947] 70.1. At that time, when he heard Valerius relating the things that had befallen Lucretia and her death, raising his hands to heaven he said: "O Zeus and all you gods who watch over the life of men, has that moment now come for which I, waiting, kept up this pretence of life? Is it fated for the Romans to be delivered, by me and through me, from this unbearable tyranny?"

[155322] 70.2. Having said this, he went in haste to the house together with Collatinus and Valerius. And when he entered, Collatinus, seeing Lucretia lying in the midst and her father lying about her, with a great groan and embracing the dead, kissed her and called upon her and conversed with her as with the living, being out of his mind through

[155663] 70.3. the calamity. While he was lamenting much, and the father in turn, and the whole house was possessed with weeping and wailing, Brutus, looking at them, said: "You will have ten thousand occasions, Lucretius and Collatinus and all you who are kin to the woman, in which you may weep for her; but now let us consider how we shall avenge her;

[156010] 70.4. for this the present occasion demands." It seemed he spoke reasonably, and, seating themselves apart and removing out of the way the throng of household servants and hired labourers, they took counsel what they ought to do. First Brutus, beginning to speak about himself — that the folly which seemed to the many to be his was not true but assumed, and telling the reasons for which he had endured this pretence — and being thought the most prudent of all men, after this persuaded them all, taking the same resolve, to drive Tarquinius and his sons from the city, delivering many alluring words to this end. And when he saw all of one mind, he said there was need not of words nor of promises, but of deeds, if any of the things needful were to come to pass; and he said that he himself would lead in these.

[156826] 70.5. Having said this and taking the dagger with which the woman had killed herself, and going to her body — for it still lay in the open, a most piteous spectacle — he swore by Mars and the other gods to do all that he could for the overthrow of the rule of the Tarquinii, and neither himself to be reconciled to the tyrants nor to permit those who were reconciled, but to hold as an enemy the one who did not wish the same things, and even to the death to be the enemy of the tyranny and those who fought along with it. And if he should transgress the oath, he prayed that such an end of life might befall both him and his children as had befallen the woman.

[157489] 71.1. Having said this, he called all the others too to the same oath; and they, no longer hesitating, rose up and, receiving the sword from one another, swore. The oaths having been taken, after this they immediately sought what should be the manner of the attempt. And Brutus suggests to them the following: "First, let us keep the gates under guard, that Tarquinius may perceive nothing of what is being said and done in the city against the tyranny, before the things on our side are made

[157983] 71.2. ready. Then, bringing the body of the woman as it is, defiled with blood, into the Forum and setting it forth in the open, let us summon the people into an assembly. And when they have assembled and we see the Forum full, let Lucretius and Collatinus come forward and lament their own fortunes, relating all that has happened.

[158317] 71.3. Then let each of the others, coming forward, accuse the tyranny and call the citizens to freedom. And it will be according to the prayer of all the Romans, if they see us, the patricians, beginning the work of freedom; for they have suffered many terrible things from the tyrant and need but a small impulse. And when we have got the multitude eager to overthrow the monarchy, let us give them a vote that Tarquinius shall no longer rule the Romans, and let us send the decree about these matters to those at the camp with speed.

[158854] 71.4. For those bearing arms too, if they learn that all in the city is hostile to the tyrants, will become eager for the freedom of their country, being no longer held by gifts as before nor able to bear the outrages of the sons and flatterers of Tarquinius."

[159116] 71.5. When he had said this, Valerius, taking up the speech, said: "In other respects, Junius, you seem to me to reckon rightly; but concerning the assembly I still wish to learn who shall be the one to summon it according to the laws and to give the vote to the curiae. For this is assigned to a magistrate to do; and none of us holds any magistracy." And he, taking him up, said: "I, Valerius;

[159513] 71.6. for I am commander of the Celeres, and it is assigned to me by the laws to summon an assembly whenever I wish. The tyrant gave me this office, the greatest there is, as to a fool who would neither know its power nor, if I should know, would use it; and I will be the first to deliver the speech against the tyrant."

[159836] 72.1. When all heard this, they praised him and asked him to say the rest, as having begun from a fine and lawful premise. And he said: "Since it seems good to you to do these things thus, let us consider again what magistracy shall be the one to govern the city after the overthrow of the kings, and by what man it shall be appointed; and, before this, what shall be the order of the constitution which, on ridding ourselves of the tyrant, we shall establish. For it is better to have deliberated everything before attempting so great a deed, and to leave nothing unexamined or unplanned. Let each of you, then,

[160450] 72.2. declare what he thinks about these matters." After this many speeches were made by many. To some it seemed best to establish again a royal constitution, reckoning up all the goods which all the former kings had done the city; to others, no longer to entrust public affairs to one ruler, recounting the tyrannical lawlessnesses which many others had used against their own citizens, and Tarquinius at the last, but to make the council of the senate master of all, as in many of the Greek cities;

[160952] 72.3. and others preferred neither of these constitutions, but counselled to establish a democracy as at Athens, alleging the outrages and greeds of the few and the dissensions that arise of the lowly toward the eminent, and declaring equality before the law to be, for a free city, the safest and most fitting of constitutions.

[161282] 73.1. The choice appearing to all difficult and hard to decide, on account of the evils attending each of the constitutions, last of all Brutus, taking up the speech, said: "I, Lucretius and Collatinus and all you present, good men and of good fathers, think we ought to establish no new constitution for the present; for the moment to which we have been brought by circumstances is brief, in which to reorder the constitution of a city is not easy; and the trial of the change, even if we chance to deliberate best concerning it, is perilous and not without danger. And it will be possible for us later, when we are rid of the tyranny, with more authority and at leisure to choose the better constitution instead of the worse, if indeed there be any better than that which Romulus and Pompilius and all the kings after them established and handed down to us, from which our city has continued great and prosperous and ruling over many men.

[162224] 73.2. But the grievous things which are wont to attend monarchies, from which they pass over into tyrannical cruelty and on account of which all men dislike them, these I advise you to correct now, and to guard against, that they may not ever arise even hereafter.

[162490] 73.3. And what are these? First, since the many look to the names of things, and from these either accept some of the harmful or shun some of the useful — among which monarchy too happens to be — I advise you to change the name of the constitution and no longer to call those who are to have the authority over all kings or monarchs, but to give them some more moderate and more humane appellation.

[162890] 73.4. Then not to make the single opinion of all masters, but to entrust the royal rule to two men, as I learn the Lacedaemonians do for many generations now, and on account of this form of government to be the best-governed and most prosperous of all the Greeks; for they will be less insolent and oppressive, the authority being divided in two and each having the same strength; and mutual respect, and prevention of living according to pleasure, and emulation toward the reputation of virtue, would most arise for each from this rule of equal honour.

[163445] 74.1. And of the insignia which have been assigned to the kings, being many, if any present grievous and envied sights to the many, some I think we ought to diminish, others to take away — I mean these sceptres and the golden crowns and the purple and gold-bordered robes, except at certain festival seasons and in the processions of triumphs, when they shall take them up for the honour of the gods; for it will grieve no one, if they be rare. But for the men an ivory chair, sitting on which they shall give judgment, and a white robe with a purple border, and the twelve axes preceding them in their goings-forth, we should leave.

[164080] 74.2. Besides these, what I think will be the most useful of all that has been said and the chief cause of those who take over the rule not erring much: not to allow the same men to rule for life; for an undefined rule, giving no account of what is done, is grievous to all, and from it tyranny grows; but to confine the power of the office to a year's term, as is done among the Athenians.

[164472] 74.3. For the same man ruling and being ruled in turn, and laying down the authority before his mind is corrupted, restrains self-willed natures and does not let characters become drunk with power. If we establish these things, it will be possible for us both to reap the goods of the royal constitution and to be rid of the evils attending it.

[164818] 74.4. And that the name of the royal authority, being ancestral to us and having come into the city with auspicious omens, the gods ratifying it, may be preserved for the sake of religion, let there always be appointed a king of the sacred rites, who shall hold this honour for life, released from all warlike and political occupation, having this one work alone, like the king, the leadership of the sacrifices, and nothing else.

[165250] 75.1. In what manner each of these things shall be, hear from me. I will summon the assembly, as I said, since it is permitted me by law, and I will introduce a motion: that Tarquinius, together with his sons and his wife, be banished, debarred from the city and territory of the Romans for all time, and the offspring sprung from them. And when the citizens have voted the motion, declaring to them the constitution we intend to establish, I will choose an interrex who shall appoint those who are to take over public affairs; and I myself will lay down the office of the Celeres.

[165833] 75.2. And the interrex appointed by me, convening the centuriate assembly, shall name those who are to hold the annual leadership and shall give the citizens a vote concerning them. And if it seems good to the majority of the centuries that the choice of the men be valid, and the auspices concerning them be fair, these men, taking over the axes and the rest of the symbols of royal authority, shall act so that we may dwell with a free country and that the Tarquinii may no longer have a return to it; for they will attempt, know it well, by persuasion and force and guile and every other means, to come back again to the rule, unless we guard against them.

[166494] 75.3. These, then, are the greatest and most important of the things I have to say and advise you at present; but the particulars, being many and not easy now to examine with precision — for we have been gathered for a sharp moment — I think we ought to leave to the very men who shall take over the rule.

[166801] 75.4. I say, however, that the men ought to consider everything with the council of the senate, as the kings did, and to do nothing apart from you, and to bring the resolutions of the senate to the people, as it was the custom of our ancestors to do, taking from it none of the things of which it was master in former times. For thus will their rule be most secure and most honourable."

[167189] 76.1. When Junius Brutus had declared this opinion, all praised it, and at once, deliberating about the men who should take over the leadership, they judged that Spurius Lucretius, the father of her who had killed herself, should be appointed interrex; and that by him those who should have the authority of the kings should be named, Lucius Junius Brutus and Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus.

[167580] 76.2. These magistrates they ordained should be called in their own tongue consuls; this name, interpreted into the Greek tongue, can mean "counsellors" or "foredeliberators," for the Romans call counsels consilia; but in course of time they were named by the Greeks hypatoi ("supreme"), from the greatness of their authority, because they rule over all and hold the highest place. For the ancients called the surpassing and

[168006] 76.3. highest hypaton. Having deliberated and established these things, and having besought the gods with prayers to aid them as they reached after holy and just deeds, they went out into the Forum. And there followed them the servants carrying upon a bier spread with black coverings the corpse, untended and defiled with blood; and ordering it to be set before the senate-house, lofty and conspicuous, they summoned the people into an assembly.

[168454] 76.4. When a crowd had gathered, not only of that then in the Forum but also of that throughout the whole city — for the heralds went through the lanes summoning the people to the Forum — Brutus, mounting the place where it was the custom for those summoning the assemblies to harangue, and stationing the patricians beside him, spoke as follows.

[168802] 77.1. "Being about to make speeches to you, fellow citizens, concerning necessary and common affairs, I wish first to say a few things beforehand about myself. For to some of you, or rather, I know well, to many, I shall seem disturbed in mind, a man not in his right senses attempting to speak about the greatest things, who, being unsound, has need of guardians.

[169168] 77.2. Know, then, that the common supposition which you all had about me as a fool was false and was contrived by no other but myself. And what compelled me to live neither as nature thought fit nor as befitted me, but as it was Tarquinius's wish and seemed likely to profit me, was fear for my life.

[169470] 77.3. For Tarquinius, having killed my father at the same time as he took over the rule, that he might seize his property, which was very great, and having made away by a secret death with my elder brother, who would have avenged his father's death if he were not put out of the way, was not plainly going to spare me either, left bereft of my nearest kin, had I not feigned the assumed folly.

[169865] 77.4. This fiction, being believed by the tyrant, saved me from suffering the same things as they, and has preserved me to the present time; but now for the first time — for the moment has come which I prayed for and awaited — having kept it for this five-and-twentieth year, I lay it aside. So much concerning myself.

[170185] 78.1. The common affairs, for which I summoned you into the assembly, are these. Tarquinius — who got the rule neither according to our ancestral customs and laws, nor, since he got it, however he got it, used it well and in kingly fashion, but has surpassed in outrage and lawlessness all the tyrants that ever existed anywhere — him we, the patricians, meeting together, have resolved to deprive of his authority, a thing that ought to have been done long ago, but which we now do at a fitting moment; and we have summoned you, plebeians, that, declaring our own purpose, we may ask you to become our fellow combatants in working freedom for our country — freedom which neither was it possible for us to share before, ever since Tarquinius held the rule, nor will it be possible hereafter, if we now grow soft.

[170999] 78.2. If, then, I had as much time as I wished, or were about to speak to men ignorant, I would recount all the lawlessnesses of the tyrant, for which he would justly deserve to perish, not once, but many times, in the eyes of all; but since the moment that circumstances give me is brief, in which there is need to say little but to do much, and the words are addressed to men who know, I will remind you of the greatest and most manifest of his deeds, those that can obtain no defence whatever.

[171497] 79.1. This is, fellow citizens, that Tarquinius who, before taking over the rule, made away by poison with Arruns his legitimate brother, because he was unwilling to be wicked, having taken as helper in this abomination that brother's wife, the sister of his own consort, whom this enemy of the gods had long been corrupting;

[171824] 79.2. this is the man who, in the same days and by the same poisons, killed his wedded wife, a modest woman who had become a partner of children with him; and who did not even think fit to clear himself of the calumnies of both poisonings, as though they had not been done by himself, by using a piteous guise and a small pretence of mourning, but, immediately upon doing these marvellous deeds, before the pyres that received the wretched bodies had died down, feasted his friends and celebrated nuptials and led the murderess bride to the chamber of her sister, confirming with her his secret agreements — being the first and only to introduce into the city of the Romans impious and accursed deeds done nowhere in the land of Greek or

[172563] 79.3. barbarian. And what things, plebeians, did he work — the notorious and terrible attempts upon both his fathers-in-law, who were already at the setting of their life? Servius Tullius, the most equitable of kings and the one who did you the most good, he openly slaughtered and did not permit his body to obtain a proper carrying-out or burial;

[172913] 79.4. and Tarquinia, that man's wife, whom it befitted him to honour as a mother, being his father's sister and zealous on his behalf, before she had mourned and done the customary rites for her husband who was beneath the earth, the wretched woman he made away with by the noose — those by whom he was saved and among whom he was reared and whom he was about to succeed after their death, had he waited a little, until the natural death came to them.

[173366] 80.1. But why do I find fault with these things, having so many of his lawlessnesses to accuse, apart from those done to his kinsmen and fathers-in-law — those accomplished against the country and all of us, if indeed one must call them lawlessnesses and not overthrows and abolitions of all the customs and usages? To begin with the leadership, that I may start from this, how did he take it over? Was it as the kings before him? Whence?

[173806] 80.2. Far from it. Those, indeed, were all brought to power by you according to ancestral customs and laws: first, a decree being written by the senate, to which is assigned the preliminary deliberation about all public matters; then interreges being chosen, to whom the council entrusts to decide, from those worthy of the rule, the most fit; after this, the people casting a vote in the elections, with which the law wishes all the greatest matters to be ratified; and upon all these, the auspices and victims and the other signs being favourable, without which there would be no benefit of human zeal and forethought.

[174428] 80.3. Come, then, which of these does any of you know to have occurred when Tarquinius took the rule? What preliminary decree of the council? What decision of interreges? What voting of the people? What favourable auspices? I do not say, though I ought, that, if indeed it was to be well, none of the customary things according to the laws should have been omitted; but if anyone can show even one only of these to have occurred, I do not think fit to slander those omitted. How, then, did he come to power? By arms and force and conspiracies of wicked men, as is the custom of tyrants, against your will and to your displeasure.

[175059] 80.4. Come, then — but since he held the rule, however he got it, has he used it in kingly fashion, emulating the former rulers, who continued saying and doing such things as made the city more prosperous and greater for those who came after than they received it? And who, being of sound mind, would say this, seeing how piteously and badly we have all been treated by him?

[175435] 81.1. Our own calamities, then — those of the patricians — at which even one of our enemies, learning them, would weep, I pass over in silence: that few of many are we left, that from great we have become lowly, that we have come to poverty and terrible want, having fallen from many blessed goods. Those brilliant and powerful and great men, through whom our city was once illustrious, some have perished,

[175843] 81.2. others are exiles from their country. But your affairs, plebeians, how stand they? Has he not taken from you your laws, taken from you your gatherings for sacred rites and sacrifices, stopped those who held elections and voted and assembled about public matters, and compelled you to toil at things deserving shame, like bought slaves — quarrying, cutting timber, bearing burdens, consumed in pits and abysses, getting not the smallest respite from your evils?

[176311] 81.3. What, then, will be the limit of our calamities, and for how long a time, suffering these things, shall we endure, and when shall we recover our ancestral freedom? When Tarquinius dies? By Zeus! And what more shall we have then — what not worse? For we shall have three Tarquinii instead of one,

[176614] 81.4. far more polluted than the father. For where the one who became a tyrant from a private man, and late began to be wicked, perfects all tyrannical wickedness, of what sort must we think those sprung from him will be, whose race is wicked, whose nurture wicked, and who never had occasion either to see or to learn anything political and moderate being done? And that you may not conjecture their accursed natures but learn them exactly — what kind of whelps the tyranny of Tarquinius rears up for you — behold the deed of one of them, the eldest.

[177167] 82.1. This is the daughter of Spurius Lucretius, whom the tyrant appointed prefect of the city when he went out to the war, and the wife of Tarquinius Collatinus, the kinsman of the tyrants and one who suffered much hardship on their behalf. This woman, wishing to be chaste and loving her own husband, as befits a good wife, when Sextus was lodged with her on account of the kinship the past night, Collatinus being then absent at the camp, was unable to escape the licentious outrage of the tyranny, but, like a captive overpowered by necessity, endured to suffer what is not lawful for a free woman to suffer.

[177781] 82.2. Indignant at this and deeming the outrage unbearable, when she had recounted to her father and the other kinsmen the constraints that seized her, having made many entreaties and curses that they should become avengers of her evils, and having drawn the sword hidden beneath her bosom, before her father's eyes, plebeians, she dyed the iron through her own entrails.

[178154] 82.3. O wondrous woman, and worthy of many praises for your noble resolve — you are gone and perished, not having endured tyrannical outrage, disdaining all the pleasures in living, that no such thing might befall you to suffer again. Then you, Lucretia, having got a woman's nature, had the spirit of a noble man; but shall we, being men, prove worse than women in virtue? And to you, because you were tyrannized over for a single night and robbed by force of your unstained honour, death seemed sweeter and more blessed than life; but shall not this same thought come to us, from whom Tarquinius, tyrannizing now not one day but the five-and-twentieth year, has taken away all the pleasures in living, having taken away freedom?

[178886] 82.4. It is not, plebeians, to be endured by us, wallowing in such evils, being the descendants of those men who thought fit to ordain justice for others and undertook many dangers for rule and glory; but one of two things must be chosen by all, either a free life or a glorious death.

[179173] 82.5. And the moment has come, such as we pray for: Tarquinius having departed from the city, the patricians leading the attempt, and nothing being lacking to us, if with zeal we proceed to the work — neither men, nor money, nor arms, nor generals, nor the rest of the equipment for war; for the city is full of all these. And it is shameful to think fit to rule the Volscians and the Sabines and ten thousand others, but ourselves to endure being slaves to others; and concerning the greed of Tarquinius to take up many wars, but concerning our own freedom, none.

[179739] 83.1. By what resources, then, shall we proceed to the work, and by what alliances? For this remains to be said. First, by the hopes from the gods, whose sacred rites and precincts and altars Tarquinius pollutes with his blood-stained hands, full of every kindred abomination, when he begins sacrifices and libations; then by those from ourselves, who are neither few nor inexperienced in war; and besides these, by the aid from the allies, who, if we do not call them, will not think fit to meddle, but, if they see us laying claim to virtue, will gladly join in the war; for tyranny is hateful to all who wish to be free.

[180364] 83.2. But if any of you fear the citizens at the camp with Tarquinius, as ones who will fight along with him and make war on us, they fear wrongly. For to them too the tyranny is grievous, and innate in all men is the longing for freedom, and every pretext for change is sufficient for those who toil by necessity; whom, if you shall vote to aid the country, neither fear will hold among the tyrants, nor favour, nor any other of the things that force or persuade men to do what is

[180847] 83.3. not just. And if in any of them, through evil nature or wicked nurture, the love of tyranny is innate — not many, by Zeus — these too we will yoke with great necessities, so as to become from wicked, good; for we have as hostages in the city their children and wives and parents, which are more precious to each than his own life. These things, then, we will promise to restore to them, if they desert the tyrants, and, voting them immunity for what they have erred, we shall easily persuade them.

[181352] 83.4. Therefore, with confidence, plebeians, and having good hopes for the future, go to the contest, about to undertake the fairest of all the wars you have ever loved. We, then — O ancestral gods, good guardians of this land, and divinities who have been allotted our fathers, and city most beloved of gods among cities, in which we obtained our birth and nurture — will defend you with counsels and words and hands and lives, and are ready to suffer all, whatever the divine power and necessity may bring.

[181862] 83.5. And I divine that upon fair attempts a fortunate end will follow. May it be that all, taking the same courage and using one mind, both save us and be saved by us."

[182033] 84.1. While Brutus was thus haranguing, continuous shouts at each of his statements arose from the multitude, signifying their will and their encouragement, and to most of them tears of pleasure flowed as they heard the marvellous and unexpected words; and various emotions, in no way like one another, seized the soul of each: griefs were mingled with pleasures, the former at the terrible things that had gone before, the latter at the goods expected; and angers fell out along with fears, the angers urging them to disdain safety for the working of evil upon the things they hated, the fears, by the reckoning that the overthrow of the tyranny would not be easy, bringing hesitation to their resolves.

[182739] 84.2. When he ceased speaking, as if from one mouth all cried out the same cry, to lead them to arms. And Brutus, pleased, said: "Provided that you first, having learned the resolutions of the council, ratify what has been decreed. For it has been decreed by us that the Tarquinii be banished from the city of the Romans and from all the country over which the Romans rule, and all the race sprung from them; and that it be lawful for no one either to do or to say anything about the return of the Tarquinii; and if anyone be found acting contrary to this, that he die.

[183310] 84.3. If it is your wish that this resolution be valid, dividing yourselves by curiae, cast your vote, and let this be the first beginning of the right of freedom for you." This was done; and when all the curiae had voted the banishment of the tyrants, Brutus, coming forward again, said: "Since the first things have been ratified by us as was needful, hear also the rest

[183684] 84.4. of what we have deliberated concerning the constitution. To us, considering what magistracy shall be master of public affairs, it no longer seems good to establish a kingship, but to appoint two magistrates each year, who shall have royal authority, whom you shall appoint in the elections by casting your vote according to centuries. If, then, this too is your wish, ratify it by your vote." The people praised this opinion too, and there was no vote against it.

[184155] 84.5. After this Brutus, coming forward, appoints as interrex, to take charge of the elections according to the ancestral laws, Spurius Lucretius; and he, dismissing the assembly, ordered all to come to the plain where it was their custom to hold the elections, bearing their arms, with speed. When they had come, he chooses two men to do all that the kings were permitted to do, Brutus and Collatinus; and the people, called by centuries, ratified the rule for the men. Such, then, were the things done in the city at that time.

[184686] 85.1. King Tarquinius, when he heard from the messengers from the city — who were the first to escape before the gates were shut, reporting only this much, that Brutus held the assembly, demagoguing and calling the citizens to freedom — telling none of the others, hastened, taking up his sons and the most trustworthy of his companions, driving his horses at full rein, to forestall the revolt. But finding the gates shut and the battlements full of arms, he went off again to the camp as fast as he could, groaning and grievously suffering.

[185230] 85.2. But it chanced that affairs there too were already ruined. For the consuls, foreseeing his swift arrival at the city, send letters by other roads to those at the camp, calling on them to revolt from the tyrant and making plain the resolutions of those in the town.

[185502] 85.3. These letters the prefects left by the king, Titus Herminius and Marcus Horatius, having received, read in the assembly; and asking opinions according to centuries what they ought to do, since it seemed good to all to hold valid the things judged by the city, they no longer received Tarquinius when he arrived.

[185821] 85.4. Thrust away from this hope too, the king flees with a few to the city of the Gabini, of which he had appointed king the elder of his sons, Sextus, as I said before — being now grey in age, but having held the kingship twenty-five years. And Herminius and Horatius, having established a truce of the war with the Ardeates for fifteen years, led off the forces homeward. The royal constitution, then, having lasted, after the founding of Rome, two hundred and forty-four years in number, and having, under the last king, become a tyranny, was, for these causes and by these men, dissolved.