WORK: Antiquitates Romanae  (slug: dionysius-of-halicarnass-antiquitates-romanae-97af98)

CHAPTER: 06-book-6



[0] 1.1. Those who succeeded to the consular office in the following year, Aulus Sempronius Atratinus and Marcus Minucius, in the seventy-first Olympiad—the one in which Tisicrates of Croton won the foot-race, Hipparchus being archon at Athens—accomplished nothing in their term that was worthy of record, whether in war or in domestic affairs. For the truce with the Latins afforded the city much respite from foreign wars, and the suspension of the recovery of debts, which the senate had decreed should hold until the expected war reached a safe conclusion, put an end to the disturbances within the walls that the poor were stirring up by demanding that their debts be publicly cancelled.

[690] 1.2. They also ratified a most equitable decree of the senate: that, if any women of Roman stock happened to be living as wives with Latin men, or Latin women with Romans, they should be their own mistresses, free either to remain with their husbands or, if they did not wish to, to return to their native cities; that of their offspring the males should remain with their fathers, while the females, so long as they were still unmarried, should follow their mothers. Now it chanced that very many women had been given in marriage into one another's cities, both through kinship and through friendship; and these, having received the freedom granted them by the decree, showed how great a longing they had to live in Rome.

[1414] 1.3. For almost all the Roman women in the Latin cities left their husbands and returned to their fathers, and of the Latin women married to Romans all but two, scorning their native cities, remained with their husbands—a happy omen that the city was destined to prevail in the war.

[1698] 1.4. It was in the term of these consuls, they say, that the temple was dedicated to Saturn beside the ascent leading from the Forum up to the Capitol, and that festivals and sacrifices at public expense were instituted to the god each year. Before this, they say, an altar had been set up on the same spot, built by Hercules, on which those who received the sacred rites from him offered the first-fruits by fire in the Greek manner. As to the beginning of the temple's foundation, some relate that Titus Larcius, who had been consul the year before, undertook it, while others say it was even King Tarquinius, the one who was driven from power; but the dedication of the temple, they agree, was performed by Postumus Cominius in accordance with a decree of the senate. To these consuls, then, it fell, as I have said, to enjoy a profound peace.

[2546] 2.1. After them Aulus Postumius and Titus Verginius succeeded to the office. In their term the year's truce with the Latins had run out, and great preparations for war were being made on both sides. The whole body of the Romans was willing and advanced upon the contest with much eagerness, whereas the greater part of the Latins was reluctant and constrained by necessity—nearly all the men of power in their cities having been corrupted by gifts and promises from Tarquinius and Mamilius, while the common people, who did not wish for the war, were debarred from any concern in public affairs.

[3143] 2.2. For no voice was any longer granted to those who wished to speak. Many therefore, chafing at this, were forced to abandon their cities and desert to the Romans; for those who had made the cities their own personal property did not think fit to prevent it, but knew much gratitude was owed by their rivals for this voluntary exile. The Romans, receiving them, enrolled those who came with their wives and children in the armies within the walls, mingling them with the citizen centuries; the rest they sent off to the forts around the city and distributed among the colonies, keeping them under guard lest they attempt any revolution.

[3783] 2.3. When all had reached the same conviction—that the conduct of affairs must once more be entrusted to a single magistracy, irresponsible and free to administer everything by its own judgment—Aulus Postumius, the younger of the consuls, was appointed dictator by his colleague Verginius. He himself chose as his Master of the Horse, in the same manner as the former dictator had done, Titus Aebutius Elva. Having within a short time enrolled all the Romans of military age and divided the force into four parts, he himself led one division, appointed his colleague Verginius to command another, Aebutius the Master of the Horse the third, and over the fourth he left Aulus Sempronius as prefect, to whom he committed the guarding of the city.

[4529] 3.1. When he had prepared everything needful for the war, his scouts came reporting that the Latins had marched out in full force; and again others made it known that a strong place called Corbio had been taken by them at the first assault, in which a small Roman garrison had been quartered. Having destroyed it entirely and seized the place itself, they made it a base for the war. But they captured no slaves or cattle in the fields, except those caught in Corbio, since the farmers had long since carried off to the nearest strongholds whatever each was able to bear and drive away; their houses, left empty, the enemy burned, and they ravaged the land.

[5188] 3.2. There came to the Latins, when they had already taken the field, from Antium—the most distinguished city of the Volscian nation—a considerable army, together with arms, grain, and whatever else they needed for the war. Greatly emboldened by this, they were in good hope, expecting that the rest of the Volscians too would join in the war once the city of the Antiates had made a beginning.

[5584] 3.3. Learning of this, Postumius marched out with all speed before all the enemy could assemble; and leading his army by night in a forced march, he came near to the Latins, who were encamped beside a lake called Regillus in a strong position, and he pitched his camp directly above the enemy on a high and difficult hill, where by holding his ground he was likely to gain many advantages.

[5975] 4.1. The Latin commanders, Octavius of Tusculum, son-in-law of King Tarquinius (or, as some write, the son of his son-in-law), and Sextus Tarquinius—for at that time they happened to be encamped apart from one another—brought their forces together into one place, and taking with them their tribunes and centurions, considered what the conduct of the war should be.

[6342] 4.2. Many opinions were expressed. Some thought best to march at once against those who had with the dictator seized the mountain, while they were still formidable, holding that the occupation of strong positions was a sign not of safety but of cowardice. Others advised hemming them in with some small guard by entrenchment, while taking the rest of the force on against Rome, which would be easy to capture now that the flower of its youth had marched out. Still others advised waiting for the help of the Volscians and the other allies, choosing the safer course over the bolder: for the Romans, they said, would gain nothing from the lapse of time, whereas for themselves delay would make their affairs the stronger.

[7064] 4.3. While they were still deliberating, the other of the consuls, Titus Verginius, arrived from Rome with the force he had with him, appearing suddenly after completing the march in the preceding night, and he encamped apart from the dictator on another ridge, very mountainous and strong; so that on both sides the Latins were cut off from their sorties into the enemy's country, the consul sitting before the parts on the left and the dictator before those on the right.

[7539] 4.4. And as still greater confusion gripped the commanders—who had chosen nothing beyond what was safe—and fear that, by delaying, they would be forced to consume their own resources, which were not abundant, Postumius, perceiving how great was their inexperience in generalship, sent the Master of the Horse, Titus Aebutius, leading the freshest of the cavalry and light-armed troops, ordering him to seize a certain mountain well placed on the route by which provisions were being conveyed to the Latins from home. And the force sent with the Master of the Horse, marching by night and passing through trackless woodland, gained possession of the height before the enemy could perceive it.

[8232] 5.1. When the enemy's generals learned that the positions in their rear were being seized and that they no longer had good hopes that their provisions from home would be safely conveyed to them, they resolved to dislodge the Romans from the hill before they should strengthen it with rampart and ditch.

[8536] 5.2. Taking the cavalry, one of them, Sextus, drove it forward at full speed, expecting that the Roman horse would not withstand him. But the Roman cavalry nobly received the assault, and for a while he held out, wheeling and charging again. But when the nature of the ground gave great advantages to those who already held the heights, while to those attacking from below it brought nothing but very many blows and fruitless toil; and when, moreover, another force of picked men from the infantry phalanx had come up to support the Romans, which Postumius had sent at their heels—then, being able to accomplish nothing further, he led the cavalry back to the camp; and the Romans, securely holding the place, openly strengthened their guard there.

[9286] 5.3. After this action it seemed best to Mamilius and Sextus not to let much time pass in between, but to decide matters by a swift battle. As for the dictator of the Romans, who at the outset had been so disposed in his purpose as to hope to end the war without a battle—and to do so above all through the inexperience of the opposing generals—it then seemed best to him to advance to the contest. For certain messengers had been captured by the cavalry guarding the roads, bearing letters from the Volscians to the Latin generals, declaring that many forces would come to their aid in about three days, and again others from the Hernicans.

[9929] 5.4. These were the things that imposed upon their commanders a swift necessity of giving battle, which they had till then not chosen. When the signals for battle had been raised on both sides, both armies advanced into the space between and arrayed their forces thus: Sextus Tarquinius was posted on the left wing of the Latins, Octavius Mamilius on the right, and the centre was held by the other of Tarquinius' sons, Titus, where also the Roman deserters and exiles were stationed. The cavalry, divided into three, were assigned to both wings and to those drawn up in the centre,

[10513] 5.5. the phalanx. Of the Roman army, the left wing was held by the Master of the Horse, Titus Aebutius, opposite Octavius Mamilius; the right by Titus Verginius the consul, holding a position opposite Sextus Tarquinius; while the centre of the phalanx the dictator Postumius himself filled, intending to engage Titus Tarquinius and the exiles about him. The number of the force that came together for the battle from each army was: of the Romans, foot soldiers three hundred short of twenty-four thousand, and a thousand cavalry; of the Latins, with their allies, about forty thousand foot and three thousand horse.

[11130] 6.1. As they were about to come to grips, the Latin generals called their men together and rehearsed many appeals to valour and long exhortations to the soldiers; and the Roman, seeing his own men afraid because they were about to engage a multitude far exceeding their own, and wishing to remove the fear from their minds, summoned them to an assembly. Setting beside him the eldest and most honoured of the senatorial council, he spoke as follows:

[11581] 6.2. "The gods, by omens and victims and the other forms of divination, promise us that they will grant freedom to the city and a fortunate victory, rendering us good returns in exchange for our having continued throughout our life to revere them and to practise justice, and being justly indignant at our enemies—who, though they have received many great benefits from us, being our kinsmen and friends and having sworn to hold the same men enemies and friends, have despised all this and bring an unjust war against us, not over rule and dominion, as to which of us should rather possess it—for that would be the less terrible—but on behalf of the tyranny of the Tarquins, that they may make the city their slave instead of free.

[12314] 6.3. "You too, men, both centurions and soldiers, must learn that you have the gods as allies—those who always preserve the city—and prove yourselves brave men in this contest, knowing that the help of the gods comes to those who fight nobly and bring everything in their power eagerly to the winning, not to those who flee from dangers, but to those willing to toil on their own behalf. We have many other advantages prepared by fortune for victory, but three are the fairest and most manifest of all.

[12818] 7.1. "First, mutual loyalty, of which those who mean to overcome their enemies have most need. For you do not need to begin today to be steadfast friends and faithful comrades to one another; your country has long since prepared this good thing for you all. For you were reared together and shared a common upbringing, you sacrificed to the gods at the same altars, you have enjoyed many blessings and have undergone many hardships in common—from which strong and indissoluble friendships are by nature compounded among all men. Next, the contest concerning the greatest things is common to all.

[13415] 7.2. "For if you fall into the enemy's power, it will not be that some of you will suffer nothing terrible while others suffer the worst; rather, all alike will have lost their dignity, their leadership, and their freedom; and you will enjoy neither wives nor children nor property nor any other of the goods you possess, while those who lead the city and administer the public affairs will die the most pitiable death amid torture and torment.

[13861] 7.3. "For when men who have suffered no evil from us, neither great nor small, have committed many and various outrages against you all, what must we expect them to do should they now prevail in arms, remembering with rancour that you expelled them from the city, took away their property, and do not even

[14168] 7.4. "permit them to set foot on their fathers' land? Last of all the advantages I have mentioned—and you would say it is no less than any other, if you consider rightly—is that the enemy have not turned out for us such as we supposed, but far inferior to their reputation. For apart from the help of the Antiates, you see no others present sharing the war with them; whereas we supposed that all the Volscians would come as their allies, and many of the Sabines and Hernicans, and we fashioned for ourselves countless other fears in vain. But all these were Latin dreams, holding empty promises and unfulfilled hopes. For some have abandoned their aid out of contempt for the generals at the levy; others will delay rather than help, wearing away the time in hopes; and others, now in the midst of their preparations, having come too late for the battle, will be of no further use to them.

[15060] 8.1. "But if any of you think these things are rightly said, yet are afraid of the multitude of the enemy, let them learn by a brief lesson—or rather a reminder—not to fear what is not to be feared. First, let them reflect that the larger part among the enemy is that which has been compelled to take up arms against us, as has been shown to us by many deeds and words, while the part fighting willingly and eagerly on behalf of the tyrants is very small—indeed but a tiny fraction of our own. Next, that all wars are won not by those greater in numbers but by those superior in valour.

[15648] 8.2. "It would be a long task to bring forward examples—how many barbarian and Greek armies, far surpassing in numbers, very small forces have overcome, so that the accounts of them are not even credible to most men. I pass over the rest; but you yourselves—how many wars have you brought to a good issue with a smaller force than you now have, arrayed against enemies with preparations greater than these? Come, are you formidable to all the others whom you have conquered in battle, yet to these Latins and their Volscian allies contemptible, because they have never made trial of your fighting? But you all know that our fathers conquered both these nations in many battles.

[16327] 8.3. "Is it reasonable, then, that the affairs of the conquered should, after such disasters, be the stronger, and those of the conquerors, after such great successes, the weaker? And who in his right mind would say this? I should be amazed if any of you dreads the multitude of the enemy, in which there is little of the noble, yet despises his own force, which is so large and good, than which never in any war before this has a force superior in valour or greater in number been brought against us.

[16830] 9.1. "And this too, citizens, is the greatest encouragement neither to fear nor to shun dangers: that all the foremost men of the senatorial council are present, as you see, to share with you the fortunes of the war—men whom from military service both their age

[17093] 9.2. "and the law have released. Is it not, then, shameful that you, who are in your prime, should flee dangers, while these men beyond the age pursue them; that the eagerness of the old, since it cannot kill any of the enemy, at least is willing to die for the country, while your vigorous strength—you who, if fortunate, may save both and conquer in safety, or if not, may, along with doing some noble deed, also suffer—should neither make trial of fortune nor leave behind a reputation for valour?

[17595] 9.3. "Is it not for you, men of Rome, that, while many wondrous deeds belong to others, whom no speech will worthily celebrate, your race should reap many famous deeds of its own, if you bring this war too to a good issue? But that the noble conduct of those of you who have resolved on the best things may not go unrewarded, and that the cowardice of those who fear danger beyond what is fitting may not go unpunished, before we come to this, hear from me what shall befall each of the two sorts.

[18094] 9.4. "To whoever, having done some fair or noble deed in the battle, those who witnessed his deeds bear testimony, I will at once render the other honours which it is each man's right to receive by ancestral custom, and I will add besides a portion of land out of what the state possesses, enough to ensure he lacks none of the necessaries; but on whomever his evil and god-stricken mind casts a longing for shameful flight, on him I will set near at hand the very death he flees. For such a citizen, by dying, would be better both for himself and for the others; and it shall be the lot of those who so die to share in neither burial nor the other customary rites, but, unenvied and unwept, to be torn by birds and beasts.

[18819] 9.5. "Knowing this beforehand, then, advance eagerly, all of you, to the contest, taking as leaders of noble deeds your noble hopes—since in this single danger, should it reach the best and most longed-for issue for all, you will gain the greatest goods: freeing yourselves from the fear of tyrants, repaying to the city that bore you the just thanks she demands for your rearing, not allowing your children, those of you who still have infants, and your wedded wives to suffer irreparable harm at the hands of enemies, and making your aged fathers live their little remaining time most pleasantly.

[19419] 9.6. "O blessed are those to whom it shall be granted to lead home the triumph from this war, with children and wives and fathers welcoming you; and glorious and enviable for their valour are those who shall give their bodies for the country. For to die is owed by all men, both bad and good; but to die nobly and gloriously belongs to the good alone."

[19773] 10.1. While he was still speaking the words urging them to valour, a kind of divine boldness fell upon the army, and as if from a single soul they all cried out together: "Have courage, and lead on." And Postumius, praising their eagerness and vowing to the gods that, if a fortunate and noble issue should follow the battle, he would perform great sacrifices at much cost and establish costly games, which the Roman people would hold every

[20215] 10.2. year, dismissed them to their posts. When they had received the watchword from the commanders and the trumpets sounded the calls to battle, they advanced with a war-cry to the encounter, first the light-armed troops and cavalry from both sides, then the foot phalanxes, which had like arms and like formations; and a fierce contest arose with all fighting mingled together, the whole battle hand to hand.

[20627] 10.3. The result was much contrary to the expectation of both. For neither side had hoped to need a battle, but each supposed it would terrify the enemy at the first onset—the Latins trusting in the multitude of their cavalry, of which not even the noise, they thought, would the Roman horse endure; the Romans, that by advancing boldly and recklessly upon dangers they would strike panic into the enemy. Having each conceived this of the other, they saw at the outset the contrary come to pass. And no longer reckoning the fear of their opponents, but their own boldness, the cause of their safety and victory, both sides showed themselves good fighters, even beyond their strength. And the fortunes of the contest about them were varied and quickly shifting.

[21389] 11.1. First, then, the Romans posted in the centre of the phalanx, where the dictator Postumius was with picked cavalry about him, himself fighting among the foremost, thrust back the part opposite them, when one of the sons of Tarquinius, Titus, was wounded in the right shoulder by a javelin and could no longer

[21704] 11.2. use his arm. For Licinius and Gellius, having examined neither what was probable nor what was possible, bring in King Tarquinius himself fighting on horseback and being wounded—a man approaching ninety years of age. When Titus had fallen, those about him fought a short while and, taking up his body still living, did nothing further of note, but retreated step by step before the advancing Romans; then again they made a stand and came to grips, when the other of Tarquinius' sons, Sextus, came to their aid with the exiles from Rome and the other picked cavalry.

[22276] 11.3. These, then, rallying again, fought; while the commanders of each phalanx, Titus Aebutius and Mamilius Octavius, fighting most brilliantly of all, routing those who withstood them wherever they advanced and replacing the disordered among their own, came to grips on a challenge; and clashing together they dealt one another mighty blows, though not mortal—the Master of the Horse driving his spear-point into the breast of Mamilius through his cuirass, and Mamilius piercing through the middle of the other's right arm. And they fell from their horses.

[22836] 12.1. When both had been carried out of the battle, Marcus Valerius, the legate next appointed, having taken over the command of the Master of the Horse, took his stand with the cavalry about him against those opposite, and after holding out a short while was quickly thrust far back from his position; and to these too came aid from the exiles from Rome, both cavalry and light-armed; and Mamilius, having recovered from his wound, was now again present, leading a strong body of cavalry and infantry. In this contest the legate Marcus Valerius—the man who first led home the triumph over the Sabines and raised up the city's spirit, humbled by the Tyrrhenian defeat—was struck by a spear and fell, and about him many other brave Romans.

[23576] 12.2. Over his fall a fierce contest arose, Publius and Marcus, the sons of Publicola, shielding their uncle. Him they raised up, unspoiled of his arms and still a little breathing, and gave to the shield-bearers to carry to the camp; while they themselves, thrusting into the midst of the enemy through resolve and eagerness, and receiving many wounds, when the exiles poured around them in a body, died together.

[23992] 12.3. After this disaster the Roman phalanx was thrust back far from the left and was breaking apart as far as the centre. Then the dictator, learning of the rout of his men, hastened to the rescue, leading the cavalry about him. Ordering the other legate, Titus Herminius, to take a squadron of cavalry and pass behind his own phalanx and turn back the fugitives—and if they would not obey, to kill them—he himself, with the bravest, thrust against the throng; and when he came near the enemy he was the first to drive his horse in with the reins let loose.

[24552] 12.4. The charge being made in a mass and terrifying, the enemy did not withstand its frenzy and ferocity, but were routed and fell in numbers. Meanwhile the legate Herminius, having rallied those who had taken fright at the rout of their own, led them against the men formed about Mamilius; and falling upon Mamilius—who was the greatest of stature and in strength the best of all men of his time—he killed him, and himself, while stripping the corpse, was struck through the flank by someone's sword and died.

[25065] 12.5. Sextus Tarquinius, commanding the left wing of the Latins, still held out against the perils and was thrusting those on the right wing of the Romans from their position; but when he saw Postumius bearing down with the picked cavalry, despairing of all hope he flung himself into their midst. There, encircled by the Roman cavalry and infantry and pelted from every side like a wild beast, he died, not without killing many of those who came to grips. When the commanders had fallen, an immediate general flight of all the Latins ensued, and their camp, left deserted by its guards, was captured—whence the Romans took many fine spoils.

[25708] 12.6. This was the greatest disaster that befell the Latins, by which they were most grievously crippled, and a destruction of lives such as had never been before. For of forty thousand foot and three thousand horse, as I have said, fewer than ten thousand survived to come safe to their homes.

[26004] 13.1. In this battle, it is said, there appeared to the dictator Postumius and those drawn up about him two horsemen, far surpassing in beauty and stature those whom our nature brings forth, just beginning to grow their beards, leading the Roman horse and striking with their spears the Latins who came to grips and driving them headlong. And after the rout of the Latins and the capture of their camp, the battle having ended toward late evening, in the Roman Forum there appeared in the same manner, it is said, two young men, clothed in warlike garb, tallest and most beautiful and of the same age, themselves preserving on their faces, as of men come from battle, the look of contest, and leading horses dripping with sweat.

[26734] 13.2. Having watered each of the horses and washed them at the spring which rises beside the temple of Vesta, making a small deep pool, when many gathered round them and asked to learn whether they brought any public news from the camp, they told them of the battle, how it had gone and that they were victorious; and when they had withdrawn from the Forum, they were, it is said, seen by no one further, though the magistrate left in charge of the city made

[27194] 13.3. much search for them. When on the following day those in charge of public affairs received the letters from the dictator and, along with all the other events of the battle, learned also of the epiphany of the divinities, they concluded, as was likely, that both apparitions were of the same gods, and were persuaded that the figures were of the Dioscuri.

[27556] 13.4. Of this marvellous and astonishing epiphany of the divinities there are many tokens in Rome: the temple of the Dioscuri which the city built in the Forum, where the figures were seen, and the fountain beside it, which to this day is called by the name of these gods and is considered sacred; and the costly sacrifices which the people perform each year through the chief priests in the month called Quintilis, on the so-called Ides, the day on which they brought this war to a good issue; and above all these, the procession performed after the sacrifice by those who hold the public horse, who, arranged by tribes and centuries, ride in rank upon their horses, all proceeding as if come from battle, crowned with sprays of olive and clad in purple togas bordered with scarlet, called trabeae, beginning from a certain temple of Mars outside the city and passing through the rest of the city and through the Forum past the temple of the Dioscuri—sometimes as many as five thousand men, bearing all the awards of valour they received from their commanders in the battles: a fair sight worthy of the greatness of the empire. These, then, were the things said and done by the Romans concerning the epiphany of the Dioscuri that I have learned;

[28804] 13.5. from which one might infer, along with many other great proofs, how dear to the gods the men of that time were.

[28923] 14.1. Postumius encamped that night in the plain, and on the next day, having crowned those who had distinguished themselves in the battle and distributed the prisoners to be guarded, he sacrificed the thank-offerings for victory to the gods. While the crown was still upon him and he was placing the burnt first-fruits upon the altars, certain scouts ran down from the heights and announced that an enemy army was marching against them. It was a chosen body of the prime of the Volscian nation, sent as an ally to the Latins before their battle had been fought.

[29487] 14.2. When he learned this, he ordered all to go to arms and to remain in the camp, each man by his own standard, keeping silence and order until he himself should command what must be done. The Volscian commanders, having pitched camp within view of the Romans, when they saw the plain full of corpses, both camps standing, and no one coming forth from the strongholds, neither enemy nor friend, for a while marvelled and were at a loss to conjecture what fortune had befallen the affairs. When from those escaping the rout they had learned all about the contest, they considered with the other commanders

[30095] 14.3. what was to be done. To the boldest of them it seemed best to march at once against the Roman camp, while many were spent with wounds, all were exhausted with toil, and the arms of most were useless—some blunted at the edge, others broken—and while no fresh aid from home was yet present to them, whereas their own force, being large and good and well armed, experienced in war, and present unexpectedly to men who did not look for it, would seem formidable even to the most daring.

[30585] 15.1. But to the most prudent the venture seemed unsafe: for brave men, lately having overthrown so great a force of the Latins, to be about to come to grips without allies, and to undertake the contest concerning the greatest things in a foreign land, where, if any reverse should occur, they would have no safe refuge. These men thought it better rather to provide quickly for their safe return home, and to reckon it great gain if they should reap no evil from the expedition.

[31066] 15.2. To others it seemed best to do neither of these, declaring the readiness for the contest to be rash and the strangeness of flight homeward shameful, since the enemy would take, just as they wished, whichever of the two they did. The opinion of these men was: for the present to strengthen their camp and make ready for the contest, and, sending to the rest of the Volscians, to demand one of two things—either to send another sufficient force against the Romans,

[31536] 15.3. or even to recall the one already sent. But the counsel that seemed most persuasive to the majority and was ratified by those in authority advised this: to send some men into the Roman camp as spies under the name of envoys, that they might have safety; these would greet the commander and say that, as allies of the Romans come from the Volscian commonwealth, they were vexed at having come too late for the battle, since they would carry off little or no thanks for their zeal, but rejoiced at the fortune of the Romans, who had won a great contest without allies. Having deceived them by the kindly tone of their words and made them trust them as friends, they would observe everything and on their return report the number of the enemy, their armament, their preparations, and whether they had any plans in mind. And when these things were accurately made clear to them, then they should propose deliberation, whether it were better to attack them, having summoned another force, or to lead away the present one.

[32560] 16.1. When they had adopted this opinion and the envoys chosen by them came to the dictator and were brought before the assembly and rehearsed their deceiving words, Postumius, after waiting a short while, said to them: "You have come, O Volscians, having clothed wicked counsels in honest words; and, doing the deeds of enemies, you wish to carry off the reputation of friends.

[32940] 16.2. "For you were sent by your commonwealth to aid the Latins against us; but since you have come too late for the battle and see them defeated, you wish to deceive us by saying the contrary of what you intended to do. And neither the kindliness of your words, which you feign for the present occasion, nor the pretext of your coming hither is sound, but it is full of guile and deceit. For you were sent forth not to rejoice in our good fortune, but to spy out how matters stand with us as to weakness or strength; and you are envoys in word, but spies in deed."

[33507] 16.3. When the men denied everything, he said he would soon furnish them proof; and at once he produced their letters, which he had captured before the battle being carried to the Latin commanders, in which they promised to send them aid, and he brought forward those who bore them. When the letters had been read and the prisoners had related the instructions they had received, the multitude rushed to pelt the Volscians with stones as spies caught in the very act; but Postumius did not think the good ought to become like the bad, saying it was better and more magnanimous to keep one's anger for those who sent them than for those sent, and, on account of the open name of the embassy, to release the men, rather than, on account of the hidden work of spying, to destroy them—that they might neither give the Volscians a specious pretext for war by alleging that the persons of envoys had been killed contrary to the law of all men, nor furnish the others a ground of enmity, even if false, yet not unreasonable nor incredible.

[34541] 17.1. Having restrained the impulse of the multitude, he ordered the men to depart without looking back, handing them over to a guard of cavalry, who escorted them to the Volscian camp. Having thrust out the spies, he charged the soldiers to make ready for battle, as he would draw up his line on the following day. But he had no need of battle: for the Volscian commanders, while it was still deep night, roused their army and went off to

[34982] 17.2. their homes. When all had succeeded for him according to his prayer, having buried his own dead and purified the army, he returned to the city, distinguished by a magnificent triumph, conveying a heap of arms on many wagons and bringing in abundant stores of military goods, and leading those captured in the battle, five hundred short of six thousand. From the spoils he set apart the tithes and held games and sacrifices to the gods at a cost of forty talents, and let out by contract the building of temples to Demeter, Dionysus, and Cora,

[35532] 17.3. according to his vow. For provisions for the war had run short at the beginning and caused them much fear of failing, both because the land had become barren and because the foreign supply was no longer being conveyed in on account of the war. On account of this fear he ordered the keepers of the Sibylline books to consult them; and when he learned that the oracles bade them propitiate these gods, he made vows to them, as he was about to lead out the army, that, if there should be good seasons throughout the city during his magistracy, such as there had been before, he would dedicate temples to them and institute

[36160] 17.4. sacrifices each year. And they, hearkening, caused the land to yield rich crops, not only the arable but also the tree-bearing, and made all the imported supplies flow in more abundantly than before. Seeing this, Postumius himself decreed the building of these temples. The Romans, then, having repelled the tyrannic war by the goodwill of the gods, occupied themselves in festivals and sacrifices.

[36566] 18.1. A few days later envoys came to them from the Latin commonwealth, chosen out of all the cities—those who held the opposing opinion concerning the war—holding before them suppliant boughs and fillets. These, being brought before the senate, declared that the men of power in the cities were the cause of the war's beginning; the common people, they said, had erred in this one thing only, that they had been persuaded by wicked demagogues who had contrived private gains.

[37044] 18.2. For this deceit, in which the greater part was due to necessity, they said each city had paid no slight penalty, the flower of its youth being destroyed, so that it was not easy to find a house clear of mourning; and they begged the Romans to receive them, who came neither still contending over rule nor striving for equality, but ready to be allies and subjects for all the remaining time, and to add to the good fortune of the Romans all that the divinity had taken from the dignity of the Latins.

[37552] 18.3. At the close of their speech they appealed to kinship, reminded them of alliances once made without pretext, and bewailed the disasters about to overtake those who had done no wrong, who were far more numerous than the wrongdoers; lamenting at every point and clasping the knees of the whole senate and placing their suppliant boughs at the feet of Postumius—so that the whole council was moved at their tears and entreaties.

[37985] 19.1. When they had withdrawn from the senate-house and speech was given to those accustomed to declare their opinions, Titus Larcius, who had been the first appointed dictator the year before, advised them to husband their fortune, saying that the greatest praise of a whole city, as of a single man, is if it be not corrupted by prosperity, but bears its good things graciously and with moderation.

[38387] 19.2. For all good fortunes are envied, he said, especially those to which is joined insolence and harshness toward the humbled and those who have come into one's power; and he urged them not to trust fortune, having often had experience of her in their own evils and goods, how unstable and quick-shifting she is; nor to impose upon their adversaries the necessity of the uttermost dangers, on account of which men become daring even beyond their judgment and fighters

[38858] 19.3. beyond their strength. He said he feared lest they draw upon themselves the common hatred of all whom they thought fit to rule, if they exact bitter and inexorable penalties from the wrongdoers, as having departed from their accustomed practices—through which they rose to eminence—forgetting them, and having made their rule a tyranny rather than, as before, a leadership and protectorate. The faults, he said, were moderate and not deserving of indignation, if certain cities, clinging to freedom and having once learned to rule, do not let go their ancient claim. But if those who reach for the highest things are to be punished irremediably should they fail of their hope, there would be nothing to prevent all men from being destroyed by one another; for the longing for freedom is innate in all.

[39667] 19.4. And he declared that rule is much better and more secure which wishes to prevail over its subjects by benefits, not by punishments; for the one is followed by goodwill, the other by fear, and it is a necessity of nature that all things terrible be most hated. At the close of his speech he urged them to use as examples the best deeds of their forefathers, for which those men were praised, recounting how many cities taken by storm they, not razing them nor slaying the men of military age nor enslaving them, but making them colonies of Rome and granting citizenship to those of the conquered who wished to dwell among them, made the city great out of small. The sum of his opinion was to renew the treaty with the Latin commonwealth which they had made before, and to bear no rancour against any city for any of its offences.

[40503] 20.1. Servius Sulpicius made no objection concerning the peace and the renewal of the treaty; but, since it was the Latins who had first broken the treaties—and not now for the first time, so that some pardon were owed them as men putting forward necessity and deceit, but many times already before, so that they needed correction—he advised that impunity and freedom be conceded to all on account of kinship, but that half their land be taken from them and Roman colonists be sent to it, who should both cultivate it and

[41026] 20.2. ensure that the men attempt no further revolution. But Spurius Cassius advised destroying their cities, saying he marvelled at the simplicity of those who advised letting their offences go unpunished—if indeed they could not perceive that, on account of the innate and unremovable envy which they bear toward the city's growth, they contrive war after war and will never of their own will cease from their treacherous purpose so long as this wretched passion dwells in their souls; men who in the end attempted to make their kindred city subject to a tyrant, the most savage of all beasts, overturning all their covenants made before the gods, stirred by no other hopes than this: that if the war should not go as they wished, they would suffer no penalty, or

[41793] 20.3. a very small one. He too thought fit to use as examples the deeds of their forefathers, who, when they perceived that the city of the Albans—from which they themselves and all the Latin cities had been colonised—envied their good fortune, and had made the impunity it had obtained for its first offences a starting-point for greater treachery, resolved to destroy it in a single day; judging that to pity none of those who err moderately is on a par with punishing none of those who do the greatest and

[42303] 20.4. irreparable wrongs. And it is a work of great folly and insensibility—not of humanity nor of moderation—when they had not endured to suffer the envy of those who colonised them, since it seemed harsh and unbearable beyond what was fitting, to endure that of their own race; and when they had punished by the loss of their city enemies convicted in lesser trials, to exact no penalty from those who had often shown an implacable hatred.

[42746] 20.5. Having said this and enumerated all the revolts of the Latins, and reminded them how great was the number of Romans destroyed in the wars with them, he urged them to deal with these in the same manner in which they had dealt with the Albans before: to destroy their cities and add their territory to that of the Romans; of the men, to make those who had shown any goodwill toward them, keeping their own possessions, citizens, but to put to death as traitors the authors of the revolt, by whom the treaties had been broken; and to reckon as slaves whatever of the people was poor, idle, and useless.

[43353] 21.1. These, then, were the things said by the leading men of the senate. But since the dictator chose the opinion of Larcius and no one further spoke to the contrary, the envoys were called in and brought before the council to receive their answers. And Postumius, reproaching them with their wickedness, which could never be brought to its senses, said: "It would be just that you should suffer the worst, seeing that you yourselves were about to do the same, had you succeeded in the courses you often took against us. Yet the Romans do not prefer their rights to fair dealing, reckoning that you are kinsmen and have fled for refuge to the mercy of the wronged; but even these offences they release to you unpunished, both for the sake of the kindred gods and of inscrutable fortune, from which they obtained their power.

[44180] 21.2. "Now, then," he said, "freed from all fear, depart; and if you release the prisoners and hand over to us the deserters and drive out the exiles, then send to us envoys to treat of friendship and alliance, as men who will fail of nothing reasonable." The envoys departed with these answers, and after a few days came having freed the prisoners, leading in bonds the deserters they had caught, and having driven the exiles with Tarquinius out of the cities. In return they obtained from the senate their ancient friendship and alliance, and the oaths once made concerning these were renewed through the fetial priests. Thus the war that had arisen against the tyrants, lasting fourteen years from their expulsion, reached such an end.

[44920] 21.3. Tarquinius the king—for he alone of the family was still left—being now about ninety years old at this time, having lost his children and the house of his kinsmen, and dragging out a pitiable old age among enemies, since neither the Latins received him any longer in their cities, nor the Tyrrhenians, nor the Sabines, nor any other neighbouring free city, went off to Campanian Cumae, to Aristodemus surnamed the Effeminate, who was then tyrant of the Cumaeans; with whom, after living a small number of days, he died and was buried by him. Of the exiles with him, some remained in Cumae, and others, scattered among various cities, ended their lives in a foreign land.

[45598] 22.1. When the Romans had brought their open wars to an end, civil strife rose up again. The senate had voted to seat the courts and that the disputes which had been deferred on account of the war should be tried according to the laws. But the disputes concerning contracts had advanced to great storms and dreadful absurdities and shamelessness, the commoners pretending an inability to discharge their debts—their land having been ravaged in the long war, their cattle destroyed, their slaves grown scarce through desertions and raids, and their property in the city consumed by the expenses of the campaign—while the creditors said these disasters had befallen all alike, and not the debtors only, and thought it intolerable that they should lose not only what they had been deprived of by the enemy through the war, but also what they had lent in peace to citizens in need.

[46477] 22.2. With the creditors refusing to submit to anything moderate and the debtors refusing to do anything just—the one not even remitting the interest, the others not even discharging the principal of the contracts—from this there were now gatherings in bands of those in like fortunes, and counter-musters in the Forum, and at times even brawls; and the whole civic order was thrown into confusion.

[46877] 22.3. Seeing this, Postumius resolved, while he still held equal honour from all, to slip out gracefully from the civic storms, as from a grievous war; and before fulfilling the last term of his autocratic office, he abjured the dictatorship and, appointing a day for the elections, together with his colleague restored the ancestral magistracies.

[47226] 23.1. So the consuls again took up the annual and lawful office, Appius Claudius Sabinus and Publius Servilius Priscus, who rightly saw the highest expedient—that the tumult within the walls must be diverted to wars abroad—and prepared to lead out one of them with an army against the Volscian nation, both wishing to punish them for the alliance sent against the Romans to the Latins, and to forestall their preparations while these were still small. For those people too were reported to be enrolling forces already with all zeal and sending embassies to the neighbouring nations inviting them to alliance, having learned that the commoners had separated from the patricians and judging it no hard task to take a city sick with internal war.

[47971] 23.2. Having resolved to lead out an army against these, and it seeming to all the councillors that they had resolved rightly, they proclaimed that all of military age should present themselves, fixing a time at which they meant to make the enrolment of the soldiers. But when the commoners, though often summoned to the military oath, did not obey, the two consuls no longer held the same opinion, but, beginning from this, they were at variance and continued to act contrary to one another throughout the whole term of their office.

[48507] 23.3. For it seemed best to Servilius to take the more lenient road, joining the opinion of Manius Valerius, the most popular of men, who thought the magistracy would best heal the strife by voting either a cancellation or a reduction of the debts; or, failing that, at least a present prohibition of the seizure of those past due; and by leading the poor to the military oath by exhortation rather than compulsion, and by not making the punishments against the disobedient harsh and inexorable, as in a city of one mind, but moderate and lenient. For there was danger, he said, lest men compelled to serve at their own charges, in want of their daily necessities, should turn to desperation when gathered together.

[49224] 24.1. At the same time new treaties also were made, with oaths, with all the cities of the Latins for peace and friendship, since they had attempted no disturbance in the strife and were plainly rejoicing in the return of the people, and seemed ready to share in the war against the seceders.

[49518] 24.2. What was written in the treaties was as follows: "Let there be peace between the Romans and all the cities of the Latins toward one another, so long as heaven and earth keep the same station; and let them neither make war on one another, nor bring in wars from elsewhere, nor furnish safe roads to those who bring war; and let them help with all their power those who are warred upon; and of the spoils and booty from common wars let each side obtain an equal share; and let the judgments of private contracts be made within ten days, in whatever place the contract was made. To these treaties let it be permitted neither to add anything nor to take anything from them, save what shall seem good to the Romans and all the Latins."

[50256] 24.3. These things, then, the Romans and the Latins agreed with one another, swearing over sacrifices. And the senate voted also to render thank-offerings to the gods for the reconciliation with the people, adding one day to the so-called Latin Festivals, which were two: the first having been consecrated by King Tarquinius, at the time when he conquered the Tyrrhenians; the other added by the people, when, having expelled the kings, it made the city free; to which the third was then assigned for the sake of the return of the seceders.

[50798] 25.1. Much time being wasted on these things, the other of the consuls, Servilius—for the campaign fell to him by lot—having by much entreaty and courtship prepared the commoners to share in the war, with a force not compelled by levy but voluntary, as the occasion invited, set out for the war while the Volscians were still preparing and neither expecting the Romans to come against them with an army, governed as they were so factiously and at enmity with one another, nor thinking they would come to grips with assailants—supposing that they themselves had full liberty to begin the war whenever they

[51404] 25.2. wished. But when they perceived that they must fight, being themselves attacked, then, stricken with dismay at the swiftness of the Romans, the eldest men came forth from the cities bearing suppliant boughs, entrusting to Servilius to deal with them as wrongdoers in whatever way he wished. He, taking provisions for the army from them and garments, and choosing three hundred sons from the most distinguished houses as hostages, departed, supposing the war ended.

[51876] 25.3. But this was no ending, only a delay and an occasion of preparation for those forestalled by the unexpectedness of the assault; and when the Roman army had withdrawn, the Volscians kindled the war again, fortifying their cities and holding under stronger guard any other place suited to give them safety. Joined with them in the danger were openly the Hernicans and Sabines, and secretly many others. The Latins, when an embassy came to them from the Volscians seeking alliance, bound the men and brought them to Rome.

[52402] 25.4. To these the senate, rendering thanks for their steadfast loyalty and still more for their zeal toward the contest—for they were ready to make war willingly—granted what it thought they most wished but were ashamed to ask: it presented to them, free of charge, those of their men captured in the wars, a little short of six thousand, and, that the gift might take on the adornment befitting their kinship, clothed them all in garments suited to free persons. As for the alliance, the senate said it needed none from the Latins, declaring that Rome's own forces were sufficient to repel the rebels. Having given these answers, it voted the war against the Volscians.

[53075] 26.1. While the senate was still sitting in the senate-house and considering what forces were to march out, there appeared in the Forum an elderly man clad in rags, with a long beard let down and unkempt hair, crying out and calling for the help of his fellow men. When the nearby crowd had run together, standing where he would be conspicuous to many, he said: "Born free, having served the campaigns of my youth, having fought in twenty-eight battles and often received prizes of valour from the wars, when the times came that drove the city into the utmost straits, I was forced to take a loan to discharge the taxes exacted of me, since the enemy had overrun my farm and the famines in the city had consumed my goods; and having no means to pay my debt, I was led off as a slave by my creditor together with my two sons; and when my master ordered some hard work and I objected to him, I received very many blows of the whip."

[54007] 26.2. Having said this, he threw off his rags and showed his breast full of wounds and his back covered with blood from the blows. When an outcry and lamentation arose from those present, the senate broke up, and throughout the whole city there was a running of the poor bewailing their own fortune and calling on their neighbours to help; and from their houses those enslaved for debt rushed out with long hair, most of them in chains and fetters, no one daring to lay hold of them—and if anyone but touched one, he was torn apart by force of hands.

[54559] 26.3. So great a frenzy held the people at that time; and not long after, the Forum was full of those who had escaped their bonds. Appius, then, fearing the rush of the multitude against himself, since he was the author of the evils and these things were thought to have happened on his account, fled from the Forum and went away. But Servilius, casting off his purple-bordered robe and rolling before each of the commoners with tears, with difficulty persuaded them to refrain that day and to come on the next, since the senate would take some care for them. Having said this and ordered the herald to proclaim that no creditor should be permitted to lead off the person of a citizen for a private debt until the senate had decided about them, and that those present might depart wherever they wished without fear, he dispersed the tumult.

[55401] 27.1. That day, then, they departed from the Forum; but on the next there was present not only the city crowd, but also the commons from the neighbouring fields, and from early morning the Forum was full. When the senate was convened to deliberate what should be done about these matters, Appius called his colleague a demagogue and a leader of the desperation of the poor, while Servilius called him austere, stubborn, and the cause of the present evils to the city; but no end came of the speeches.

[55903] 27.2. Meanwhile Latin horsemen, driving their horses in haste, arrived in the Forum announcing that the enemy had marched out with a great army and were already upon their borders. While they reported this, the patricians and the body of the knights and all the rest who had wealth or ancestral renown, as men in danger over great things, armed themselves with speed;

[56272] 27.3. but those of them who were poor, and especially those oppressed by debts, neither touched their arms nor otherwise furnished any aid to the common cause, but, rejoicing and receiving the foreign war as a thing prayed for, as one that would free them from their present evils, showed their chains and fetters to those who begged them to defend the state, and mockingly asked whether it were worth their while to fight for the safety of these blessings. Many even dared to say that it was better to be slaves to the Volscians than to endure the insults of the patricians; and the city was filled with lamentation and tumult and all manner of women's wailings.

[56937] 28.1. Seeing this, the senators begged the other of the consuls, Servilius, who at the moment seemed the more persuasive to the many, to come to the aid of the country. He, summoning the people to the Forum, set before them the necessity of the present crisis, which no longer admitted of civic rivalries, and thought fit that now they should advance against the enemy with one mind and not look on while their country was made desolate—wherein each had his ancestral gods and the tombs of his forefathers, the most honoured of all things among men; and that they should take pity on their parents, who would not be able to defend themselves through old age, and have compassion on their wives, who would presently be forced to endure dreadful and unbearable outrages, and most of all pity the cruel maimings and merciless insults of their infant children, not reared for such hopes;

[57822] 28.2. and that, when all of them with equal zeal had repelled the present danger, then they should consider in what way they might establish a polity equal and common and saving for all, neither the poor plotting against the property of the rich nor the rich insulting those humbler in fortune; for these things were least befitting a state. But there would be some civic relief for the poor, and some moderate help for those who advanced the loans—at least for the wronged—and that best of human goods, which keeps all cities in concord, faith in contracts, would not be utterly and forever abolished from the Roman city alone.

[58452] 28.3. Having gone through these things and whatever else was fitting to be said on such an occasion, he ended by speaking in defence of his own goodwill, which he continued to hold toward the people, and begged them to share in this campaign with him, in return for his zeal toward them—the care of the city falling to his colleague, and the command of the wars assigned to himself; for the lot had so apportioned these duties. He said the senate had promised him that it would confirm whatever he should agree upon with the multitude, and he had promised the senate that he would persuade the commoners not to betray their country to the enemy.

[59099] 29.1. Having said this, he ordered the herald to proclaim that, of those Romans who should march out to the war against the enemy, no one might either sell or pledge their houses, or lead off any of their kin for any contract, or prevent whoever wished from sharing in the campaign; but that against those who stayed behind from the campaign the creditors should have their suits, on the terms on which each had lent. When the poor heard this, they at once consented and all rushed to the war with great zeal—some led on by hopes of profit, others by gratitude to the general, but most fleeing from Appius and the insults of those in the city against those who remained.

[59771] 29.2. Servilius, taking over the army, marched with great speed, leaving no time idle, that he might engage the enemy before they invaded Roman territory; and finding them encamped near the place called Pomentine and plundering the Latin country, because the Latins would not join them in the war though invited, toward late evening he pitched his camp beside a certain hill about twenty stades from their encampment. By night the Volscians attacked them, thinking them few and, as men come from a long march, wearied and lacking in zeal on account of the disturbances of the poor over debts, which were thought to be at their height.

[60407] 29.3. But Servilius, fighting from the camp while it was still night, when light came and he learned that the enemy were plundering in disorder, ordered many small gates to be opened secretly from the camp, and at a single signal launched the army upon them. The peril falling suddenly and unexpectedly upon the Volscians, a few who made a stand, fighting near the rampart, were cut down; the rest, fleeing headlong and losing many of their own, most of them wounded and having lost their arms, made their way safe to their camp.

[60938] 29.4. The Romans following close at their heels and surrounding the camp, after defending it a short while they surrendered the rampart, full of many slaves and cattle and arms and the equipment for war. Many free persons were captured, some of the Volscians themselves, some of the nations that fought with them, and money and gold and silver and clothing in great abundance, as when a most prosperous city is taken. Servilius gave these to the soldiers, that each might enrich himself, and, ordering them to divide it among themselves and bring nothing to the public treasury, set fire to the camp and led his forces against the nearest city, Suessa Pometia. For in the size of its circuit and the number of its inhabitants, and besides in reputation and wealth, it seemed far to surpass the cities thereabouts, and was, as it were, the leader of the nation.

[61800] 29.5. Having invested it and recalling the army neither by day nor by night, that the enemy might have no time to rest, taking neither sleep nor any pause from war, by famine and helplessness and lack of allies he wore them down and took them in no long time, and slaughtered all of military age. And committing all the money there to the soldiers to carry and drive away, he led his force against the other cities, no one of the Volscians being any longer able to ward off anything.

[62285] 30.1. When the affairs of the Volscians had been humbled by the Romans, the other of the consuls, Appius Claudius, brought their hostages into the Forum—three hundred men—that those who had given their pledge of hostages to him might be wary of breaking faith, and in the sight of all he scourged them and ordered their necks to be struck off.

[62630] 30.2. When his colleague returned from the campaign not many days later and thought fit to receive the triumph customarily granted by the senate to generals who had fought a brilliant contest, Appius opposed it, calling him a factious man and a lover of a wicked polity, but accusing him most of all because he had brought no portion of the war's spoils into the public treasury but had bestowed it as gifts on whomever he wished; and he persuaded the senate not to grant the man the triumph. But Servilius, thinking himself insulted by the council, turned to an arrogance unusual among the Romans: for, summoning the people to an assembly in the plain before the city and recounting what had been done in the war, and narrating the envy of his colleague and the insult of the senate, he said that from his own deeds and from the army that had fought with him he had the authority to celebrate a triumph over fair and fortunate achievements.

[63573] 30.3. Having said this, he ordered the fasces to be wreathed, and, himself wreathed and wearing the triumphal robe, advanced into the city escorted by the whole people, until he went up to the Capitol and paid his vows and dedicated the spoils. From this he drew upon himself still greater envy from the patricians, but made the commons devoted to himself.

[63931] 31.1. While the city was in such disorder, a kind of truce arose in the interval on account of the ancestral sacrifices, and brilliant festivals coming on with their splendid expenditures checked for the present the dissension of the multitude. While they were holding festival, the Sabines, who had watched for this time from afar, attacked them with a great force, making the assault while it was still early night, that they might fall upon the city before those within perceived it; and they would very easily have overpowered them, had not some of the light-armed, breaking away from the phalanx and falling upon the steadings for plunder, caused an uproar.

[64595] 31.2. For a cry at once arose and a running of the farmers to the wall, before the enemy came to the gates. When those watching the games in the city learned of their approach, even in the midst of it and with their garlands upon them, they left the contests and rushed to arms; and a sufficient force, self-summoned, was gathered for Servilius, which he, keeping it in formation, hurled upon the enemy, who were worn out by sleeplessness and toil and did not expect the Romans' attack.

[65083] 31.3. When they came to grips, the battle was, on account of the haste of both sides, robbed of order and arrangement; but as if by chance, phalanx fell upon phalanx, or company upon company, or man upon man, and cavalry and infantry fought together confusedly. Helpers came to both sides not long after, since the cities were near, who, cheering on the failing, made them hold out long against their hardships. Then the Romans, when their cavalry came up, again conquered the Sabines, and having killed many returned to the city leading very many prisoners. And those of the Sabines within the city, who had come under pretext of seeing the games and were to seize beforehand the strongholds of the city for the attackers, as had been arranged with them, they searched out and cast into the prisons. And the sacrifices which the war had interrupted they decreed should be doubled from the former, and were again at their feasting.

[66016] 32.1. While they were still keeping festival, envoys came from the nation of the Aurunci, who held the fairest plains of the Campanian land. These, presenting themselves before the senate, demanded that the territory of the Volscians called Ecetrans—which the Romans, having taken it from the Ecetrans, had distributed among colonists sent out to guard the nation—be restored to them and the garrison withdrawn from it; and if they would not do so, they should expect the Aurunci to come against Roman territory within a short time and exact penalties for all the evils they had wrought upon their neighbours.

[66627] 32.2. The Romans gave them this answer: "Report, O envoys, to the Aurunci that we Romans hold it just that whatever a man acquires by valour, taking it from enemies, this he should hand down to his descendants as his own. We fear no war from the Aurunci, neither as our first nor as our most terrible; rather, it is our custom to fight all men for the leadership, and, seeing it to be a contest of valour, we shall receive it undismayed."

[67067] 32.3. After this, the Aurunci, setting out from their own land with a great army, and the Romans with their native forces under the command of Servilius, met one another near the city of Aricia, which is distant a hundred and twenty stades from Rome; and each encamped on strong hills, a little apart from one another. When they had strengthened their camps, they advanced into the plain to fight, and joining battle from early morning till midday they held out, so that there was much slaughter on both sides. For the nation of the Aurunci was warlike, and in stature, strength, and the terror of an aspect that had much of the bestial, most formidable.

[67723] 33.1. In this war the Roman cavalry are said to have proved the best, and their commander Aulus Postumius Albus, who had held the dictatorship the year before. For the place where the battle was fought was least suited to cavalry, having rocky knolls and deep ravines, so that the horse could be of no use to either side.

[68046] 33.2. But Postumius, ordering those about him to dismount from their horses, and forming a body of six hundred men, joined battle with the enemy where the Roman phalanx was most distressed, being thrust down a steep place, and at once steadied their ranks. When once the barbarians were checked, courage fell upon the Romans, and a rivalry between the foot and the horse; and both together, tower-like in a single mass, thrust the right wing of the enemy back to the hill; and some, following the fugitives toward the camp, killed many, while others fell upon the rear of those still fighting.

[68641] 33.3. Having routed these too into a difficult and slow retreat toward broken ground, they pursued them, cutting the tendons of their feet and severing their hams with sideways sword-strokes, until they came to their camp. Forcing the guards of this also, who were not many, they took the camp and plundered it; yet they found no great spoils, save arms and horses and any other warlike gear. These things, then, the consuls Servilius and Appius accomplished.

[69102] 34.1. After this, Aulus Verginius Caelimontanus and Titus Veturius Geminus succeeded to the consular office, Themistocles being archon at Athens, in the two hundred and sixtieth year after the founding, the seventy-second Olympiad—in which Tisicrates of Croton won a second victory—being about to begin. In their term the Sabines again prepared to lead out a greater army against the Romans, and the Medullini, revolting from the Romans, made oaths of alliance with the Sabine nation.

[69588] 34.2. Learning of their intention, the patricians prepared to march out quickly in full force; but the commons would not obey them, remembering with rancour the promise often broken to them concerning the poor who needed aid, those who voted on their behalf carrying the contrary. Gathering in small groups, they bound one another by oaths no longer to share in any war with the patricians, while each of the poor was being overpowered singly, but to help in common those they met. And the conspiracy showed itself in many places in skirmishes of words and deeds, but most of all it became clear to the consuls when those summoned did not come to the levy.

[70246] 34.3. For when the consuls ordered someone of the people to be seized, the poor, gathering in a body, took away the man being led off, and themselves, striking the consuls' attendants who would not release him, drove them off; and they refrained not from striking even the knights and patricians, as many as were present and thought fit to prevent what was happening. And in a short time the whole city was full of disorder and tumult. Together with the strife within the city growing, the preparations of the enemy for a raid also took a greater increase. The Volscians having again resolved on revolt, and the people called the Aequians, an embassy came from all the subjects of the Romans begging them to aid them, lying as they did in the path of the war.

[71007] 34.4. For the Latins said the Aequians, having invaded their country, were plundering their fields and had already sacked some cities; the garrison in Crustumerium declared the Sabines were near and warring on the fort with much zeal; others announced some other evil that had happened or was about to happen, and came to beg help speedily. Envoys also came before the council from the Volscians, demanding to recover the territory of which they had been deprived, before the war should begin.

[71502] 35.1. When the senate was convened concerning this, Titus Larcius, called first by the consuls, being thought to surpass in dignity and most competent to judge what was needful, came forward and said: "To me, senators, the things which others think terrible and needing swift aid seem neither terrible nor very pressing—namely, how we should help our allies or in what manner ward off the enemy; but the things they neither reckon the greatest of evils nor necessary at present, but, neglecting them as if they would do us no harm, have set aside—these seem to me most terrible, and, unless we quickly attend to them, the causes of the utmost overthrow and confusion of public affairs: the disobedience of the commoners, who refuse to do what is ordered by the consuls, and our own harshness toward their disobedience and their love of liberty.

[72348] 35.2. "I think we ought to consider nothing at present but how this shall be removed from the city, and how we may all govern with one mind, preferring the common good to private interests. For the city's power, when of one mind, will be sufficient both to afford safety to friends and fear to enemies; but in faction, as now, it could accomplish neither. I should marvel if it did not even destroy itself and grant the mastery to its enemies without effort; which—by Jupiter and the other gods—I think will not be long in coming, if you govern in such fashion.

[72911] 36.1. "For we are divided, as you see, and have two cities, the one ruled by poverty and necessity, the other by satiety and insolence. But modesty, order, and justice, by which every civic fellowship is preserved, remain in neither of the cities. Therefore we already take justice from one another by force, and place the highest right in the stronger, like wild beasts, wishing to destroy our adversary along with our own hurt, rather than to keep our own safety along with the

[73392] 36.2. common preservation of our rival. I think fit that you take much forethought for these very things, sitting in council about them, when you have dismissed the embassies. But what I have to advise you to answer the embassies for the present is this: since the Volscians demand of us what we hold, having conquered them in arms, and threaten war if we do not obey, let us say this: that we Romans hold those possessions fairest and most just which we keep, having won them in war according to law, and that we will not endure foolishly to obliterate our valour; for if we surrender these to those who lost them—possessions we shall ever fight to share with our children and to leave to those born of them—we shall be deprived of what we now have, and shall harm ourselves as much as enemies could.

[74195] 36.3. "As for the Latins, let us praise their goodwill and reassure their fear that we shall not abandon them, so long as they keep faith, when on our account they come into any danger, but shall send a sufficient force to defend them before long. These I judge will be the best and most just answers. When the embassies have departed, I say we must give our first council to the disturbances within the city, and that not after long delay, but on the very next day."

[74664] 37.1. When Larcius had declared this opinion and all had approved it, the embassies, receiving the answers stated, departed; and on the next day the consuls, convening the senate, set before them the consideration of remedying the civic disturbances. First, then, being asked his opinion, Publius Verginius, a popular man, taking the middle road, said: "Since the body of the commons in the past year showed the greatest zeal in the contests for the city, opposing along with us the Volscians and Aurunci who came against us with a great army, I think we ought to release those who then joined with us and shared in these wars, and that none of them should have either his person or his property held by the creditors; and that the same right belong to their parents up to grandfathers, and to their children down to grandchildren; but that the rest be liable to seizure by the creditors, on the terms each had lent."

[75583] 37.2. After this Titus Larcius said: "To me, senators, it seems best to release from their contracts not only those who proved brave in the wars, but also all the rest of the people. For only thus could we make the whole city of one mind." Third, coming forward, Appius Claudius, who had held the consulship the year before, said:

[75915] 38.1. "Always, senators, as often as a speech has been proposed about these matters, I am of the same opinion: to grant the people nothing of what they claim that is neither lawful nor honourable, nor to lessen the spirit of the city; and not even now do I change any of the views that seemed right to me from the first—or I should be the most senseless of all men, if last year, when I was consul, with my colleague opposing me and stirring up the people, I held firm and remained by my resolutions, turned aside neither by fear nor entreaty nor yielding to favours, but now, being a private man, should fling myself away and betray my freedom of speech;

[76572] 38.2. "whether any of you wishes to call the freedom of my soul noble or stubborn, as long as I live I shall not depart from what has been rightly resolved, and I shall never, to gratify the wicked, introduce cancellations of debts; nay, against those who introduce them I shall, using all zeal, come to grips, reckoning that all vice and corruption and, in a word, the overthrow of a city begins from the cancelling of debts.

[77000] 38.3. "And whether anyone thinks I say these things from prudence or from some madness—since I deem it right to look not to my own safety but to the city's—or in whatever way he supposes them to be said, I grant him to think as he wishes; but to the utmost I shall oppose those who would introduce other than ancestral measures. But since the times demand not the debts but great aid, I will tell what alone shall be the remedy of the dissension at present: choose a dictator quickly, who, using irresponsible power, will compel both senate and people to think the best things for the commonwealth; for there will be no other release of so great an evil."

[77657] 39.1. When Appius had said this and the young men applauded him as proposing what was needful, Servilius rose to speak against him, and certain others of the elders; but they were overborne by the younger men, who came of set purpose and used much violence,

[77916] 39.2. and in the end the opinion of Appius prevailed. After this the consuls, taking common counsel—since most thought Appius would be appointed dictator, as alone able to prevail in the protectorate—rejected him, and appointed Manius Valerius, brother of Publius Valerius the first consul, who was thought likely to be most popular and a man advanced in years; thinking that the mere terror of the power would suffice, but that the affairs needed a man wholly equitable, lest he work some innovation.

[78419] 40.1. Valerius, taking up the office and choosing as Master of the Horse Quintus Servilius, brother of the Servilius who had been consul with Appius, summoned the people to an assembly. When a great crowd had gathered—then for the first time since Servilius had laid down his office and the people, led off to the campaigns, had turned to open desperation—coming forward to the platform he said: "Citizens, we well know that it is always your wish that some of the Valerian family rule over you, by whom you were freed from a grievous tyranny, and that you would perhaps consent to fail of none of the moderate things, entrusting yourselves to those who seem and are the most popular of all.

[79112] 40.2. "So that there is no need for words to teach you that we shall confirm freedom to the people—we who from the first granted it—but only of moderate exhortation, that you may trust us to fulfil whatever we promise. For we have reached the completion of an age that least admits of trickery, and we have a dignity that carries the least part of knavery, and we mean to live the time that remains nowhere but among you, ready to pay the penalty for whatever we may seem to deceive you in.

[79604] 40.3. "These things, then, as I said, I will pass over, as needing no long words to those who know. But what you seem to me, having suffered at the hands of others, reasonably to suspect of all—seeing always some one of the consuls who summons you to the wars promising to obtain from the senate whatever you need, yet bringing none of the agreements to fulfilment—that you would not justly suspect this of me too, I would prove especially by these two things: that the senate would not have used me for this service, when there were others more suited, the one thought most devoted to the people; and that it would not have adorned me with autocratic power, by which I shall be able to ratify what seems best to me even without it.

[80338] 41.1. "For surely you do not suppose that I, knowing the deceit, have purposed to deceive you along with it and to do mischief together with it. For if these things enter your minds about me, as the most knavish of all men—use me as you wish; but free your souls of this suspicion by trusting me, and transfer your anger from your friends to the enemy, who come to take your city from you and to make you slaves instead of free, and who, hastening to inflict all the things accounted dreadful among men, are reported to be not far from our territory.

[80890] 41.2. "Eagerly, then, clear yourselves of these slanders, and show them that even in faction the power of the Romans is stronger than another's at concord; for either they will not withstand you advancing with one accord, or they will pay penalties worthy of their daring. For consider that it is Volscians and Sabines, whom you have often conquered in battle, who bring war upon you, having now gained neither greater bodies nor braver souls than before, but, despising you as men at enmity with one another. And when you have punished the enemy, I pledge you that the senate will, worthily of the valour you display in the war, arbitrate both the rivalries over debts and whatever else you ask of it that is moderate.

[81611] 41.3. "Meanwhile let every property, every person, every right of a Roman citizen be free from seizure for debt and every other contract. And to those who fight eagerly, the fairest crown shall be this city that bore you standing upright; fair too the praise of their fellows; and the adornment from us shall be enough to set right a household with money and make a family illustrious with honours. And I think fit that my own readiness for dangers be an example to you; for I will fight in the forefront as the mightiest of you."

[82143] 42.1. When he had said this, the whole people, hearing it gladly, as men no longer to be deceived, promised to share in the war; and ten military legions were formed, each of four thousand men. Of these each of the consuls took three, with as many cavalry as were apportioned to each; the four others and the rest of the cavalry the dictator took. And at once, having made ready, they marched out with speed—Titus Veturius against the Aequians, Aulus Verginius against the Volscians, and the dictator Valerius himself against the Sabines; while Titus Larcius guarded the city with the elders and a small force of men in their prime.

[82777] 42.2. The Volscian war reached a swift decision. For thinking they greatly surpassed in numbers and remembering their former misfortunes, having become fighters quicker rather than wiser by necessity, they rushed first upon the Romans, when they were seen encamped within view. A fierce battle ensuing, after doing many noble deeds but suffering more dreadful ones, they were turned to flight; their camp was taken, and a notable city was reduced by siege—Velitrae

[83243] 42.3. was its name. In like manner the spirit of the Sabines too was humbled in a very short time, by a single pitched battle in which both wished to prevail. Then the country was plundered and certain small towns were taken, from which the soldiers got much both of persons and goods. The Aequians, suspecting their own weakness when they learned that their allies' affairs were at an end, sat down in strong places and did not come forth to battle, making their retreats, where they could, secretly through mountains or thickets; and they protracted the war for a while, dragging it out. Yet they could not bring their army off unharmed, since the Romans attacked them boldly in precipitous places and took their camp by storm. Then there was a flight of them from the Latin land and surrenders of the cities they happened to have seized at the first assault, and there were captures of citadels not abandoned out of obstinacy.

[84174] 43.1. Valerius, the war having gone according to his mind, after leading home the customary triumph for the victory, dismissed the people from the campaign—though the senate did not yet think it the time, lest the poor demand the promises; and into the conquered land, which they had taken from the Volscians, he sent colonists, chosen from among the poor, who were both to garrison the enemy country and to leave behind less of the factious element in the city.

[84638] 43.2. Having arranged these things, he asked the senate to confirm to him the promises, since it had received the eagerness of the multitude in the contests. But when it gave no heed to him, but—as before it had opposed him—the young and violent, gathering themselves and prevailing in number over the others, then too acted against him and made much outcry, declaring his house a fawner upon the people and the author of wicked laws, and blaming on that policy of the courts, in which the men most gloried in the assembly, the destruction of all the power of the patricians, Valerius, indignant at much and reproaching the people as suffering injustice in being slandered by them, and bewailing the fortune about to seize them for resolving such things, and, as is likely in such an evil, partly from passion and partly from understanding more than the many, prophesying, went away from the senate-house; and summoning the people to an assembly, he said:

[85595] 43.3. "Owing you much gratitude, citizens, both for the zeal you showed me in joining willingly in the war and still more for the valour you displayed in the contests, I was making great effort to requite you both in other ways and by not falsifying the promises which I made to you on behalf of the senate, and by at last establishing your strife in concord, becoming counsellor and arbiter to both. But I am prevented from doing this by those who choose not the best things for the commonwealth, but what is for the moment pleasing to themselves, who, prevailing in number over the others and in the strength which youth furnishes them rather than the affairs, are emboldened.

[86275] 43.4. "But I am old, as you see, and have others like me for allies, whose strength, lying in judgment, is unable to follow it up in deed; and our seeming care for the commonwealth has turned into what appears a private hatred toward each party. For by the senate I am blamed as courting your multitude, and to you I am slandered as showing my goodwill rather to it.

[86643] 44.1. "If, then, the people, having been well treated, had failed of the promises made through me to the senate, I should have had this defence: that you broke faith, and there was no knavery in me; but since the things agreed by the senate have not been fulfilled to you, my speech now becomes necessary to the people: that you have not suffered with my consent, but that we both alike have been deceived and overreached—and I more than you, who am not only wronged in what I have been deceived in common with all, but also in the things I have heard ill of privately—as that I gave the spoils taken from the enemy to your poor without the common consent of the council, wishing to win private favour, and that I think fit to confiscate the property of citizens, though it forbade me and bade me not transgress the law, and that I dismissed the army against the will of the senators, when I ought to have kept you amid the bivouacs and wanderings

[87592] 44.2. in the enemy's country. I have also been reproached with the sending of the colonists to the Volscians, because I bestowed much good land not on the patricians nor the knights, but distributed it among your poor; and—what gave me the most indignation—because more than four hundred men from the people were enrolled among the knights at the levy, having grown wealthy.

[87968] 44.3. "If, then, these things had befallen me while my body was in its prime, I should have made clear in deed to my enemies what manner of man they insulted; but since I am over seventy years of age and no longer able to defend myself, and I see that your strife would not even now be ended by me, I lay down my office and give my body to whoever wishes, if any think they have been deceived by me, to use as they judge just."

[88397] 45.1. Having said this, he drew the whole commons to sympathy, and they escorted him as he departed from the Forum; but the senate he made still harsher toward himself. Straightway after this these things happened: the poor, no longer secretly nor by night as before, but now openly assembling, deliberated about a secession from the patricians; and the senate, purposing to prevent it, ordered the consuls not yet to disband the armies. For each was still master of three legions, the men being held by the military oaths and no one thinking fit to leave the standards—so great was the fear of the oaths in each man. A pretext for the campaign was contrived, that the Aequians and Sabines had joined together for the war against the Romans.

[89140] 45.2. When the consuls had advanced outside the city with their forces and pitched their camps not far from one another, the soldiers, gathering all into one, being masters of arms and standards, at the instigation of one Sicinius Bellutus, seceded from the consuls, seizing the standards—for these the Romans hold most precious on campaign and consider sacred, like the shrines of the gods—and appointing other centurions and Sicinius commander over all, they seized a hill near the river Anio, not far from Rome, which from this is now called the Sacred Mount.

[89704] 45.3. When the consuls and centurions recalled them with entreaty and lamentation and many promises, Sicinius answered: "With what intent, patricians, do you now recall those whom you drove from their country and made slaves instead of free? With what pledge will you confirm the promises to us which you are proved to have often falsified? But since you think fit to hold the city alone, depart, troubled no more by the poor and humble; for us, any land in which we have our freedom, whatever it be, will suffice to be reckoned our country."

[90248] 46.1. When this was reported to those in the city, there was much tumult and lamentation and running through the streets, the people preparing to leave the city and the patricians thinking fit to turn them back and apply force to the unwilling; and there was an outcry about the gates and much wailing, and hostile words against one another, and the deeds of enemies, no one any longer distinguishing age or comradeship or worth of valour.

[90689] 46.2. When those appointed by the senate to guard the exits—for they were few and no longer able to hold out—being forced out by the people, abandoned their watch, then at once the commons poured out in numbers, and the calamity was like the capture of a city, lamentation arising among those who remained and mutual reproaches as they saw the city being emptied. After this there were many councils and accusations of the authors of the secession. At the same time the enemy nations attacked them, plundering the land up to the city. The seceders, however, taking the necessary provisions from the nearby fields but doing no other harm to the country, remained in the open, and received those who came to them from the city and the surrounding forts, who were now becoming numerous.

[91474] 46.3. For not only those who wished to escape debts and judgments and the expected necessities flocked to them, but also of the others, all whose life was idle or slack, or unable to supply their desires, or who were emulators of wicked practices, or envious of others' good fortune, or, through some other misfortune or cause, ill-disposed toward the established polity.

[91847] 47.1. Upon the patricians at the moment fell much confusion and dismay, and fear lest the seceders, along with the foreign enemies, would presently come against the city. Then, as at a single command, snatching up their arms, each with his own clients, some went to the roads by which they thought the enemy would come, others marched out to the forts to guard the strongholds, and others encamped in the plains before the city; while those who through old age were unable to do any of these things were posted on the walls.

[92373] 47.2. But when they learned that the seceders neither joined the enemy nor ravaged the country nor did any harm worth mentioning, they ceased from their fear; and changing their minds, they considered on what terms they should be reconciled with them. And speeches of all kinds, and most differing from one another, were made by the leaders of the council; but the most moderate and most fitting to the present fortunes were those which their eldest spoke, teaching that the people had made the secession from them through no wickedness, but partly forced by their unavoidable misfortunes, partly deceived by their counsellors, judging their interests by anger rather than reason, as is wont to happen among an ignorant multitude; and that most of them were conscious of having taken bad counsel and were seeking specious pretexts to undo their errors; for their very deeds were those of men already repentant, and, if they got good hope for the future, the senate having voted them impunity and made a seemly reconciliation, they would gladly accept their own.

[93436] 47.3. And those who gave this advice thought fit that the better men should not prove worse in anger than the worse, nor put off the reconciliation to that time when either the senseless would be forced to come to their senses, or the lesser evil would be cured by the greater—when their freedom would be taken away by themselves through the surrender of arms and the giving up of their persons; for this was near to impossible. Rather, by using moderation, the patricians should become the authors of expedient counsels and go first to the reconciliation, considering that to rule and govern belonged to the patricians,

[94058] 47.4. but of friendship and peace ... to the good. And they declared that the dignity of the senate would be lessened not most in that wherein, bearing their unavoidable misfortunes nobly, they would govern in safety, but in that wherein, dealing ill-temperedly with their fortunes, they would overthrow the commonwealth. It was a work of folly, they said, to disregard safety while reaching for what was seemly; for it was desirable to attain both, but if one were debarred from either, the saving things must be reckoned more necessary than the more seemly. The conclusion of those who gave this advice was to send envoys to treat with the seceders about friendship, on the ground that they had committed no irreparable wrong.

[94788] 48.1. These things seemed good to the senate; and after this, having chosen the most suitable men, it sent them to those in the camp, charging them to learn from them what they wanted and on what just terms they thought fit to return to the city; for if any of their demands were moderate and possible, the senate would not oppose them. For the present, then, if they laid down their arms and came down to the city, impunity for their offences would be theirs, and amnesty for the time to come; and if they took the best counsels for the commonwealth and risked themselves eagerly for their country, fair and

[95398] 48.2. profitable returns. The envoys, having received these instructions, delivered them to those in the camp and discoursed accordingly. But the seceders did not accept the proposals; rather, with disdain and harshness and much irony they reproached the patricians for pretending not to know what the people wanted and on account of what necessities they had seceded from them, while granting them impunity from suffering any penalty for the secession, as though they were still masters—when they themselves needed the citizens' help, men who before long would have to face the foreign wars which would come against them in full force, against whom they could not even lift a hand, men who did not reckon their own safety their own good, but the good fortune of those who would fight alongside them. Finally they added this argument, that the patricians, now learning better the straits that gripped the city, would know against what kind of adversaries the contest would be for them; and they uttered many harsh threats.

[96422] 48.3. The envoys, making no further reply to this, departed and reported to the patricians the answer of the seceders. The city, when it received these answers, fell into far greater confusion and fear than before; and the senate was able to find neither a remedy nor a delay, but, hearing for many days the abuse and accusations which its leaders made against one another, was dissolved. Nor was the body of the commons, however much still remained from goodwill toward the patricians or compelled by longing for their country, of the same mind, but a great part of it too, openly and secretly, was draining away, and nothing of what remained seemed secure. These things having happened, the consuls—for the time still left them of their office was short—appointed a day for the elections.

[97214] 49.1. The people, when the time came in which the magistracies had to be ratified by an assembly gathered in the plain, since no one either sought the consulship or, when it was offered, would accept it, themselves appointed consuls from among those who had already held this office, men acceptable both to the people and to the aristocracy—Postumus Cominius and Spurius Cassius, by whom the Sabines had been defeated and made to renounce their leadership—in the seventy-second Olympiad, in which Tisicrates of Croton won the foot-race, Diognetus being archon at Athens.

[97786] 49.2. These, taking up office on the Kalends of September, sooner than had been the custom of their predecessors, before transacting anything else convened the senate to discuss the return of the commoners, and asked to declare his opinion first a man who was then in the prime of his age and thought to surpass the others in understanding, and most of all praised for the choice of his policies—because he was of the middle order, neither magnifying the arrogance of the aristocrats nor permitting the people to do whatever they wished—Agrippa Menenius; who urged the senate to the reconciliation, speaking thus:

[98401] 49.3. "If, senators, it had happened that all present held the same opinion, and no one was likely to be an obstacle to the reconciliation with the people, but it lay before us only to consider on what terms—whether just or not—we should be reconciled with them, I would have shown you in few words what I think.

[98715] 49.4. "But since some think this very point still needs deliberation—whether it is better for us to come to terms with the seceders or to make war—I do not think it easy for me by a short statement to advise what should be done, but I must by a longer speech teach those of you who are ill-disposed toward the reconciliation that they urge the contrary of what is good; or, if they mean to frighten you, that they reckless of the greatest and most incurable evils stand in dread of the slightest of difficult things, which admit of easy remedy. And they have come to this through nothing else than that they judge their interest not by reason but by passion and madness.

[99387] 49.5. "For how could those be said to foresee with their minds anything useful or possible, who suppose that so great a city, now mistress of so many affairs and become an object of envy and grievance to its neighbours, could either, without the commons, easily hold and preserve the nations under it, or could bring in another people in place of the worse, a better one, which would fight for its empire on its behalf and govern with it in much tranquillity, showing itself moderate both in peace and in war? For they could say nothing else, trusting in which they would think fit to bid you not accept the reconciliation.

[100012] 50.1. "How full of simplicity each of these alternatives is, I would beg you to consider from the very facts, reflecting that, when the humbler sort have fallen into strife with you on account of those who used their misfortunes neither in a civic nor moderate spirit, and have withdrawn from the city, but do and intend you no further harm, but only consider how they may be reconciled without disgrace—many of those ill-disposed toward you, gladly accepting what fortune brought, have been roused in spirit, and think this longed-for opportunity is at hand, in which they

[100587] 50.2. will overthrow your empire. The Aequians and Volscians, the Sabines and the nation of the Hernicans, besides having made no truce in their war against us, and chafing at their recent evils, are plundering our fields. And of Campania and Tyrrhenia, all that remains doubtfully detached from us—some openly revolts, some secretly prepares to. It seems too that the Latin kinship no longer remains securely friendly to us when put to the test, but a great part of it is reported to be sick with a longing—which all crave—for change;

[101124] 50.3. and we, who once encamped against others, now sit hemmed within our walls, having left our land unsown and seeing our steadings plundered, our booty driven off and our servants deserting, with no remedy for our ills. And, suffering these things, do we still hope that the commons will be reconciled with us, knowing that it lies in our power to end the strife by a single decree?

[101511] 51.1. "With our affairs in the field so ill, the dangers within the walls are no less terrible. For we have not for a long while prepared our allied forces as men about to be besieged, nor are we ourselves sufficient in number against so many enemy nations; and of the small and unworthy garrison, the greater part is of the commons—labourers, clients, and artisans, not at all sure guardians of a shaken aristocracy. And the continual desertions of these to the seceders that now occur

[101999] 51.2. have made the whole suspect. Above all these, the gathering of provisions, being impossible while the land is held by the enemy, already threatens famine, and when we come into straits will threaten still more; and besides these, there is the war that lets us be at no time secure in mind. But all the terrors are surpassed by the women of the seceders and their infant children and their aged parents, who in pitiable garments and mourning attire wander to ruin through the Forum and the streets, weeping, supplicating, clasping each man's right hand and knees, bewailing the desolation that holds them and will hold them still more—a dreadful and unendurable sight.

[102674] 51.3. "There is no one so savage in disposition that he is not overturned in soul at seeing these things, and feels something at the fortunes of men. So that, if we mean to be irreconcilable toward the commons, we must rid ourselves of these persons too—the one sort as useless for a siege, the others as not likely to remain firmly friendly. But if these too are driven out, what force will be left to guard the city? Or in what aid shall we trust to dare endure the dangers? Our own refuge and only sure hope, the flower of the patricians, is small, as you see, and not worth being proud of. Why, then, do those who advise enduring the war babble and deceive us, rather than openly advise surrendering the city now to the enemy without blood and without toil?

[103437] 52.1. "But perhaps I am deluded in saying these things and think fit to fear what is not terrible; and the city now risks nothing but a change, no hard thing, and we could with much ease receive into it a labouring and client multitude from every nation and place. For this is what many of those who oppose the commons keep harping on—and, by Jupiter, not the basest of them.

[103814] 52.2. "For some have come to such simplicity as to propose not saving counsels but impossible prayers; whom I would gladly ask, what surplus of time will be given us, engaged in such affairs, with the enemy so near the city? What pardon will there be for the delay and tarrying of the allies who are to come, in dangers that neither tarry nor delay? What man or god will furnish us safety and gather at leisure from every place and convey hither the aid? And further, who will those be who leave their own countries and migrate to us? Will it be those who have homes and hearths and livelihoods and the honour they enjoy among their fellow citizens through ancestral distinction or the fame of their own valour? And who would endure to leave behind his own goods to share scantily in others' evils? For they will not come hither to share in peace and luxury, but in dangers and war, of which the outcome is uncertain

[104732] 52.3. whether it will be brought to a good issue. Or shall we bring in a multitude that is plebeian and homeless, such as was that which was driven from here—clearly through debts and judgments and like misfortunes—glad to settle wherever it may chance? Such a one, even if it should be otherwise good and moderate (that we may grant it this too), would on this very account—that it would be neither native nor of the same way of life, nor acquainted with the customs and laws and breeding among us—be far and altogether worse than the one we have.

[105282] 53.1. "For the native man has here as hostages his children and wives and parents and many other persons of his own kin, and—by Jupiter—the longing for the very soil that reared him, which is necessary to all and not to be removed; but this summoned and intrusive multitude, if it became our fellow-dweller, having none of these things here, for what good would it think fit to risk itself, unless someone should promise to give it portions of land and a share of the city, however great, taking it from the present owners—a thing we do not think fit to share even with our citizens who have often fought for it? And perhaps it would not even be content with these alone if given, but would think fit to share equally with the patricians in honours and offices and the other goods.

[106065] 53.2. "Therefore, if we shall not grant each of their demands, shall we have as enemies those who fail of them? But if we should concede, our country will be gone and our polity overthrown by ourselves. And I do not add here that in the present we need bodies fit for war, not farmers or labourers or merchants or those occupied in mechanical crafts, who would at the same time have to learn warfare and give proof of it; and hard is the trial of those unaccustomed; and necessarily such would be the rabble migrating from every nation.

[106603] 53.3. "For I see no military alliance established for us, nor, should one appear unexpectedly, would I advise you to receive it readily within the walls, knowing many other cities enslaved by the armies brought in for their guard.

[106835] 54.1. "Reflecting, then, on these things and on whatever else has been said by us before, and recalling moreover, in answer to those who summon us to the reconciliation, that not among us alone or first has poverty striven against wealth and lowliness against eminence, but in nearly all cities, both small and great, the lesser is for the most part set against the greater as an enemy—in which the leaders of the commonwealth, by using moderation, have saved their countries, but by using arrogance have, along with the other goods, destroyed themselves as well;

[107400] 54.2. and that everything compounded of many parts is by nature liable to sicken in some one of its members; and besides these, that one must neither always cut off the ailing part of the human body—for the appearance of what is left would be ugly and its nature not long-enduring—nor expel the diseased portion of a civic fellowship; for the whole would not be long in perishing through its own parts in time; and considering how great is the power of necessity, to which alone even the gods yield, do not chafe against your fortunes, nor fill yourselves with arrogance and folly as if all would be according to our prayer, but bend and yield, using as examples of good counsel not foreign deeds, but our own.

[108112] 55.1. "For both a single man and a whole city ought to take pride in the noblest of their own deeds, and to see that the rest will be in keeping with these. You, then, having already taken into your power many enemies by whom you had been most grievously wronged, were willing neither to destroy them nor to cast them from their own, but gave them back their houses and lands, allowed them to dwell in the countries they sprang from, and to some of them you have even granted to be of equal vote and your fellow citizens.

[108635] 55.2. "And I have a deed of yours still more wonderful than this to tell: that even of your own citizens, many who had greatly wronged you, you released from punishment, casting your anger on the authors alone—among whom were those who colonised Antemnae and Crustumerium and Medullia and Fidenae, and many others. For why need I now enumerate all whom you, when conquered by siege, admonished with moderation and in civic fashion? And in no way did either danger or blame on this account befall the city; rather, your fairness is praised, and nothing of your safety has been diminished.

[109224] 55.3. "Then will you who spare your enemies make war on your friends, and you who let go unpunished those who came into your power will punish those who helped you win your empire? And, while offering your own city as a safe refuge to all who need it, will you endure to drive from it the native-born, with whom you were reared and educated and shared many evils and goods in peace and in war? No—not if you wish to do what is just and befitting your own customs, and to judge the expedient without anger.

[109731] 56.1. "But that the strife must be ended, one might say, we have recognised no less than you, and have shown much zeal; only try to say how we may end it. For you see how great is the arrogance about the people, who neither send to us about a settlement, though they are in the wrong, nor give to those sent by us civic and humane answers, but are haughty and threaten, and it is not easy to conjecture what they want. To these things what I advise be done