WORK: Antiquitates Romanae  (slug: dionysius-of-halicarnass-antiquitates-romanae-97af98)

CHAPTER: 07-book-7



[109953] 54.3. the moderate things. He advised, however, that the consuls and all the council and the other patricians, coming in numbers, be present at the trial and join in the man's defence, and ask the people to decide nothing harsh about him; for these too would contribute not a little to the balance of his safety; and not only that they themselves be so minded, but that each summon his own clients and gather his friends, and, if they suppose any of the commoners well-disposed to them through benefits, that these too now, at the voting, demand the favour formerly owed.

[110526] 54.4. He declared that the kindly and the haters of wickedness would be no small part of the people, and still greater than this, that which knows how to feel something at human fortunes and to pity those in dignities when their fortunes fall low.

[110775] 54.5. But the greater part of his speech was directed to Marcius, holding exhortation mixed with admonition and entreaty with necessity. For he thought fit, since he was charged with dividing the people from the senate and was slandered as tyrannic through the arrogance of his character, and fear had come upon all lest through him there should be a beginning of strife and irreparable evils, such as civil wars bring, that he should not make the slanders against him true and valid by remaining in the envied manner of life, but take on a humble bearing and yield his person to those who said they were wronged, and not flee an unjust charge that was being cleared by word with justice.

[111465] 54.6. For these things were both safest for his preservation and most brilliant for the good repute he longed for, and in keeping with his earlier deeds. But if he should be more arrogant than moderate, and should think fit that the senate endure every danger on his account, he declared he would bring an evil defeat and a shameful victory upon those who heeded him; and he was here lengthy in lamentation, recounting the greatest and most manifest of the evils that befall cities in dissensions.

[111964] 55.1. Going through this with many tears, not feigned and counterfeit but real—a man surpassing in the dignity of age and valour—when he saw the council moved by what was said, he wove the rest of his speech from a now more confident beginning: "But if some of you, senators," he said, "are disturbed, thinking you introduce a wicked custom into the city if you concede the people to cast a vote against the patricians, and think the tribunician power, having got much strength, will be for no good, let them learn that they err in opinion and have supposed the contrary of

[112539] 55.2. what is fitting. For if anything else will be the cause of safety to this city, and of its never being deprived of its freedom or its strength, but of continuing ever in concord and using one opinion about all things, the people will be most responsible, taken into partnership in affairs; and the fact that the polity administering the commonwealth is not one unmixed—neither monarchy nor oligarchy nor democracy, but the constitution mixed of all these—this above all will benefit us.

[113033] 55.3. "For most easily does each of these polities by itself fall into insolence and lawbreaking; but when all are tempered moderately, the part that is being stirred and departing from the customary order is ever restrained by the part that is sound and abides in its own ways. Monarchy, become cruel and arrogant and beginning to pursue tyrannic ambitions, is overthrown by a few good men.

[113426] 55.4. "Oligarchy, composed of the best men—which you too now use—when, lifted up by wealth and clubs, it makes no account of justice and the rest of virtue, is overthrown by a sensible people. A people, temperate and governing by laws, when it begins to be disorderly and lawless, is set right by force, mastered by the best man.

[113757] 55.5. "For you, senators, against a monarch's power, that it become not a tyranny, the possible remedies are found. For, appointing two instead of one as masters of the city, and entrusting these with the office not for an unlimited time but yearly, you nonetheless appoint as guardians over them three hundred men, the best and eldest of the patricians, of whom this senate is composed; but of yourselves, that you may remain in fitting order, you appear hitherto to have made no guard.

[114246] 55.6. "And about you I do not yet fear lest you be corrupted in mind by the greatness and abundance of goods—you who have lately freed the city from a long tyranny and have not yet had leisure to grow insolent and luxurious because of the continual long wars; but reflecting on those who will come after you, and how many changes the long course of time brings, I fear lest the powerful of the council, having made some disturbance, escape notice in turning the polity into a tyrannic monarchy.

[114742] 56.1. "If, then, you share the polity with the people too, no evil will be bred here, but he who thinks fit to have more than the rest and has won over from the senate one willing to sicken and do wrong with him—for one must foresee all the likely things when deliberating about a city—that great and august man, summoned by the tribunes before the multitude, will render account to the mean and humble people of what he does and intends, and if he appear to wrong, will get the justice he deserves.

[115243] 56.2. "And the people itself, that it may not grow insolent, become master of so great a power, nor, led astray by demagoguery from the basest, make war on the best—for in a crowd too tyranny is wont to arise—will be watched and allowed to break no law by a man surpassing in prudence, chosen dictator by you, who, using autocratic and irresponsible power, will both cut out the diseased part of the city and not let the not-yet-corrupted be harmed, reforming the best customs and laws and ways of life and appointing what magistracies he thinks will most temperately administer public affairs; and, having arranged these within six months, will be a private man again, taking from these things only the being honoured, and nothing else.

[115982] 56.3. "Reflecting, then, on these things, and judging this form of polity best, drive the people from nothing; but, as you have shared with it the appointing of the magistrates that govern the city each year, and the ratifying of some laws and abolishing of others, and the deciding about war and peace—the greatest and most sovereign of the matters transacted in the city—and have not made the senate master of any of these, so share with it the courts too, and most of all about those who may be charged with wronging the city, by introducing strife or contriving tyranny or treating with the enemy about treason or attempting some other such evil.

[116634] 56.4. "For the more fearful you make it for the insolent and the greedy to transgress the laws and disturb the customs, by appointing many eyes and guards over them, the better will the commonwealth be for you."

[116847] 57.1. Having said this and the like, he ceased. Of the senators who rose after him, all the rest except a few attached themselves to this opinion. And when the preliminary decree had to be written, Marcius, having asked leave to speak, said: "What manner of man I have been toward public affairs, senators, and how through my goodwill toward you I have come into this danger, and that what has met me from you is contrary to my judgment, you all know, and will know still more when my case has its

[117346] 57.2. end. But since Valerius's opinion prevails, may it profit you, and may I prove a bad guesser of the future. But that you who write the preliminary decree may know on what terms you are about to hand me over to the people, and that I too may not be ignorant about what I shall contend, bid the tribunes say before you what the wrong is on which they will accuse me, and what name they will inscribe on the suit."

[117765] 58.1. He said this, thinking he would undergo trial on the speeches he had made in the senate, and wishing the tribunes to acknowledge that on this charge they were about to accuse him. But the tribunes, having deliberated among themselves, charged him with plotting tyranny and bade him come to make defence against this charge, not wishing to shut up the indictment in one charge, and that neither strong nor pleasing to the senate, but both making for themselves authority to accuse him of whatever they wished, and thinking to take away from Marcius the help from the councillors. And Marcius said: "Well, if indeed I shall be judged on this slander, I give myself liable to trial before the commoners, and let there be no hindrance to writing the

[118518] 58.2. preliminary decree." It was also welcome to the majority of the councillors that the trial be on this charge, on both grounds: that to say what one thinks among the councillors would not be liable to charge, and that the man would easily clear the slander, having lived a temperate and unblamed life.

[118826] 58.3. The preliminary decree about the trial is written after this, and a time for the preparation of the defence is fixed for the man up to the third market-day. The market-days came about for the Romans, as even to our times, every ninth day. On these, the commoners coming together from the fields into the city made the exchanges of their wares and took justice from one another, and, taking up the vote, ratified the public matters of which they were master by the laws and which the senate permitted them; but the seven days between the market-days, being for the most part themselves labourers and poor, they spent in the fields.

[119464] 58.4. When the tribunes had received the preliminary decree, going forward into the marketplace they summoned the people to an assembly, and, going through many encomiums of the senate and reading its decrees, proclaimed a day on which they were to complete the trial, to which they thought fit that all the citizens come as men who would decide about the greatest matters.

[119839] 59.1. When this was noised abroad, there was much zeal and arraying of both commoners and patricians—the one as men who would punish the most arrogant, the other lest he become subject to the enemy, as men contending on behalf of the aristocracy. And it seemed that the whole vindication of life and freedom was being risked for both in the contest then. The third market-day arriving, the crowd from the fields, such as never before, having come together into the city, held the marketplace from early morning; and the tribunes summoned the multitude to the tribal assembly, having roped off parts of the marketplace in which the tribes were to stand by themselves.

[120507] 59.2. And then for the first time there was held among the Romans an assembly by tribes voting against a man, though the patricians much opposed it, that this might not be, and thought fit to gather the assembly by centuries, as was their custom. For in former times, when the people was to cast a vote about any matter the senate permitted, the consuls summoned the centuriate assembly, first performing the sacrifices which are by law theirs—and to our time some of these are still performed.

[121003] 59.3. The multitude came together in the Field of Mars before the city, arrayed under centurions and standards as in war, and they cast their vote not all of them taking it up together, but each by his own centuries, when summoned by the consuls. The whole being a hundred and ninety-three centuries, and these divided into six classes, the first class called and casting its vote was that of those having the greatest property assessment and taking the first rank in wars; among whom were eighteen centuries of cavalry and eighty of foot.

[121544] 59.4. Second voted the class of those inferior in livelihood and fighting in the rank below in battles and having not the same armament as those in the front, but less; this multitude was arrayed in twenty centuries, and there were added to them two companies of carpenters and bronze-smiths and the other artisans of warlike works. Those called in the third class filled twenty centuries, and had an assessment less than the second and the rank below them, and bore arms not equal to those

[122036] 59.5. before them. Those called after these had a less property assessment and took the safer rank in war and had a lighter armament; these too were divided into twenty centuries; and to these were arrayed two centuries of horn-blowers and trumpeters. The fifth class was called, of those assessed at very little money, whose arms were javelins and slings; these had no rank in the phalanx, but, light-armed and unencumbered, campaigned with the heavy-armed, divided into thirty centuries.

[122527] 59.6. The poorest of the citizens, being not fewer than all the rest, last took up the vote, having one century only; these were free from the levied campaigns and exempt from the assessments made by property, and for

[122746] 59.7. both these reasons most without honour in the voting. If, then, in the first centuries—which the cavalry filled and the foot taking the first rank in the wars—ninety-seven centuries should agree, the voting was complete, and the vote was no longer given to the remaining ninety-six centuries; but if this did not happen, the second class of twenty-two centuries was called, and the third; and this continued until ninety-seven centuries should agree.

[123204] 59.8. And most of the contests reached their end in the first callings, so that there was no further need of the last. Rarely indeed did so doubtful a matter occur that it advanced to the last vote, of the poorest; and it was, as it were, a portent, when the first hundred and ninety-two centuries being split in two, the last vote cast for those should become the cause of the inclination to one side.

[123608] 59.9. Now those fighting for Marcius thought fit to call this assembly by property classes, supposing that perhaps at the first calling the man would be acquitted by the ninety-eight centuries, or, failing that, by the second or third. But the tribunes, suspecting this, themselves thought fit to gather the tribal assembly and make it master of the contest, that neither the poor be at a disadvantage to the rich, nor the light-armed have a less honoured place than the heavy-armed, nor the commoner multitude, cast off to the last callings, be shut out from equality; but, all having become of equal vote and equal honour with one another, should cast their vote at a single calling by tribes.

[124305] 59.10. And these seemed to demand more justly than the others, thinking the people's court ought to be popular and not oligarchic, and the decision about those wronging the commonwealth common to all.

[124507] 60.1. This too being conceded them, with difficulty, by the patricians, when the trial had to be pleaded, first there went up Minucius, one of the consuls, and spoke the words the senate had charged him with: first reminding them of all the benefits the people had received from the patricians, then thinking fit that in return for many fine deeds one necessary favour be rendered by the people to them who begged it, for the common good

[124946] 60.2. of the city. Besides this, praising concord and peace and recounting how great prosperity each of these brings to cities, accusing dissension and civil wars, by which he declared cities had been destroyed with all their men and whole nations had perished; exhorting them not to choose the worse before the better, yielding to anger, but from sober reckoning to foresee the future, nor to use the worst of the citizens as counsellors when deliberating about the greatest matters, but those who seemed to them best, by whom they knew their country had been much benefited in peace and in war, whom they would not think fit to distrust as having changed their nature.

[125618] 60.3. And one chief point of all his speech was, that they cast no vote against Marcius, but most of all for his own sake acquit the man of the trial, remembering what he had been toward public affairs and how many wars he had brought to a good issue on behalf of the common freedom and empire, and that they would do nothing holy or just or befitting them, bearing rancour for paltry words and being ungrateful for noble

[126041] 60.4. deeds. And it was a fair occasion for acquittal, since he himself came offering his person to his opponents and ready to accept whatever they should decide about him. But if they were unable to be reconciled to him, but were harsh and inexorable, reflecting that the senate is present begging on his behalf—three hundred men, the best of the city—to feel something and have their opinions bent, and not to thrust away the entreaty of so many friends for the punishment of one enemy, but, for the favour of many good men, to disregard the suit of one man. Having said this and the like, he added last that speech: that, a vote being cast, if they should acquit the man, they would seem to have released him because the people was wronged in nothing by him;

[126804] 60.5. but if they should hinder the trial from being completed, they would appear to have gratified those who begged on his behalf.

[126937] 61.1. When Minucius had ceased, the tribune Sicinius came forward and said that he himself would neither betray the freedom of the commoners nor willingly entrust it to betrayers, but that, if the patricians really offered the man for trial to the commoners, he would give the vote concerning him, and would do nothing else besides this.

[127276] 61.2. After this Minucius came forward and said: "Since you are by all means eager, tribunes, that a vote be cast about the man, accuse him of nothing outside the charge; but since you indicted him for attempting tyranny, prove this and bring your proofs about it. And of the speeches you charge him with making against the people in the senate, neither make mention nor accuse. For the council voted him released from this charge and thought fit that he come before the people on stated terms."

[127773] 61.3. And after this he read the preliminary decree. Having said this and called it to witness, he went down. Of the tribunes, Sicinius first laid out the accusation with much care and preparation, referring all that the man had ever done or said against the people to the establishing of a tyranny; then after him the most able of the tribunes to speak.

[128129] 62.1. When Marcius took up the speech, beginning from above, from his earliest age, he went through how many campaigns he had served on behalf of the city, and how many crowns of victory he had received from the generals, and the enemy prisoners taken by him, and the citizens saved in the contests; and at each thing said he displayed the prizes of valour and offered the generals as witnesses and called by name the citizens saved.

[128564] 62.2. And these came forward, lamenting and begging the citizens not to destroy as an enemy the author of their safety, asking one life in return for many and offering themselves instead of him to be used as they wished. The greater part of them were of the commoner class and very useful to the commonwealth; whose faces and entreaties the people taking as a disgrace, turned to pity and tears.

[128961] 62.3. And when Marcius, tearing his clothing, displayed his breast full of wounds and all the rest of his body covered with the blows, and asked whether they thought it the deed of the same men to save the citizens in the wars but to destroy in peace those they had saved; and whether one establishing a tyranny would drive from the city the commoner part, by which a tyranny is most increased and nourished—while he still spoke, the equitable and kindly part of the commoners shouted to acquit the man, and took it as a disgrace if a man who had so often disregarded his own life for the safety of all should undergo trial about such a charge.

[129607] 62.4. But all who were by nature envious and haters of the good and easily moved to every strife were vexed at being about to acquit the man, yet had nothing else to do, finding no apparent occasion of an attempt at tyranny, about which they had taken up the votes.

[129874] 63.1. Perceiving this, that Decius—who had made the speeches in the senate and arranged for the preliminary decree about the trial to be written—rose, and, ordering silence, said: "Since, commoners, the patricians acquit him of the speeches made by Marcius in the senate and the violent and arrogant deeds that followed from these, and do not even permit us to accuse him, hear what other deed besides the speeches this noble man happens to have wrought—how arrogant and tyrannic—and learn what law of yours he, being a private man, abolished.

[130419] 63.2. "You all know, doubtless, that the law orders the spoils from the wars, of as many as we may take by valour, to be public, and of these not only does no private man become master, but not even the commander of the force himself; but the quaestor, receiving them, sells them and brings the money to the treasury; and this law, from the time we have dwelt in this city, no one not only abolished, but did not even charge with being not well; but this Marcius, first and alone, disregarding it, though it stands and is valid, thought fit to appropriate our common spoils, commoners—last year, and not long ago.

[131034] 63.3. "For when you made an incursion into the land of the Antiates and surrounded yourselves with many persons, many cattle, much grain, and much other property, neither did he display these to the quaestor, nor, having sold them himself, did he bring the money to the treasury, but distributed and bestowed all the booty on his own friends. This deed I say is a proof of tyranny; for how not?—who benefited his own flatterers and bodyguards and the accomplices of his coming tyranny out of the public funds;

[131545] 63.4. and I say this is a manifest abolition of the law. Let Marcius come forward and declare one of two things—either that he did not distribute among his friends the spoils he took from the enemy's land, or that, doing this, he does not abolish the laws—of which he will have neither to say to you. For you yourselves know both, the law and the deed, and you cannot, having acquitted him, seem to have judged the just and well-sworn things. Leaving, then, the crowns and the prizes of valour and the wounds and the rest of the show, speak to these, Marcius; for I now hand over the speech to you."

[132146] 64.1. This accusation made much change to the other side. For the more equitable and those eager for the man's acquittal became softer on hearing these things, while all the malicious—which was the greatest part of the people, eager in every way to destroy the man—were still more strengthened toward this, having got a great and manifest

[132486] 64.2. occasion. For the distribution of the spoils was true—not, however, made of a wicked purpose and for the establishment of a tyranny, as Decius charged, but from the best motive and for the correction of the evils gripping the commonwealth. For while the multitude was still in strife and divided from the patricians, the enemy, despising them, made incursions of the country and continual ravagings; and whenever it seemed good to the senate that the force to hinder these march out, none of the commoners marched out, but they rejoiced and looked on at what was happening; and the patricians' band was not by

[133103] 64.3. itself a match for the enemy. Perceiving this, Marcius promised the consuls that, if they should entrust him with the command, he would lead a willing army against the enemy and exact justice from them quickly. Receiving the authority, he summoned his clients and friends and those of the other citizens who wished to gain some advantage from the general's fortune and valour in war. And when a sufficient force seemed to him to have come together, he led it against the enemy, who as yet foresaw nothing.

[133616] 64.4. Invading a land full of many goods and becoming master of abundant booty, he allowed the soldiers to distribute among themselves all that was taken, that those who had shared in the work, carrying off the fruit of their labours, might come eagerly to the other campaigns; and that those who had shrunk back, reflecting how many goods they might have shared but had been hindered through being in strife, might become wiser for the remaining expeditions.

[134077] 64.5. This was the man's intent about the deed; but, examined by itself with sullen anger and the envy of foes, the act seemed to be a kind of demagoguery and tyrannic bribery. So that the whole marketplace was full of shout and tumult, and neither had Marcius anything to say in defence to this, nor the consul nor anyone else, as the charge had appeared against them unexpected and unlooked-for.

[134476] 64.6. When no one any longer made defence, the tribunes gave the vote to the tribes, inscribing on the suit as penalty perpetual exile—through fear, I think, lest the man should not be convicted if they had assessed death against him. When all had voted, the votes being counted, the difference appeared not great. For there being then twenty-one tribes to which the vote was given, Marcius had nine acquitting tribes; so that if two tribes had come over to him, on account of the equality of votes he would have been acquitted, as the law thought fit.

[135030] 65.1. This was the first summons of a patrician man before the people for trial. And from that time it became a custom for those who later took the presidency of the people to summon whom they thought fit of the citizens to undergo trial before the people; and from this beginning the people rose great, and the aristocracy lost much of its ancient dignity, permitting the commoners to share the senate, conceding them to seek offices, not hindering them from taking presidencies of sacred rites, and sharing with all the other most honoured things proper to the patricians alone—some things by necessity and unwillingly, others by forethought and wisdom, about which I shall speak at the proper time.

[135733] 65.2. This custom, however—I mean the summoning of the powerful in the city to trial, of which the people became master—would afford many occasions of speech to those who wish to praise or blame it. For many good men have already suffered things unworthy of their valour, shamefully and wickedly deprived of their lives by the tribunes; and many arrogant and tyrannic in their characters, forced to render account of their lives and pursuits, have given the fitting penalties.

[136211] 65.3. When, then, the decisions were made from the best motive, and the boasts of the great were brought down with justice, it seemed a great and wondrous thing and was praised by all; but when the valour of a man administering public affairs well was envied and unjustly destroyed, it appeared dreadful to the rest, and those who began the custom were accused. And the Romans, often deliberating whether they ought to abolish it or keep it as they received it from their forefathers, set no end to the deliberation.

[136729] 65.4. But if I too must declare an opinion about such great matters, it seems to me that the custom itself, examined by itself, is useful and most necessary to the Roman city, but becomes better and worse according to the characters of the tribunes. For when men just and temperate and reckoning the common matters more necessary than the private obtain this power, the one wronging the commonwealth, having given the punishment that befitted, worked much fear in those prepared to do the like; and the good man, coming from the best motive to public affairs, neither underwent a shameful trial nor was brought into charges foreign to his pursuits.

[137379] 65.5. But when wicked and licentious and money-loving men obtain so great a power, the contrary of these things happens. So that one ought not to correct the custom as faulty, but consider how good men shall become champions of the people, and that the greatest matters not be entrusted at random to whoever happens.

[137697] 66.1. The first strife that befell the Romans after the expulsion of the kings had such causes and reached this end. I have lengthened the account of it lest anyone marvel how the patricians endured to make the people master of so great a power, no slaughter of the best men having occurred nor exile, such as in many other cities occurred. For each man longs, at paradoxical reports, to learn the cause, and places his belief in this alone.

[138140] 66.2. I reckoned, then, that my account would need much—indeed everything—to be credible, if I said only so much, that the patricians gave up their dominion to the commoners, and, though it was in their power to govern under an aristocracy, made the people master of the greatest things; but had passed over the causes for which these things were conceded; for this reason I went through them all.

[138539] 66.3. And since they reformed their affairs not by forcing and compelling one another with arms, but by persuading with words, I judged it most necessary of all to go through the speeches the powerful in each party then used. And I would marvel if some think they ought to record accurately the deeds in wars, and sometimes spend many words on a single battle—going through the natures of places and the peculiarities of armaments and the modes of formations and the exhortations of generals and the other things that became causes of victory to one side—but, recording civic movements and strifes, do not think they ought to report the speeches by which the paradoxical and wondrous deeds were accomplished.

[139249] 66.4. For if anything else is a great encomium of the Roman city and worthy to be emulated by all men, this too, in my opinion, was a deed—or rather, above all the many wondrous things, the most brilliant—that neither did the commoners, despising the patricians, attack them and, having wrought much slaughter of the best, take over all their possessions; nor did those in dignities, using either their own resources or foreign aid, destroy all the commoners and dwell fearlessly in the city for the rest of time;

[139764] 66.5. but, like brothers with brothers or sons with fathers in a temperate household conversing about equal and just things, they dissolved their quarrels by persuasion and reason, and endured to do nothing irreparable or impious against one another—such things as the Corcyraeans wrought in their strife, and the Argives and Milesians and all Sicily and many other cities. I, then, for these reasons chose to make the narrative more accurate rather than briefer; let each judge as he wishes.

[140258] 67.1. The trial then having this end, the people was dismissed, having taken on a senseless boast and thinking it had brought down the aristocracy; the patricians downcast and humbled and holding Valerius to blame, by whom persuaded they had entrusted the trial to the people; and there was lamentation and tears of those pitying and escorting Marcius.

[140612] 67.2. But Marcius himself was seen neither bewailing his own fortunes nor lamenting nor saying or doing anything unworthy of his magnanimity whatever; and he showed his nobility and the firmness of his mind still more when, having come home, he saw his wife and mother rending their robes and beating their breasts and crying out what it is natural to say in such calamities, women cut off from their nearest by deaths or exiles.

[141043] 67.3. For he felt nothing at the tears and lamentations of the women, but, having only embraced them and exhorted them to bear their misfortunes nobly, and committed his children to them—for the elder of the children was ten years old, the younger still in arms—and having neither shown them any other affection nor arranged anything he would need for his exile, he went out in haste to the gates, having told no one whither he would make his withdrawal.

[141499] 68.1. A few days later the time of the elections came round, and there were appointed consuls by the people Quintus Sulpicius Camerinus and Sergius Larcius Flavius, for the second time. And certain disturbances befell the city from divine terrors, frequent; for unwonted apparitions were seen by many, and voices were heard with no one speaking, and births of men and beasts far departing from the natural were borne to the incredible and monstrous, and oracles were chanted in many places, and women seized by divine inspiration prophesied pitiable and dreadful

[142063] 68.2. fortunes for the city. And a certain pestilential sickness laid hold of the multitude and worked much destruction of cattle; the death of men, however, was not great, but the terror went only as far as sicknesses. To some these things seemed to come about by the purpose of a god indignant that they had driven the best of the citizens from his country; to others nothing of what happened was a god's work, but these too were chance, and

[142508] 68.3. all the rest human accidents. Then there came to the council of the senate a sick man, conveyed on a small couch—Titus Latinius by name, an elder and master of sufficient property, a labourer and for the greater part of his life living in the country. He, brought into the senate, said that in his sleep Capitoline Jupiter had seemed to stand over him and say: "Go, Latinius, and tell the citizens that they gave me as the leading dancer of the recent procession one not fair, that they may renew the festivals and perform others from the beginning; for I have

[143076] 68.4. not accepted these." He said that, rising from sleep, he had counted the dream as nothing, but had supposed it one of the many and deceitful. Then again in his sleep the same image of the god, appearing to him, was angry and indignant that he had not reported to the senate what was bidden, and threatened that, unless he did this quickly, he would learn at great cost not to disregard the divinities. And having seen the second dream also, he said he had formed the same opinion about it, and at the same time took the matter as a disgrace—that a labouring old man should report to the senate dreams full of superstition and terrors, lest he incur ridicule.

[143742] 68.5. A few days later his son, young and handsome, neither by sickness nor by any other apparent cause, snatched off suddenly, died; and again the apparition of the god, appearing in his sleep, made plain that of his disdain and contempt of the god's words he had now given one penalty, deprived of his son,

[144052] 68.6. and would give the others a little later. He said that, hearing this, he received the saying with pleasure, if death should come to him who had neglected life; but the god set on him not this punishment, but cast into all the members of his body unbearable and dreadful pains, so that he could move no limb without the utmost wrenching. Then indeed, having communicated to his friends what had befallen and being ordered by them to come to the senate, while going through these things he seemed gradually to be relieved of his pains; and when he had gone through all, rising from the couch and crying out to the god, he went off on his own feet through the city home, sound.

[144734] 69.1. The senate was filled with fear, and each was speechless, unable to conjecture what was being made plain by the god, and who the leading dancer of the procession was who seemed to him not fair. Then someone of them, recalling what had happened, speaks, and all bore witness. It was of this sort: a Roman man, not obscure, having handed over his own servant to his fellow-slaves to lead off for punishment by death, that the man's punishment might be conspicuous, ordered him to be dragged through the marketplace scourged, and through any other conspicuous place of the city, going before the procession which the city was sending to the god at that time.

[145397] 69.2. Those leading the servant to punishment, stretching out both his hands and binding them to a piece of wood reaching along his breast and shoulders down to his wrists, followed scourging him, naked, with whips. The man, held in such necessity, both cried out ill-omened cries which the pain prompted, and made unseemly movements through the maltreatment. This man, then, all supposed to be the dancer not fair indicated by the god.

[145835] 70.1. Since I have come to this part of the history, I do not think I ought to pass over the things performed by them about the festival—not that my narrative may become more pleasing by receiving theatrical additions and more flowery speeches, but that it may confirm one of the necessary matters: that the nations which jointly founded the Roman city were Greek, colonised from the most distinguished places, and not, as some think, barbarous and homeless.

[146295] 70.2. For I promised at the end of the first writing, which I composed and published about their race, to confirm the proposition with countless proofs, furnishing their ancient customs and usages and pursuits, which they keep to my time, such as they received from their forefathers; not thinking it enough for those who record ancient and local histories to relate them credibly as they received them from the natives, but thinking they need many and irrefutable testimonies if they are to appear

[146795] 70.3. trustworthy. Among which I am persuaded that first and most sovereign of all are the ancestral worships paid in each city concerning gods and divinities. For these both Greece and barbarian land keep under guard for the longest time, and think fit to innovate nothing about them, restrained by fear of

[147104] 70.4. the wrath of the divinities. Most of all have the barbarians experienced this, for many reasons which it is not the time to tell at present; and no length of time has yet persuaded the Egyptians or Libyans or Celts or Scythians or Indians or any other barbarian nation whatsoever to unlearn or transgress anything about the rites of the gods—unless some, having at some time come under the power of others, were forced to take over the pursuits of their conquerors. But it has never befallen the Roman city to experience such a fortune; rather, it itself always prescribes justice to others.

[147703] 70.5. If, then, their race were barbarian, so far would they have been from unlearning their ancestral rites and the native customs through which they advanced to so great prosperity, that they even established it as fair for all the others whom they ruled to honour the gods by their own usages; and nothing would have hindered all the Greek world from being barbarised by the Romans, ruled by them now for the seventh generation, if indeed they were barbarians.

[148168] 71.1. Another, then, would have supposed that even the things now done in the city were no small indications of the ancient pursuits; but I, that no one may suppose this proof weak—either on that improbable supposition that, having mastered all the Greek world, they would gladly have learned the better customs and disregarded the native ones—shall make my proof from that time when they did not yet hold the leadership of Greece nor any other overseas dominion, using Quintus Fabius as my confirmer and needing no further proof; for he is the most ancient of those who composed Roman histories, and furnishes proof not only from what he heard, but also from what he himself knew.

[148851] 71.2. This festival, then, the senate of the Romans voted to hold, as I said before, according to the vows made by the dictator Aulus Postumius, when he was about to contend against the revolted Latin cities attempting to bring Tarquinius back to power; and he appointed to be spent each year on the sacrifices and games five hundred minae of silver; and up to the Punic War they spent this on the festival.

[149260] 71.3. On these sacred days many other things were done by Greek custom—at the assemblies and receptions of strangers and truces—which it would be a long task to tell; but the things about the procession and the sacrifice and the games—for it suffices from these to examine the things not told—were of this sort.

[149573] 72.1. Before beginning the games, those holding the greatest power sent out a procession to the gods, leading it from the Capitol and through the marketplace to the great hippodrome. There led the procession first their sons who were near manhood and of an age to take part—the cavalry, those whose fathers had the cavalry assessment, the foot those who were to serve among the foot; the former by squadrons and centuries, the latter by classes and ranks, marching as to a school; that there might be made plain to the strangers the coming flower of the city's manhood, what its number and beauty were.

[150177] 72.2. After these followed charioteers driving four-horse chariots and pairs and the unyoked horses; after whom the contestants in the athletic events, both light and heavy, bare as to the rest of the body, but covering the parts that modesty requires. This custom too continued in Rome to my time, as it was from the beginning among the Greeks; but in Greece it has been abolished, the Lacedaemonians having abolished it.

[150601] 72.3. The first to attempt to strip his body and run naked at Olympia, in the fifteenth Olympiad, was Acanthus the Lacedaemonian. Before this all the Greeks held it a disgrace to show their bodies wholly bare in the contests, as Homer testifies—being a most trustworthy and ancient witness—making the heroes gird themselves. At any rate, narrating the wrestling of Ajax and Odysseus at the funeral of Patroclus, he says: "And the two, having girded themselves, stepped into the midst of the contest."

[151103] 72.4. And still more clearly in the Odyssey he makes this plain, at the boxing-match of Irus and Odysseus, in these verses: "So spoke he; and they all approved; but Odysseus girded his rags about his loins, and showed his thighs, fair and great; and his broad shoulders were seen and his breast and stout arms." And introducing the beggar no longer wishing to fight, but playing the coward, he has said this: "So spoke they; but Irus' spirit was evilly stirred; yet even so the suitors led him in, having girded him by force." This ancient custom among the Greeks the Romans, keeping it to this day, are plainly seen not to have learned later from us, nor to have changed it in time, as we did.

[151799] 72.5. There followed the contestants choruses of dancers, many, divided into three—first of men, second of beardless youths, last of boys—whom there accompanied flute-players blowing on small archaic flutes, as is done even to this time, and harpers plucking seven-stringed ivory lyres and the so-called barbita. Of these the use, among the Greeks, has ceased in my time, though it was ancestral; but among the Romans it is kept in all the ancient sacrifices.

[152260] 72.6. The equipment of the dancers was crimson tunics girt with bronze belts, and swords slung at the side, and spears shorter than the ordinary; and the men also had bronze helmets adorned with conspicuous crests and feathers. There led each chorus one man, who gave the others the figures of the dance, leading off the warlike and vigorous movements, mostly in trochaic rhythms.

[152642] 72.7. This too, then, was a Greek pursuit, very ancient among them—the dance in arms called the pyrriche; whether Athena first began to lead the dance and to dance in arms at the destruction of the Titans the victory-song out of joy, or, still earlier, the Curetes established it, when, nursing Zeus, they wished to soothe him by the clash of arms and the rhythmic movement of limbs, as the myth holds.

[153046] 72.8. Homer shows the antiquity of this too as native to the Greeks in many places, but most of all in the description of the shield which he says Hephaestus gave Achilles. For, supposing on it two cities, the one adorned in peace, the other suffering in war—in which he sets the better fortune by making festivals and weddings and revels, as is fitting—he says this too: "And youths went whirling as dancers; and among them flutes and lyres held their cry; and the women, standing, marvelled, each at her own porch."

[153565] 72.9. And again, saying that there was wrought on it a Cretan chorus of youths and maidens, he has spoken thus: "And a dancing-floor the renowned god of the two strong arms wrought, like to that which once in broad Knossos Daedalus fashioned for fair-haired Ariadne. There youths and maidens worth many oxen danced, holding one another's hands by the wrist." And describing its adornment, that he might make plain to us that the movement of the males was in arms, he says: "And these had fair garlands, and those had daggers of gold from silver baldrics." And introducing the leaders of their dance, who gave the others the lead and led off, he writes: "And a great crowd stood about the lovely dance, taking delight; and two tumblers among them, leading off the song, whirled through the midst."

[154363] 72.10. And not only from the contest-like and earnest dance of the choruses, which the Romans used at the sacrifices and processions, might one see their kinship with the Greeks, but also from the mocking and jeering. For after the armed choruses there marched in procession the choruses of satyr-players, representing the Greek sikinnis. Their equipment, for those likened to Sileni, was woolly tunics, which some call "shaggy," and wraps of every flower; for those likened to Satyrs, girdles and goat-skins and upstanding manes of hair upon their heads and the like. These mocked and mimicked the earnest movements, transferring them to the more ridiculous.

[155024] 72.11. The entries of triumphs too show the mocking and satyric sport to be ancient and native to the Romans. For it is permitted to those who lead home victories to lampoon and jeer at the most distinguished men, even the generals themselves—as at Athens those who marched in procession on the wagons formerly were carried along amid their jests, but now sing improvised verses.

[155405] 72.12. And I have seen also at the funerals of distinguished men, along with the other processions, the choruses of satyr-players leading the bier, performing the sikinnis dance—and most of all at the funerals of the prosperous. That the satyric sport and dance was not the invention of Ligurians or Umbrians or any other barbarians dwelling in Italy, but of Greeks, I fear lest I seem burdensome to some in wishing to confirm by more words an acknowledged matter.

[155871] 72.13. After these choruses there went by harpers in numbers and many flute-players; and after them those carrying the censers, on which spices and frankincense were burned the whole way, and those bearing the procession-vessels made of silver and gold, both the sacred and the public. Last of all there marched the images of the gods, borne on the shoulders of men, presenting forms like those fashioned among the Greeks, and equipment and symbols and gifts, of which each is handed down as the finder and giver to men—not only of Zeus and Hera and Athena and Poseidon and the others whom the Greeks reckon among the twelve gods, but also of the more ancient, from whom the twelve gods are fabled to have been born—Cronus and Rhea and Themis and Leto and the Fates and Mnemosyne and all the others to whom there are sacred rites and precincts among the Greeks; and of the later ones, fabled to have been born after Zeus took the rule—Persephone, Eileithyia, the Nymphs, the Muses, the Seasons, the Graces, Dionysus—and of as many demigods as, their souls having left their mortal bodies, are said to have gone up to heaven and obtained honours like the gods'—Heracles, Asclepius, the Dioscuri, Selene, Pan, and countless others.

[157102] 72.14. And yet, if the founders of Rome and the establishers of this festival were barbarians, what fitted them to revere all the Greek gods and divinities, but to disregard their ancestral ones? Or let someone show us another race, outside the Greek, to whom these sacred rites are ancestral, and then let him impugn this proof as unsound.

[157444] 72.15. The procession completed, the consuls and those of the priests whose office it was at once sacrificed oxen; and the manner of the sacrifices was the same as among us. For, having washed their hands and purified the victims with clean water and sprinkled the fruits of Demeter on their heads, then having prayed, they ordered the attendants to sacrifice them. Of these, some, while the victim still stood, struck its temples with a club; others, as it fell, put the slaughtering-knives beneath; and after this, having flayed and dismembered it, they took first-fruits from each entrail and every other limb, which, having moistened with spelt-meal, they offered on baskets to the sacrificers; and these, placing them on the altars, kindled them and poured wine over

[158217] 72.16. the offerings as they were consecrated. That each thing was done by the laws established about sacrifice by the Greeks, it is easy to learn from the poetry of Homer. For he introduces the heroes washing their hands and using barley-meal, where he says: "Then they washed their hands and took up the barley-grains." And cutting the hair in three from the head and placing it on the fire, writing thus: "But he, taking first-fruits, cast the hairs of the head into the fire." And striking the foreheads of the victims with clubs and sacrificing them when fallen, as he does at the sacrifice of Eumaeus: "And he struck, taking first-fruits, with a billet of oak which he left when splitting. And the life left it; and they slaughtered and singed it."

[158973] 72.17. And taking first-fruits from the entrails and from the other limbs, and moistening these with barley-meal and consecrating them on the altars, as he does at the same sacrifice: "And the swineherd laid the raw pieces, beginning from all the limbs, on the rich fat; and these he cast on the fire, having sprinkled them with barley-grits."

[159318] 72.18. These things, which I have seen the Romans still doing in my time at the sacrifices, I know; and content with this one proof, I am persuaded that the founders of Rome were not barbarians, but Greeks gathered from many places. For a few pursuits about sacrifices and festivals it is possible that certain barbarians too perform like the Greeks; but to do all the same is incredible.

[159708] 73.1. It remains for me to go through a few things about the games which they performed after the procession. First was the race of four-horse chariots and pairs and unyoked horses, as among the Greeks of old at Olympia and to

[159936] 73.2. the present. And in the equestrian contests, two of the very ancient pursuits, as established from the beginning and kept by the Romans, continue to my times: that about the three-horse chariots, which among the Greeks has ceased, though it is an ancient and heroic practice, which Homer makes the Greeks use in the battles—for to two horses yoked, in the manner a pair is yoked, a third trace-horse was added at the side, held by a leading-rein, which the ancients called the "trace-horse" from its being hung at the side and not yoked; and another, kept still by a few Greek cities in certain archaic rites—the race of those who leap from the chariots.

[160598] 73.3. For when the horse-races take their end, those riding beside the charioteers—whom the poets call parabatai, but the Athenians apobatai—leaping down from the chariots, contend the stadium-race themselves against one another. And the horse-races completed, then there entered those contending with their own bodies—runners and boxers and wrestlers. For these three were the events among the ancient Greeks, as Homer shows at the funeral of Patroclus.

[161054] 73.4. And in the intervals between the events they displayed a most Greek and best of all customs—making crownings and proclamations of the honours with which they honoured their benefactors, as at Athens was done at the Dionysiac sacrifices, and displays of as many spoils as they had taken from wars to those who had come together to view.

[161397] 73.5. But indeed it was neither well, the subject not requiring it, to make no mention of these, nor fitting to lengthen beyond what was needed. It is time to return to the remaining narrative. For when the senate learned the matters about the man led off to punishment by his master and going before the procession, from him who renewed the account of what had been done, supposing this to be the not-fair leader of the dancers spoken of by the god, as I said, and having sought out the one who had maltreated the servant and imposed the penalty he deserved, it voted that another procession be performed for the god and other games from the beginning at double the money than before. And the things accomplished in the consulship of these consuls were of this sort.