WORK: Antiquitates Romanae  (slug: dionysius-of-halicarnass-antiquitates-romanae-97af98)

CHAPTER: 05-book-5



[110144] 53.4. The reckoning of their conspiracy was of this sort. The leaders of the enterprise had to watch for a moonless night and seize the citadels and the strong places of the city; and the servants, when they should perceive those holding the well-placed places — and this was to be made plain to them by a shout — were to kill their masters as they slept, and, having accomplished these things, to plunder the houses of the well-to-do and open the gates to the tyrants.

[110615] 54.1. But the divine providence which at every season saves the city and remains even to my times disclosed their counsels, an information having come to one of the consuls, Sulpicius, which two brothers, Tarquinii, Publius and Marcus, from the city of Laurentum, the chief men of those who shared in the conspiracy, made, forced by a divine necessity.

[110969] 54.2. For there stood over them, when they slept, fearful visions of dreams threatening great punishments, if they should not cease and stand off from the attempt; and they seemed to be pursued by certain divinities and struck and to have their eyes dug out and at the last to suffer many other cruel things; by which, full of fear and shaken with trembling, they were roused, and could not even sleep for these terrors.

[111391] 54.3. At the outset, then, by certain averting and expiatory sacrifices they tried to entreat the divinities that beset them; but when they accomplished nothing, they turned to divination, keeping the intent of the enterprise secret, and thinking fit to learn this only, whether it was now the time to do what they wished. The diviner answering that they were walking a wicked and destructive road, and that, if they should not change their counsels, they would perish in the most shameful manner, fearing lest others should forestall them in bringing the secrets to light, they themselves become informers to the one of the consuls who was in the city.

[112046] 54.4. And the consul, praising them and promising to do them much good, if they should display deeds like their words, kept these men within with himself, telling no one; and the ambassadors of the Latins, having for a time put off and drawn out his answer, then bringing into the senate-house the things resolved by the councillors,

[112381] 54.5. answers them: "Men, friends and kinsmen, report on your departure to the commonwealth of the Latins, that the people of the Romans neither earlier granted to the Tarquinienses, when they asked it, the return of the tyrants, nor afterward to all the Tyrrhenians whom King Porsina led, when they begged for the same things and brought upon us a war heaviest of all wars, did it bend, but endured to see its land mown down and its farmsteads burned, becoming shut within its walls for the sake of freedom and of not being commanded to do anything it did not wish; and at you, O Latins, it has marvelled, if, knowing these things, you have come none the less commanding us to receive the tyrants and to raise the siege of Fidenae, and threatening war if we do not obey. Cease, then, to put forward cold and incredible pretexts of enmity; and if for these reasons you mean to dissolve the kinship and to ratify the war, delay no longer."

[113321] 55.1. Having answered these things to the ambassadors and sent them forth from the city, after this he tells the senate concerning the secret conspiracy what he had learned from the informers; and receiving from them full authority to search out those sharing in the secret counsels and to punish those found, he did not take the self-willed and tyrannical road, as another might have done, shut up in so great a necessity; but he turned to the reasonable and safe one, in keeping with the form of the constitution then established.

[113855] 55.2. For neither did he wish the citizens to be seized from their houses and led to death, dragged from wives and children and fathers — considering what the pity would be of the kinsmen of each at the tearing away of their nearest, and fearing lest some, driven to despair, should take the rush to arms, and the necessity of acting lawlessly should proceed through kindred blood; nor did he think he ought to seat law-courts for them, reckoning that all would deny it and that there would be no firm or indisputable proof for the judges, apart from the information, trusting which they would condemn the citizens to death;

[114481] 55.3. but he devised a certain novel manner of deceit against the revolutionaries, through which, first, the leaders of the secret counsels would themselves, no one compelling them, come to one place; then they would be convicted by indisputable proofs, so that no defence at all should be left them; and besides this, gathered not into a deserted place nor convicted before few witnesses, but in the Forum, all looking on, becoming manifest, they would suffer what befitted, and no confusion would arise throughout the city nor uprisings of others, such as are wont to happen about the punishments of revolutionaries, and that too in perilous times.

[115133] 56.1. Another, then, might have supposed it sufficient to tell the main point itself, that, having seized those sharing in the secret counsels, he put them to death, as though the affairs needed but a brief declaration; but I, deeming the manner too of the seizure of the men worthy of history, resolved not to pass it by, considering that for those who read histories it is not sufficient, for profit, to hear the end alone of what was done, but each demands also to learn the causes of things and the manners of the deeds and the intentions of those who did them and the things from the divine power that concurred, and to be ignorant of none of the things that naturally attend affairs; and seeing the learning of these things to be very necessary for statesmen, that they may have examples to use for the things that befall.

[115963] 56.2. The manner of the seizure of the conspirators, which the consul devised, was this. Choosing the most vigorous of those sharing in the council of the senate, he ordered them, when they should receive the watchword, together with their most trustworthy friends and kinsmen, to seize the strong places of the city, in which each chanced to have his dwelling; and to the horse he gave notice to wait in the most suitable of the houses about the Forum, having swords, and to do whatever he should command them.

[116476] 56.3. And that nothing might be innovated in the seizure of the citizens by their kinsmen or by any of the other citizens, nor that there should be kindred slaughters through this confusion, sending letters to the consul appointed over the siege of the Fidenates, he ordered him, at the beginning of night, leading the best part of the army, to come to the city and, near the wall in a hilly place, to lay down arms.

[116894] 57.1. Having prepared these things, he told the informers of the deed to tell ... the leaders of the conspirators to come into the Forum about midnight, bringing those of their companions whom they most trusted, as about to receive there their post and place and watchword, and to hear what each ought to do. These things came to pass; and when all the chief men of the companions had been gathered into the Forum, by signals unknown to those men, at once both the citadels became full of those who had taken up arms on behalf of the city and the things about the Forum were guarded round about by the horse, and not one exit was left for those who wished to depart.

[117562] 57.2. And at the same time the other consul, Manius, having risen from Fidenae, was present in the plain, leading his force. As soon as day shone forth, the consuls, having heavy-armed men about them, came forward to the platform; and ordering the heralds to proclaim through all the lanes that the people should come to an assembly, when all the crowd of the city had run together, they both make plain to them the conspiracy that had been formed for the return of the tyrant and bring up the informers.

[118068] 57.3. And after this, granting a defence, if any should dispute against the information, when no one attempted to turn to denial, withdrawing from the Forum into the senate-house, they asked the opinions of the councillors concerning them, and, having written down their resolutions, came again to the assembly and read the preliminary decree. It was of this sort: that to the Tarquinii who had informed of the attempt citizenship be given and ten thousand drachmae of silver to each and twenty plethra of public land; but that those who had shared in the conspiracy, having been seized, should die, if the people too should so resolve.

[118706] 57.4. The assembled crowd having made valid the resolutions of the senate, ordering those gathered for the assembly to withdraw from the Forum, they then called the attendants having swords, who, standing round all those liable to the charges in the place where they had been shut up, slew them. Having dispatched these, they no longer admitted any information against any of those who had planned the same things, but released from the charges all who had escaped the punishment by hand, that all that was disturbing might be removed from the city.

[119257] 57.5. Those who formed the conspiracy, then, were destroyed in this manner. And the senate, having voted that all the citizens be purified, because they had been compelled to declare opinions about a civil bloodshed — as not lawful for them to be present at sacred rites and to begin sacrifices before they had expiated the pollution and dissolved the calamity by the customary purifications — when all that was holy had been done by those who interpret divine matters according to the local custom, voted that thank-offerings and games be performed after this, and set apart three days as sacred for these. And Manius Tullius, one of the consuls, having fallen from the sacred chariot in the holy games named after the city, in the procession, in the very hippodrome, and having died on the third day after this procession, Sulpicius alone held the office for the remaining time, which was brief.

[120156] 58.1. The consuls appointed for the coming year were Publius Veturius Geminus and Publius Aebutius Elva. Of these, Aebutius was set over the city affairs, which seemed to need no small guarding, lest some other innovation be made by the poor; but Veturius, taking the half of the army, ravaged the land of the Fidenates, none hindering, and, sitting down before the city, made continuous assaults. Not being able to take the wall by siege, he palisaded and ditched the surroundings, as one about to reduce

[120663] 58.2. the people by famine. But to the Fidenates, now hard pressed, there came aid from the Latins, which Sextus Tarquinius had sent, and corn and arms and the other things fit for war. Trusting in these, they took courage to come forth from the city, a not small force, and make a camp in the open. The circumvallation, then, was no longer useful to the Romans, but it seemed there must be a contest; and a battle takes place near the city, for a while evenly balanced; then, by the endurance of the Romans, which through their much training was their advantage, the Fidenates, being forced, though more in number, were put to flight by fewer.

[121309] 58.3. But there was no great slaughter of them, the withdrawal into the city not being far off, and those on the walls beating back the pursuers. After this deed the allies, dispersing, departed, having helped those within in nothing; and the city was again in the same calamities and was distressed by the want of necessities.

[121638] 58.4. About the same time Sextus Tarquinius, leading an army of Latins, campaigned against Signia, which was held by the Romans, as one about to take the fort by assault. The men within fighting back nobly, he had prepared, as one about to compel the people by famine to leave the place, and spent much time there accomplishing nothing worthy of note; but failing of this hope too, supplies and aid coming to the garrison from the consuls, raising the siege he led off his forces.

[122120] 59.1. In the following year the Romans appoint as consuls Titus Larcius Flavus and Quintus Cloelius Siculus. Of these, Cloelius was set to manage the city affairs, having the half of the army for the guarding of the revolutionaries, being thought equitable in nature and democratic; but Larcius, leading an army equipped for the war against the Fidenates and having prepared the things fit for a siege, set off.

[122533] 59.2. To those toiling under the length of the war and lacking all the necessaries he was grievous, undermining the foundations of the walls and raising mounds and bringing up engines and standing off from the siege neither by day nor by night, and supposing that in a little time he would take the city by storm. For not even the cities of the Latins, in whom alone the Fidenates trusted when they took up the war, were sufficient to save them then.

[122985] 59.3. For no single city was considerable enough to deliver them from the siege, and a force from the whole nation in common had not yet been assembled; but to them, often sending embassies, the presidents of the cities gave the same answers, that aid would come to them swiftly; but no deed like the promises came about, and the hopes of alliance proceeded only as far as words.

[123366] 59.4. Not, however, had the Fidenates altogether despaired of the things from the Latins, but they held out on the hopes from there, enduring all terrible things. But above all the famine was an irresistible thing, and this wrought much destruction of men. When they had now given up under their evils, they sent ambassadors to the consul asking a truce for a fixed number of days, as though in this time about to deliberate concerning friendship with the Romans, on what just terms they should make it.

[123871] 59.5. But the time was asked of them not for the sake of deliberation, but of the preparation of allies, as some deserters lately come revealed. For on the preceding night they had sent the most distinguished of the citizens and those most powerful in the cities of the Latins as ambassadors to the commonwealth, bearing suppliant boughs.

[124211] 60.1. Having foreknown these things, Larcius ordered those asking the truce, when they had laid down their arms and opened the gates, then to confer with him; otherwise neither reconciliation nor truce nor any other humane or moderate thing would there be for them, he said, from the city of the Romans; and the ambassadors sent to the Latin nation he kept from passing any longer within the wall, having beset all the roads leading into the city with more careful guards, so that the besieged were compelled, despairing of the hopes of alliance, to take refuge in entreaties of the enemy. And coming together into an assembly they resolved to submit to the reconciliation

[124885] 60.2. on whatever terms the conqueror should think fit. So democratic, then, were the characters of the leaders of that time, and most far removed from tyrannical self-will, which but a rare few of the leaders of our day, uplifted by the greatness of their authority, have been able to escape, that the consul, having taken over the city, did nothing of his own judgment, but, ordering the people to lay down their arms and leaving a guard upon the citadel, himself went off to Rome, and, gathering the council, gave it to them to consider

[125426] 60.3. in what manner they ought to treat those who had surrendered themselves. At which the councillors, admiring the man for his honour toward them, judged that the most distinguished of the Fidenates and the authors of the revolt, whomever the consul should designate, be scourged with rods and have their heads cut off; but concerning the rest they put the authority in his hands to do all that he chose.

[125835] 60.4. Larcius, having become master of all, put to death a few of the Fidenates accused by those of the opposite party, in the sight of all, and confiscated their property; but to all the rest he gave back both their city to hold and their goods, and cut off the half of their land, which the Roman guards left in the city to hold the citadel allotted. Having accomplished these things, he led the army homeward.

[126249] 61.1. When the capture of Fidenae was announced to the Latins, every city was up and full of fear, and all were angry at those set over the commonwealth, as having betrayed their allies. An assembly being held at Ferentinum, those who persuaded them to take up arms made a great accusation of those who would dissuade from the war, and most of all Tarquinius and his son-in-law Mamilius and the leaders of the city of the Aricini.

[126681] 61.2. Demagogued by these, all who shared in the Latin race in common take up the war against the Romans; and, that no city might either betray the commonwealth or dissolve the enmity beforehand without the resolve of all, they gave one another oaths, and voted that those who should not keep the agreements be outside the treaty and accursed and enemies of all.

[127045] 61.3. Those who enrolled themselves in the treaties as councillors and swore the oaths were men from these cities: the Ardeates, Aricini, Boillani, Bubentani, Corni, Carventani, Circeienses, Coriolani, Corbintes, Cabani, Fortineii, Gabii, Laurentines, Lanuvians, Lavinians, Labicani, Nomentani, Norbani, Praenestines, Pedani, Corcotulani, Satricani, Scaptini, Setini, Tiburtines, Tusculans, Tolerini, Tellenii, Veliterni; from all these cities those in their prime should join the campaign, as many as the leaders Octavius Mamilius and Sextus Tarquinius should need — for these they appointed generals with full power.

[127665] 61.4. And that they might seem to make seemly the pretexts of the war, they sent the most distinguished ambassadors from each city to Rome, who, standing before the senate, said that their city was accused by the city of the Aricini, because, when the Tyrrhenians were bringing war upon the Aricini, they not only afforded them safe passages through their own country, but also helped them with whatever they needed for the war, and, receiving those who fled from the rout, all wounded and unarmed, saved them — not ignorant that they were bringing a common war upon all their nation, and that, if they had taken the city of the Aricini into their power, there would have been nothing to prevent them from enslaving all the other cities also.

[128409] 61.5. If, then, they should be willing to undergo trial before the Aricini, coming to the common court of the Latins, and to be content with what should be judged by all, they said they would need no war; but if, keeping their accustomed self-will, they should think fit to concede to their kinsmen nothing of the just and moderate things, they threatened that all the Latins would make war on them with all their might.

[128831] 62.1. The ambassadors challenging these things, the senate, not thinking fit to undergo trial before the Aricini, concerning matters in which the accusers were to become judges, and supposing the enemy would not even be judges so far as this, but would add still heavier injunctions than these, voted to accept the war. For the sake of their valour, then, and their experience of contests, they supposed no calamity would seize the city; but they dreaded the multitude of the enemy; and sending embassies in many directions it called upon the neighbouring cities for alliance, the Latins sending counter-embassies to the same and accusing Rome much.

[129482] 62.2. The Hernicans, then, having come together in common, answered both embassies with suspicious and unsound replies, saying they would ally with neither for the present, but would deliberate at leisure which of the two demanded the more just things, and would give the council a year's time.

[129778] 62.3. The Rutuli undertook openly to send aid to the Latins; but to the Romans, if they should wish to dissolve the enmity, they said they would through themselves render the Latins more moderate and would arbitrate the settlement for them. The Volscians said they even marvelled at the shamelessness of the Romans, that, conscious that they had in other things wronged them and, at the last, held the best part of their country which they had taken from them, they nevertheless dared to call upon them, being enemies, for alliance; and they counselled them, giving back the country, then to ask just things from them as friends. The Tyrrhenians stood in the way of both, saying to the Romans that a truce had been made not long before, but that to the Tarquinii there was kinship and friendship for them.

[130585] 62.4. These having so answered, the Romans, in no way humbled — which it would have been natural for those to suffer who take up a great war and have despaired of all the hopes of alliance — but trusting in their own forces alone, became far more eager for the contest, as men who through necessity would be brave amid the dangers, and, if they should fare according to their mind, having succeeded by their own valour, would share the glory with no one. So great was the spirit and boldness that remained with them from their many contests.

[131128] 63.1. But preparing the things fit for the war and beginning to enrol the forces, they fell into much perplexity, all not furnishing the same eagerness for the work. For those wanting in livelihood, and most of all those unable to pay their debts to their creditors — being very many — did not obey when called to arms nor wished to share in any work with the patricians, unless they should vote them a release from debts; but some of them even said they would leave the city and exhorted one another not to love a city that gave them a share in no good thing.

[131690] 63.2. For a while, then, the patricians tried to exhort and win them over; but when they became no more moderate to the exhortations, thus then, coming together into the senate-house, they considered what would be the more seemly dissolution of the disturbance that held the city. As many, then, as were equitable in nature and moderate in the assessments of their livelihoods, counselled to remit the debts to the poor and to buy political goodwill for a small price, as men about to gain great things from it, both privately and publicly.

[132232] 64.1. The leader of this opinion was Marcus Valerius, son of Publius Valerius, one of those who overthrew the tyranny, the one called, for his goodwill toward the people, Publicola; teaching them that to those who contend for equal things equal ambitions are wont to be implanted toward the work, but to those who are to enjoy no good thing no noble thought comes; and saying that all the poor were exasperated and going about the Forum saying:

[132678] 64.2. "And what more shall we have, if we conquer the enemies from without, if we are to become liable to the creditors for our debts, and, having established the leadership for the city, shall not be able to guard even the freedom of our own bodies?" He declared that not this danger alone would be brought upon them, if the people should be set at war with the senate — that it might leave the city in the dangers, which all who wish the commonwealth saved should dread — but also that other, more grievous than this, that, deceived by the humanities from the tyrants, it might take up arms against the patricians

[133295] 64.3. and help to restore Tarquinius to power. While, then, it was still words and threats, and no wicked deed had been done by the people, he counselled to forestall by this aid and to win over the people beforehand to the cause — neither being the first to establish this measure nor about to incur any great disgrace through it, but able to point to many who endured even this and other things far more grievous, when it was possible to do nothing else; for necessities are stronger than human nature, and he thought fit that all consider the seemly only then, when they already have the safe.

[133893] 65.1. Having reckoned up many examples from many cities, he last put forward the city of the Athenians, which then enjoyed the greatest name for wisdom, that not many years before, but in the time of their fathers, it had voted a remission of debts to the poor, Solon leading the way, and that no one reproached the city for this measure nor called him who introduced it a flatterer of the people and a wicked man, but all bore witness to those who were persuaded that they had much prudence, and

[134391] 65.2. to him who persuaded great wisdom. But the Romans, for whom the danger was not concerning small differences but concerning their not being handed over again to a savage tyrant worse than any beast, who of men of sense would reproach, if by this humanity they should procure the poor to become allies instead of enemies to the city?

[134730] 65.3. Having gone over the foreign examples, he last took in the argument from the deeds of their own country, reminding them of the necessities that had lately seized them, when, their land being held by the Tyrrhenians, becoming shut within their walls and reduced to much want of necessities, they did not hold the senseless reckonings of madmen and men set on death, but, yielding to the times that held them and taking necessity as the teacher of advantage, both endured to give King Porsina the most distinguished children as hostages — never before having endured this — and to be punished with a part of their land, giving up the Seven Pagi to the Tyrrhenians, and to use the enemy as judge concerning the things he charged against them, giving both provisions and arms and the other things which the Tyrrhenians needed for the

[135567] 65.4. dissolution of the war. Using these examples, then, he declared it was not the part of the same prudence to gainsay the enemies in nothing of what they demanded, but to make war on their own citizens for a small difference — citizens who had fought noble and many wars for the leadership when the kings held the commonwealth, and furnished great eagerness toward the freeing of the city from the tyrants, and were about to furnish still more zeal for the remaining works if called upon, being in want of livelihood, yet ungrudgingly giving up their bodies and lives, which alone remained to them, to the dangers on her behalf. And he said at the end that even if they should attempt to say nothing of the sort, overcome by shame, nor to announce it, the patricians ought, taking the fitting reckoning concerning them, to bestow freely what they knew them to need, both in common and each one privately — considering that they were doing an arrogant thing in asking of them their bodies but not granting them the money, and in saying to all that they were making war for the common freedom, yet robbing those who helped to acquire it, having not wickedness to reproach them with, but want, which it befitted to pity rather than to hate.

[136810] 66.1. While Valerius was saying such things and many praising the opinion, Appius Claudius Sabinus, called in the proper place, counselled the opposite, teaching that the faction would not be removed from the city if they should vote cancellations of debts, but would become still more wicked, transferred from the poor to the well-to-do.

[137150] 66.2. For it was plain to all that those who were to be robbed of their money would bear it ill, being citizens and full citizens and having served all the campaigns that fell to them on behalf of the city, nor would they think fit that what their fathers left them, and they themselves, working hard and living temperately, acquired, should be confiscated to the most wicked and idle of the citizens. And it was the work of much folly, wishing to gratify the worse part of the body politic, to disregard the better, and, confiscating the property of others to the most unjust of the citizens, to rob those who justly acquired it.

[137782] 66.3. And he thought fit that they consider that cities are destroyed not by the poor and those having no strength, compelled to do just things, but by the well-to-do and those able to manage public affairs, when they are outraged by the worse sort and do not obtain justice. And if those robbed of their contracts should not be at all indignant, but should bear the harms somehow gently and carelessly, not even so, he said, would it be well or safe for them to grant the poor such a gift, through which the common life would become without dealings and full of mutual hatred and lacking the necessary uses, without which it is not possible for cities to be inhabited — the farmers no longer sowing and planting the land, nor the merchants sailing the sea and exchanging the goods from across the water, nor the poor doing any other just work.

[138628] 66.4. For toward all these things none of the well-to-do would give up his own money to those who needed a start; and from this prosperity would be begrudged, industry dissolved, and the licentious would have a better lot than the temperate, the unjust than the just, and those who appropriate the property of others than those who guard their own. And these are the things that make divisions in cities and unceasing mutual destructions and every other kind of evils, by which some cities that fared most prosperously were robbed of their freedom, and others, getting the worse lot, were utterly destroyed.

[139237] 67.1. And above all he thought fit that they consider, establishing a new constitution, that no wicked custom should pass into it, saying it was a great necessity that, of whatever sort the common practices of cities are, such should the lives of private men become. And there was no custom worse for either cities or households than that each should ever live according to pleasure and that everything should be conceded to the weaker by the stronger, whether for favour or for necessity; for the desires of the foolish are not satisfied on obtaining what they need, but they at once reach after other greater things and advance to infinity; and most of all do the masses suffer this; for what each by himself is ashamed to do, or fears, restrained by the stronger, this, when they have become a body, they more readily do lawlessly, having added strength to their own resolves from those who wish the same things.

[140154] 67.2. And he said the desires of senseless mobs, being insatiable and unlimited, ought to be checked at the beginning, while they are weak, not, when they have grown strong and great, to be put down. For all have a harder anger when robbed of what was conceded than when failing of what was hoped.

[140453] 67.3. And he used many examples for this, going over the deeds of Greek cities, as many as, growing soft through certain ill-timed occasions and the beginnings of wicked practices, having let them pass, no longer had power to stop and abolish them; from which they were compelled to advance into shameful and irremediable calamities. And he said the commonwealth was like the individual man, the senate having something analogous to the soul of a man,

[140906] 67.4. and the people to the body. If, then, they should let the senseless people rule over the senate, they would suffer the same things as those who subject the soul to the body and live not according to reason but according to the passions. But if they should accustom the people to be ruled and led by the senate, they would do the same as those who subject the body to the soul and lead their lives toward the best,

[141327] 67.5. not toward the most pleasant. And he declared that no great harm would befall the city if the poor, indignant at not being granted the cancellation of debts, should be unwilling to take up arms on her behalf, saying that those who left nothing to themselves beyond their bodies were altogether few, who would furnish neither any wonderful benefit to the commonwealth by being present in the campaigns nor any harm by being absent; reminding them that those having the least assessment of livelihood took the last place in the wars, and that these held the position of an appendage to those arrayed in the phalanx, present for the terrifying of the enemy, as men bearing no weapon save slings, of which there is the least use in battles.

[142071] 68.1. And he said that those who thought fit to pity the poverty of the citizens and counselled to aid those unable to pay their debts ought to examine what it was that had made them poor — men who had received allotments which their fathers left them, and had been much benefited from the campaigns, and, at the last, had taken the portion that fell to them from the confiscated property of the tyrants; then to consider as disgraces and harms to the city those whom they should see having lived for the belly and the basest pleasures and for these reasons having fallen out of their livelihoods, and to suppose it a great gain for the commonwealth if they should willingly be destroyed away from the city; but those whom they should perceive to have lost their livelihoods through bad fortune, these to benefit from their own

[142900] 68.2. means. And he said that those who had lent to them would best both know this and do it, and would aid their fortunes — those very men, not compelled by others, but willingly, that to them the favour might remain a noble debt in place of the money. But to make the aid common to all, of which the wicked would share equally with the good, and to benefit some not from their own but from others' means, and to those whose money they took away not even to leave the favours for the benefactions, befitted least the virtue of the Romans.

[143441] 68.3. And above all these and the other things, that it was a terrible thing and not to be endured for the Romans, who laid claim to the leadership which their fathers, having acquired it through many toils, left to their descendants, to do — not according to purpose nor persuaded nor in the fitting occasion — the best things and those advantageous to the commonwealth, but, as though the city had been captured or expected to suffer this, to act contrary to what seemed good to themselves, from which they would gain no benefit, or some quite small, but would risk suffering the uttermost of evils.

[144044] 68.4. For it was far better for them to do what the Latins commanded, as being more moderate, and not even to come to a trial of war, than, having conceded to men in no way useful what they urged, to abolish the faith from the city, which their fathers ordained should be honoured with the building of a temple and yearly sacrifices, while they were about to take on an alliance of slingers for the war.

[144449] 68.5. The sum of his opinion was this: those of the citizens willing to share in the fortune of the war on the same just terms as each of the others, to take up into the affairs; but those who thought fit to take up arms on behalf of the fatherland under agreements of whatever kind, as men who would help in nothing if they should get them, to let go their way. For if they should learn this, he said they would yield and would render themselves obedient to those who deliberated the best things concerning the commonwealth. For all that is senseless is ever wont, when one flatters it, to be high-minded, but when one frightens it, to be prudent.

[145099] 69.1. These opinions, then, most differing from one another, were spoken; and certain others, holding the middle ground between these, were many. For some thought fit that only those possessing nothing should be released from their debts, making the money liable to the creditors, not the bodies; others counselled that the public treasury should discharge the contracts on behalf of those unable, that both the faith of the poor should be guarded by the public favour and those who had lent to them be in no way wronged. And it seemed good to some to rescue the bodies both of those already held for debts and of those about to be robbed of their freedom, exchanging for them with the creditors other bodies from the captives.

[145828] 69.2. Some such things being said, the prevailing opinion was that no preliminary decree be made about them for the present; but when the wars should take the best end, then the consuls should propose the matter and give a vote to the councillors; and meanwhile there should be no exaction either of any contract or of any condemnation, and all the other disputes should be let go, and neither should the courts sit nor the magistrates decide concerning anything outside what pertained to the war.

[146327] 69.3. This preliminary decree, brought before the people, somewhat diminished the political disturbance, yet did not remove all the faction from the city. For there were some of the labouring multitude to whom the hope from the senate did not seem sufficient aid, having nothing plain or firm; but they thought fit that it do one of two things, either give them the release from debts now, if it wished to have them as sharers in the dangers, or not cheat them by putting it off to other times; for the intentions of men are not alike when needing and when satisfied of whatever they need.

[146918] 70.1. The commonwealth being in such a state, the senate, considering by what manner it might most bring it about that the plebeians should innovate nothing further, resolved to abolish the consular authority for the present, and to appoint some other magistracy master of war and peace and every other matter, with full power and unaccountable for whatever it should deliberate and do.

[147306] 70.2. And the measure of time for the new office should be six months, and after the six months the consuls should rule again. The things that compelled it, in order to dissolve the tyrannic war, to endure a self-chosen tyranny were many others, but above all the law ratified by one of the consuls, Publius Valerius called Publicola, concerning which I said at the outset that it made void the opinions of the consuls — not to punish any of the Romans before trial, having permitted those led to punishment by them to appeal the decision to the people, and, until the multitude should cast a vote concerning them, to have safety in body and life; and bidding the one who should attempt to do anything contrary to these to die unavenged.

[148045] 70.3. It reckoned, then, that, this law remaining valid, the poor, compelled by the magistracies, would render no service, despising, as was natural, the punishments which they were not about to undergo at once, but whenever the people should condemn them; but, it being abolished, all would by much necessity do what was commanded. And that the poor might not oppose, if anyone should openly abolish the law itself, it resolved to bring to power the tyrant-like office, which was to have all the laws under itself.

[148562] 70.4. And it writes a preliminary decree, by which, having circumvented the poor and abolished the law that confirmed their freedom, it escaped notice. The preliminary decree was of this sort: that Larcius and Cloelius, the then consuls, lay down their authority, and if any other held any office or charge of any public matters; and that one man, whom the senate should choose beforehand and the people ratify, taking over the authority of all, should rule for not more than six months, having an authority stronger than the consuls.

[149098] 70.5. Not knowing what power this had, the plebeians vote that the resolutions of the senate be valid; but the stronger office was a tyranny according to the laws; and the choice of the one who was to rule they conceded to those of the council to make, deliberating by themselves.

[149380] 71.1. After this much inquiry and forethought fell upon the leaders of the senate concerning the one who should take over the leadership. For it seemed to them there was need of a man of action for affairs and one having much experience of warlike contests, and besides this, prudent and temperate and not at all to be led by the greatness of his authority into folly; and above all these and the other things which good generals ought to have, knowing how to rule firmly and about to give in nothing soft to the disobedient — which

[149914] 71.2. they most needed at the present. And seeing all the things they thought fit present in one of the consuls, Titus Larcius — for Cloelius, being excellent in the civil functions, had not the energetic and warlike quality, nor the commanding and fearful, but was an equitable punisher of the disobedient — the senate held it a disgrace to take from the one the office which he had according to the laws, and to grant to the other the authority of both, which was becoming greater than the royal guise; and some fear too came over it, lest Cloelius, deeming grievous the rejection from the office, as one dishonoured by the senate, should then change the purpose of his life and, becoming patron of the people,

[150628] 71.3. overturn all the commonwealth. All being ashamed to bring into the open what they happened to think, and doing this for a long while, the eldest and most honoured of the consulars declared an opinion by which, keeping both consuls in equal honour, he found from those very men the one more fit to rule; for he said it seemed to him, since the senate had judged and the people had ratified that the power of the office be given to one, but two things remained needing no small deliberation and care — who should be the one to take over the tyrant-like office and by what lawful authority appointed — that one of the then consuls, whether by the cession of his colleague or having drawn it by lot, should choose whomever of the Romans he supposed would manage the affairs of the city best and most advantageously. And of interreges they needed nothing at present, whom in the monarchies it was the custom to appoint as sole choosers of those about to rule, the city having its holy office.

[151623] 72.1. All praising the opinion, after him another, rising, said: "To me, senate, it seems that this too should be added to the opinion: two best men managing the commonwealth at this time, than whom you could not find better, that one of them be appointed master of the proclamation, and the other be chosen by his colleague, they judging between themselves the more fit; that there may remain to them, along with the honour, equal joy also — to the one because he declared his colleague the best, to the other because he was judged best by his colleague; for each is sweet and noble. I know, then, that even if this part were not added to the opinion, it would have seemed good to the men themselves to do so; but it is better that this be even when you wish nothing else."

[152399] 72.2. This too seemed to have been said according to the mind of all; and nothing more being added to the opinion, the decree is ratified. When the consuls took over the authority of judging which of them was the more fit to rule, they did a marvellous thing and beyond all human suppositions. For each declared not himself worthy of the leadership, but the other; and they wore out that whole day reckoning up one another's virtues and begging not to take the office themselves, so that those present in the council came into much perplexity.

[152944] 72.3. The senate being dismissed, the kinsmen by birth of each, and the most honoured of the other senators, coming to Larcius, made many entreaties of the man until deep in the night, teaching him that the senate had placed all its hopes in him, and saying that his lack of zeal about the office was wicked for the commonwealth. But he was unyielding, and continued in turn entreating and beseeching each. On the next day, the council being assembled again, when he then too contended and, persuaded by all, did not stand off from his opinion, Cloelius, rising, both proclaims him, as the interreges were wont to do, and himself abjures the consulship.

[153599] 73.1. This man was first appointed sole ruler in Rome, with full power over war and peace and every other matter. They give him the name dictator, whether on account of the authority of commanding what he wished and of ordaining the just and the noble things for the others as it should seem good to him — for the Romans call commands and the prescriptions of just and unjust things edicta — or, as some write, on account of the proclamation that then took place, since he was not about to hold the office having found it from the people according to the ancestral customs,

[154174] 73.2. but appointed by one man. For they did not think they ought to give an envied and heavy name to any office governing a free city, both for the sake of the ruled, that they might not be disturbed at the hated appellations, and through forethought of those taking over the offices, lest they unawares either suffer something amiss from others or do themselves to their neighbours the things such dominions bring; since the greatness of the authority which the dictator has is least made plain by the name;

[154685] 73.3. for the dictatorship is an elective tyranny. And it seems to me that the Romans took this measure too from the Greeks. For those called Aesymnetes among the Greeks of old, as Theophrastus relates in his work on kingship, were a kind of elective tyrants; and the cities chose them neither for a fixed time nor continuously, but according to the occasions, whenever it should seem advantageous, and for however long a time; just as the Mytilenaeans once chose Pittacus against the exiles with Alcaeus the poet.

[155201] 74.1. The first came to this, taught the usefulness by experience. For at the outset every Greek city was ruled by kings, yet not as the barbarian nations despotically, but according to certain laws and ancestral customs; and the best king was the most just and most lawful and one departing in nothing from the ancestral ways.

[155530] 74.2. And Homer makes this plain, calling the kings dispensers of justice and ministers of right. And for a long time the kingships continued, administered on certain fixed terms, like that of the Lacedaemonians; but some beginning to do amiss in their authority, and using laws little, but managing the most by their own judgments, the many, displeased with the whole matter, dissolved the royal constitutions, and, establishing laws and appointing magistracies, used these as guards of the cities.

[156031] 74.3. But when neither the laws established by them were sufficient to confirm justice, nor those who received the offices and the charges of them to aid the laws, and the occasions, much innovating, compelled them to choose not the best of constitutions but those most fitting to the chances that seized them — not only in the unwished-for calamities, but also in the prosperities exceeding the measure, the political orders being corrupted by these, which needed a swift and self-judging correction — they were compelled to bring the royal and tyrannical authorities again into the open, covering them with more seemly names, the Thessalians calling them archoi, the Lacedaemonians harmostae, fearing to call them tyrants or kings, as not even being lawful for them, the authorities which they had dissolved, the gods having ordained by oaths and curses,

[156889] 74.4. to confirm these again. To me, then, the Romans seem to have taken the example from the Greeks, as I said; but Licinius thinks the Romans took the dictator from the Albans, saying these were the first, after the death of Amulius and Numitor, the royal kindred having failed, to appoint annual magistrates having the same authority as the kings, and to call them dictators; but I did not think fit to inquire whence the city of the Romans took the name, but the example of the authority comprehended by the name. But concerning these matters it would perhaps be of no use to write more.

[157482] 75.1. In what manner Larcius dealt with affairs, having been first appointed dictator, and what order he set about the office, I will try to set forth concisely, deeming these things most useful to those who shall read, which will furnish much abundance of noble and advantageous examples to lawgivers and statesmen and all others who wish to take part in public life and to manage the commonwealth. For I am not about to relate the constitutions and lives of an unenviable and humble city, nor the counsels and deeds of nameless and cast-off men, so that to anyone our zeal about small and base things might seem a crowd of trifling; but concerning the city that ordains for all the noble and just things, and concerning the leaders who established it in this dignity — things which a philosopher and statesman would be zealous not to be

[158322] 75.2. ignorant of — I write. Immediately, then, upon taking over the authority, he appoints as master of the horse Spurius Cassius, who had been consul in the seventieth Olympiad. This custom was kept by the Romans down to the generation of my time, and no one to this day appointed dictator passed his office without a master of the horse. Then, wishing to show how great the power of the authority is, for the sake of terror rather than of use, he ordered the lictors to carry the axes together with the bundles of rods through the city — a custom local to the kings, but abandoned by the consuls ever since Valerius Publicola, the first to be consul, lessened the envy of the office, himself renewing it.

[159031] 75.3. Having terrified by this and the other symbols of the royal leadership the disturbing and revolutionary, the best of the usages established by Servius Tullius the most democratic king he first ordered all the Romans to perform: to bring the assessments of their livelihoods by tribes, adding the names of their wives and children and the ages of themselves and their children.

[159415] 75.4. All having assessed themselves in a short time through the greatness of the punishment — for those who disobeyed had to lose both property and citizenship — there were found Romans of military age more than a hundred and fifty thousand by seven hundred. After this, separating those of military age from the older men and distributing them into centuries, he divided foot and horse into four parts; of which he had one, the best, about himself, and of the remaining he ordered Cloelius his fellow-consul to take which he himself wished, the third Spurius Cassius the master of the horse, and the one that was left his brother Spurius Larcius — this was appointed to guard the city, remaining within the wall with the older men.

[160150] 76.1. When all the things fit for the war were ready for him, he led the forces out into the open, and pitches three camps at the places where he most supposed the Latins would make their onset. Considering that it is the part of prudent generals not only to make their own affairs strong but also the enemy's weak, and most of all to dissolve wars without battle and toil, or, if not, with the least expense of the soldiery — deeming worst of all wars and having the most griefs those which some are compelled to take up against kinsmen and friends — he thought there ought to be for them more equitable rather than more just dissolutions.

[160792] 76.2. Secretly sending to the most distinguished of the Latins certain unsuspected men, he tried to bring about friendship for the cities, and openly sending embassies both to the cities and to the commonwealth, he not with difficulty wrought it that all should no longer have the same impulse toward the war; and most of all he won them over and made them stand off from their leaders by such a benefaction as this.

[161210] 76.3. For those who had taken over the supreme generalship of the Latins, Mamilius and Sextus, keeping their forces together in the city of Tusculum, were preparing as if to march upon Rome, but spent much time in delay, whether awaiting the cities that were behind, or because the sacred rites were not coming out favourably for them. At this time some, straying from the camp, plundered the country of the Romans.

[161627] 76.4. Learning this, Larcius sends Cloelius against them, leading the bravest of the horse and the light-armed. He, appearing to them unexpected, kills a few fighting, and takes the rest captive. These Larcius, having recovered them from their wounds and tended them with the other humanities, sent off to Tusculum in a body without ransom, sending with them the most honoured of the Romans as ambassadors. These brought it about that the army of the Latins was dissolved and a year's truce was made for the cities.

[162144] 77.1. Having accomplished these things, the man led his forces out of the open and, before fulfilling all the time of his authority, having appointed consuls, laid down the office, neither having killed any of the Romans nor driven any from the fatherland nor enclosed any in any other grievous calamity.

[162450] 77.2. This emulation, beginning from that man, remained with all who took over the same authority down to the third generation before us. At any rate we have received from history no one who did not use it moderately and as a statesman, though the city was often compelled to abolish the lawful magistracies and to make all affairs subject to one man.

[162803] 77.3. And if those who took over the dictatorship had been good patrons of the fatherland, in no way corrupted by the greatness of the office, only in the foreign wars, it would have been less marvellous; but as it is, even in the civil dissensions, many and great as they were, and at the dissolution of suspected kingships and tyrannies, and at the prevention of ten thousand other calamities, all who got so great an authority furnished themselves blameless and like the first who took the office; so that the same opinion came to all, that there is one aid for every incurable evil and one hope of final safety, whenever all the others are broken off through certain occasions — the office of the dictator. But in

[163522] 77.4. the age of our fathers, when nearly four hundred years had passed from the dictatorship of Titus Larcius, the matter was brought into ill repute and appeared hateful to all men, Lucius Cornelius Sulla being the first and only to use it bitterly and cruelly; so that then for the first time the Romans perceived what for all the rest of the time they had not known, that the office of the dictator is a

[163931] 77.5. tyranny. For he both composed a senate out of chance men, and contracted the power of the tribuneship to the least, and depopulated whole cities, and some kingdoms he abolished and others himself appointed, and did many other self-willed things, concerning which it would be a great task to speak; and apart from those who perished in the battles, he killed not fewer than forty thousand citizens who had surrendered themselves to him, some of whom he even

[164395] 77.6. first tortured. Whether, then, he did all these things of necessity or to the advantage of the commonwealth, the present is not the occasion to examine; but that on account of these things he was hated and the name of the dictator appeared terrible, this was what I set out to show. And it naturally befalls not these dominions alone, but also the other affairs in the common life that are striven for and admired. For all things appear noble and advantageous to those who use them, when one uses them well, but shameful and unprofitable when they get wicked patrons. And of this nature is the cause, having added to all good things certain inborn banes. But concerning these matters there would be another occasion more fitting for the discussion. Those who took over the consular office in the following year were Aulus Sempronius Atratinus and Marcus Minucius, in the seventy-first Olympiad, the one in which Tisicrates the Crotoniate won the foot-race, Hipparchus being archon at Athens.