WORK: Antiquitates Romanae  (slug: dionysius-of-halicarnass-antiquitates-romanae-97af98)

CHAPTER: 02-book-2



[110066] 56.3. But those who write the more probable account say that he was slain by his own citizens. And as the cause of his slaying they bring forward the release of the hostages whom he had taken from the Veientines, made without common consent and contrary to custom; and his no longer treating the most ancient citizens and the enrolled in the same manner, but holding the former in greater honour and despising those who had been brought in; and his cruelty and arrogance concerning the punishments of offenders (for certain Romans accused of robbing their neighbours, men neither obscure nor few, he ordered to be hurled down the precipice, having judged the case himself alone); but most of all because he now seemed to be harsh and arrogant and to exercise his power no longer in a kingly but in a more tyrannical fashion.

[110892] 56.4. For these reasons, they say, the patricians banded against him and plotted his murder; and they did the deed in the senate-house, and, dividing the body into parts that the corpse might not be seen carried out, departed concealing under their robes whatever part of him each had,

[111179] 56.5. and after this hid it in the earth secretly. Others say that he was slain while holding an assembly by the new Roman citizens, and that they undertook the murder at the very time, of course, when the darkness also occurred, the people having scattered from the assembly and the leader having been left without his guard. For this reason, indeed, they say that the day on which the calamity occurred is named after the rout of the multitude, and is called even to our own times "the flight of the crowd."

[111690] 56.6. And the events that befell from the god concerning the union of that man and his dissolution seem to furnish no small occasion to those who make mortal things divine and raise the souls of the distinguished to heaven. For at the violation of his mother, whether it was wrought by some man or by a god, they say the sun was wholly eclipsed and utter darkness, as in night, held the earth; and at his death they say the same thing befell.

[112134] 56.7. Romulus, then, who founded Rome and was first appointed by it king, is said to have met with such an end, leaving no offspring of his own, having reigned thirty-seven years and being in the fifty-fifth year of his age. For he came to the leadership altogether young, being eighteen years old, as all who have written the histories concerning him agree.

[112494] 57.1. In the following year no king of the Romans was appointed, but a magistracy which they call an interregnum took charge of public affairs, appointed in some such manner as this. Of the patricians enrolled in the senate by Romulus, being two hundred in number, as I have said, they were distributed into decads; then, having cast lots, they gave to the first ten thus drawn the supreme power to govern the city.

[112911] 57.2. But these did not all reign at the same time, but in succession, each for five days, during which he held the rods and the other symbols of royal authority. The first to rule handed over the leadership to the second, and he to the third, and so it went on to the last. When the fifty-day term had passed for the first ten kings, another ten took up the office, and from them again others.

[113307] 57.3. When it seemed good to the people to put an end to the decemvirates, being aggrieved at the changes of authority, because not all the men had like principles or like natures, then the senators, calling together the multitude into assembly by tribes and phratrae, gave it to them to consider concerning the order of the constitution, whether they wished to entrust the common affairs to a king or to annual magistracies.

[113734] 57.4. Yet the people did not take the choice upon itself, but gave the decision to the senators, as being content with whichever of the constitutions they should approve. To them it seemed good, all of them, to establish a kingly constitution; but concerning him who should reign, strife fell out, from which order he should be. For some thought that the one to govern the city ought to be appointed from the ancient senators, others from those brought in later, whom they called the "younger."

[114230] 58.1. The contention being drawn out at length, they agreed at last upon this just arrangement: that one of two things should be done — either the elder senators should appoint a king, none of themselves, but whomever of the others they should think most fit; or the younger should do this same thing. The elder accept the choice, and, having taken much counsel among themselves, resolved thus: since they themselves were excluded from the rule by the agreement, to confer the office on none even of the senators who had come in later, but to seek out and appoint as king some man brought in from outside, who would attach himself to neither party, that faction might be most of all removed.

[114923] 58.2. Having so resolved, they put forward a man of the Sabine race, the son of Pompilius Pompon, a distinguished man, named Numa (one must lengthen the second syllable and accent it with the grave), being of the most prudent age — for he was not far short of forty years — and kingly in the dignity of his form.

[115237] 58.3. And his fame was very great, not only among the Quirites but also among the neighbouring peoples, for wisdom. When this seemed good to them, they called together the multitude into assembly, and one of them, the interrex of that time, coming forward, said that it had seemed good in common to all the senators to establish a kingly constitution, and that he, having become master of the decision, chose Numa Pompilius as king of the city to take up the rule. And after this, having appointed envoys from the patricians, he sent them to bring the man to the office, in the third year of the sixteenth Olympiad, which Pythagoras the Laconian won in the stadium-race.

[115909] 59.1. Thus far I have nothing to say against those who have given out the history concerning this man; but in what follows I am at a loss what to say. For many are they who have written that Numa was a disciple of Pythagoras, and that at the time he was appointed king by the city of the Romans he was living at Croton studying philosophy; but the time of Pythagoras' age conflicts with the account.

[116310] 59.2. For Pythagoras was later than Numa not by a few years but by four whole generations, as we have received from the common histories. For the one took up the kingship of the Romans in the middle of the sixteenth Olympiad, but Pythagoras lived in Italy after the fiftieth Olympiad.

[116596] 59.3. And I have a still greater proof than this to give that the times do not agree with the histories handed down concerning the man: that at the time Numa was called to the kingship by the Romans, Croton was not yet a city; for four whole years later than Numa's becoming king of the Romans, Myscelus founded it, in the third year of the seventeenth Olympiad. So Numa could neither have studied philosophy with Pythagoras the Samian, who flourished four generations later, nor have been living in Croton, when the Romans called him to the kingship, in a city

[117159] 59.4. that did not yet then exist. But those who have written concerning him seem, if I must declare my own opinion, having taken these two agreed facts — the sojourn of Pythagoras that occurred in Italy and the wisdom of Numa (for the man is agreed by all to have been wise) — to have joined these together and made Numa a disciple of Pythagoras, no longer examining their lives, whether both flourished at the same times,

[117584] 59.5. which I have now done — unless indeed someone shall suppose that there was another Pythagoras, a teacher of wisdom, before the Samian, with whom Numa studied. But this I do not know how one could prove, since no one of note, neither Roman nor Greek, so far as I know, has handed it down in history. But concerning these matters enough.

[117927] 60.1. Numa, when these men came to him calling him to the leadership, for a time refused and long continued struggling against taking the office; but when his brothers pressed him with entreaties, and his father at last thought it not right to thrust away so great an honour offered, he consented to become king;

[118241] 60.2. and the Romans, learning these things from the envoys, before they saw the man with their eyes, were seized with a great longing for him, deeming it sufficient proof of his wisdom that, while others honoured kingship beyond measure and placed the happy life in it, he alone despised it as a paltry thing and not worthy of zeal; and when he arrived, they met him while he was still on the road with much praise and greetings, escorting him into the city with the other honours.

[118725] 60.3. An assembly being convened after this, in which the tribes cast their votes for him by phratrae, and the patricians having ratified what seemed good to the multitude, and lastly the augurs having declared the signs from the divine power auspicious, he took up the office.

[119004] 60.4. This man the Romans say made no campaign, but, having been pious and just, passed the whole time of his rule in peace and rendered the city most excellently governed; and they tell many wonderful accounts concerning him, referring his human wisdom to the suggestions of the gods.

[119291] 60.5. For they tell the tale that a certain nymph, Egeria, used to come to him on each occasion, teaching him kingly wisdom; but others say not a nymph but one of the Muses. And this, they say, became manifest to all. For when men at the first, as it seems, disbelieved and thought the account concerning the goddess was fabricated, he, wishing to display to the disbelievers some clear token of his intercourse with the divinity, and being instructed by her, did as follows:

[119768] 60.6. having invited many good Romans to the house in which he happened to be living, then, having shown those who came that the interior was meanly furnished both in its general appointments and in particular without provisions suitable for entertaining a crowd, he at that time bade them depart, but invited them to dinner in the evening;

[120110] 60.7. and when they came at the appointed hour, he showed them costly couches and tables laden with many fine cups, and set before them, as they reclined, a banquet of every kind of food, such as it would not have been easy for any of the men of that time to provide even over a very long while. And amazement at each of the things they saw came upon the Romans, and from that time a firm belief was established that some goddess consorted with him.

[120561] 61.1. But those who remove from history all that is fabulous say that the account concerning Egeria was fabricated by Numa, that those who feared the divine might the more readily give heed to him and eagerly accept the laws he laid down, as being brought from the gods.

[120833] 61.2. And they declare that he took the imitation of these from the Greek examples, having become an emulator of the wisdom of Minos the Cretan and of Lycurgus the Lacedaemonian. Of these the one said he was a companion of Zeus, and frequenting the Dictaean mountain, in which the Cretans tell the tale that Zeus was reared by the Curetes when a newborn babe, descended into the sacred cave, and, composing the laws there, brought them out, declaring that he received them from Zeus; and Lycurgus, going to Delphi, said he was taught the legislation by

[121387] 61.3. Apollo. To deal precisely with the mythical histories, and especially with those referred to gods, since I see it requires long discourses, I shall pass over; but the goods which the Romans seem to me to have got from the rule of that man, as I have learned from the histories of the country, I shall set forth, premising in what kind of disturbances the affairs of the city happened to be before he came to the kingship.

[121816] 62.1. After the death of Romulus the senate, having become master of public affairs and holding the power for a year, as I have said, began to differ and fall into faction within itself concerning the greater and the equal share. For so much of it as was Alban, from those who had set out the colony with Romulus, thought fit both to lead in counsel and to receive the greatest honours and to be courted by the

[122228] 62.2. newcomers; but those who had later been enrolled among the patricians from the colonists thought they ought not to be excluded from any honour nor be at a disadvantage with the others, most of all those who happened to be of the Sabine race and who, according to the agreement made by Romulus with Tatius, having come into the city on equal terms with the ancient inhabitants, seemed to have given them the same favour in return.

[122665] 62.3. And as the senate split, so the multitude of the dependents, divided in two, attached itself to each of the factions. And there was no small part of the common people from those who had recently come over to the citizenship, which, because it had aided Romulus in no war and had been neglected by the leader, had received neither a portion of land nor of spoils. This part, homeless and beggared, wandering about, was of necessity hostile to the more powerful and most ready for revolution.

[123163] 62.4. In such a swell, then, did Numa find the affairs of the city tossing; and first he relieved the needy of the commons by distributing among them a portion of the land Romulus had acquired and a small portion from the public land; then, taking away nothing from the patricians of what the founders of the city had won, but giving the colonists certain other honours, he made them cease their differences.

[123573] 62.5. And having fitted the whole multitude, like an instrument, to the single reckoning of the common advantage, and having increased the circuit of the city by the Quirinal hill (for it was as yet still unwalled), he then took in hand the rest of his policy, busying himself with these two things, by which he supposed the city, when so adorned, would become happy and great: piety first, teaching men that the gods are givers and guardians of every good to mortal nature; and then justice, through which, he declared, even the goods from the gods bring fair enjoyments to those who possess them.

[124173] 63.1. Out of the laws and institutions by which he brought each of these to great advancement, I do not think fit to write all, fearing the length of the discourse, and at the same time seeing that the recording of them is not even necessary to Greek histories; but the most authoritative themselves, and those able to make plain all the man's policy, I shall tell in summary, beginning with his ordering of things divine.

[124597] 63.2. Whatever, then, ordered by Romulus, he found in usages and laws, holding all to have been ordered from the best, he let remain in its place; but whatever seemed to have been left out by him, these he added, appointing many precincts to gods that had not yet obtained honours, founding many altars and temples, assigning festivals to each of them, and establishing priests to take charge of them, legislating very many rites of purity and worship and lustrations and other services and honours, as many as no Greek nor barbarian city, nor those who

[125152] 63.3. ever plumed themselves most upon their piety. Romulus himself, too, as having become greater than mortal nature, he ordained to be honoured under the name of Quirinus, with the building of a temple and yearly sacrifices. For while the Romans were still ignorant of his disappearance — whether it came about by the providence of a divinity or by a human plot — a man named Julius, of the line of Ascanius, a husbandman and blameless in his life, such as would tell no lie for his own gain, came forward into the Forum and said that, as he was returning from the field, he saw Romulus departing from the city bearing his arms, and, when he came near, heard him saying this:

[125831] 63.4. "Announce to the Romans from me, Julius, that the divinity who received me by lot when I was born is leading me to the gods, now that I have fulfilled my mortal span; and I am Quirinus." And having embraced the whole legislation concerning things divine, he divided it in writing into eight parts, as many as were the divisions of the rites.

[126180] 64.1. He assigned one ordering of the sacred rites to the thirty curiones, who, I said, sacrifice the

[126283] 64.2. common rites on behalf of the phratrae. The second to those called by the Greeks crown-bearers, but by the Romans flamines, whom they so name from the bearing of the caps and fillets, which they still wear even now, calling them flama.

[126526] 64.3. The third to the leaders of the celeres, who, I said, serving as horse and foot, are appointed guards of the kings; for these too performed certain appointed

[126691] 64.4. rites. The fourth to those who interpret the signs sent from the gods and distinguish of what matters they are tokens, both private and public, whom from one kind of the observations of their art the Romans call augures, but we should call them bird-watchers, being among them masters of all divination, that concerning things celestial and aerial and

[127050] 64.5. earthly. The fifth to the virgins who guard the sacred fire, who are called by them, after the goddess they serve, Vestals — he himself being the first to found a temple of Vesta for the Romans and to appoint virgins as her sacrificers; concerning whom it is necessary to say a few words, and those the most essential, as the subject demands. For there are matters that have been thought worthy of inquiry and treated by many of the Roman historians in this place, concerning which those who have not carefully examined the causes have brought forth rather careless writings.

[127633] 65.1. The founding of the temple some attribute to Romulus, thinking it impossible that, when a city was being founded by a man experienced in divination, a common hearth of the city should not first be established — and that too when the founder had been reared in Alba, in which from of old the temple of this goddess had been set up, and his mother had become a sacrificer to the goddess; and, dividing the rites in two and making some of them common and civic, others private and of the family, on both these grounds they say there was much necessity for Romulus to worship this goddess.

[128226] 65.2. For neither is anything more necessary to men than the common hearth, nor was anything more proper to Romulus by succession of race, his ancestors being of those who brought the goddess's rites from Ilium, and his mother a priestess. Those, then, who on these grounds attribute the founding of the temple to Romulus rather than to Numa seem to speak rightly in general — that, when a city is founded, a hearth ought first to be established, and that too by a man not unversed in the wisdom concerning things divine — but to have been ignorant of the particulars, concerning both the building of the present temple and the virgins who serve the goddess.

[128886] 65.3. For neither was it Romulus who consecrated to the goddess this place in which the sacred fire is guarded (a great proof of this is that it is outside the so-called square Rome which he walled; but all set up the temple of the common hearth in the strongest part of the city, and none outside the wall), nor did he establish the services to the goddess through virgins, mindful, as it seems to me, of the misfortune concerning his mother, who, serving the goddess, happened to lose her virginity; thinking that he would not be able, if he found any of the sacrificers corrupted, to punish her according to the ancestral laws, because of the recollection of his own domestic calamities.

[129578] 65.4. For these reasons, then, he did not build a common temple of Vesta nor appoint virgins as her priestesses, but, having set up in each of the thirty phratrae a hearth on which the members of the phratra sacrificed, he made the leaders of the curiae their sacrificers, imitating the customs among the Greeks, which still take place among the most ancient of the cities. The so-called prytaneia among them are temples of Vesta, and are served by those who hold the greatest power in the cities.

[130077] 66.1. Numa, taking up the office, did not disturb the private hearths of the phratrae, but established one common hearth of all in the place between the Capitol and the Palatine, the hills being now joined into one circuit and the Forum lying midway between both, in which the temple is built; and he enacted that the guarding of the rites should be performed, according to the ancestral law of the Latins, through virgins.

[130502] 66.2. There are also certain difficulties concerning what it is that is guarded in the temple, and why it is committed to virgins. Some say that what is kept is nothing beyond the visible fire, and they make the guarding of it committed to virgins rather than to men with reason — because fire is undefiled and a virgin uncorrupted, and to the purest of things divine the most chaste of mortals is dear.

[130907] 66.3. And they hold that the fire is consecrated to Vesta because the goddess, being the earth and holding the central place of the universe, makes the kindlings of the aerial fire from herself. But there are some who say that, besides the fire, certain sacred objects lie in the precinct of the goddess, unspeakable to the multitude, of which the hierophants and the virgins have knowledge — offering as no small proof of their account what happened concerning the burning of the temple in the first Punic War which arose between the Romans and the Carthaginians over Sicily.

[131485] 66.4. For when the precinct was on fire and the virgins were fleeing from the flames, one of the hierophants, Lucius Caecilius surnamed Metellus, a man of consular rank, the one who brought home the famous triumph from Sicily over the Carthaginians of a hundred and thirty-eight elephants, despising his own safety for the common good, ventured to force his way into the burning building and, snatching up the sacred objects left by the virgins, saved them from the fire; for which he won great honours from the city, as the inscription of his image set up on the Capitol bears witness.

[132073] 66.5. Taking this as agreed, they then add conjectures of their own: some saying that there is here guarded a portion of the sacred objects in Samothrace, Dardanus having brought the rites from the island to the city founded by him, and Aeneas, when he fled from the Troad, having carried these too among the rest to Italy; others declaring it to be the heaven-fallen Palladium that was among the Ilians, as if Aeneas had brought it through his experience, and the Achaeans had taken a copy of it by theft — concerning which very many accounts have been told by poets and historians.

[132658] 66.6. I, for my part, gather from very many things that there are certain sacred objects unknown to the multitude guarded by the virgins, and not the fire alone; but what these are I do not think fit to inquire too curiously, neither I myself nor any other who wishes to keep his duties toward the gods inviolate.

[132973] 67.1. The virgins who serve the goddess were four at the first, the kings choosing them on the conditions Numa established; but later, through the multitude of the rites they perform, becoming six, they have so remained to our own time, having their abode by the goddess, where by day none of those who wish to enter is barred, but by night it is not lawful for any male to lodge.

[133355] 67.2. It is necessary for them to remain for thirty years pure of marriage, performing the sacrifices and the other rites according to law, during which ten years they had to learn, ten to perform the rites, and the remaining ten to teach others. When the thirty years were fulfilled, there was nothing to hinder those who wished from laying aside the fillets and the other insignia of the priesthood and marrying. And some did this, very few, to whom the ends of their lives turned out unenviable and not at all fortunate; so that, taking their misfortunes as an omen, the rest of the virgins remain by the goddess until death, and then another is again appointed by the hierophants in the place of her who has departed.

[134078] 67.3. Honours are rendered them by the city, many and fair, on account of which they feel no longing for children or marriage; and great punishments lie upon their faults, of which the examiners and chastisers by law are the hierophants — scourging with rods those who err in any of the lesser matters, but delivering those who have been corrupted to the most shameful and

[134452] 67.4. most piteous death. For while still living they are carried in procession on a bier, borne to the funeral appointed for the dead, friends and kinsmen bewailing them and escorting them; and brought as far as the Colline gate, within the wall, they are placed in a chamber built underground together with the burial ornaments, and obtain neither monument nor offerings to the dead nor

[134842] 67.5. any other of the customary rites. There are many other tokens, it seems, of one serving the rites unholily, but most of all the quenching of the fire, which the Romans dread above all terrors, supposing it to be a sign of the destruction of the city, from whatever cause it may arise; and with many services they propitiate it and bring it back again to the temple; concerning which I shall speak at the proper time.

[135266] 68.1. It is well worth recording also the manifestation of the goddess which she displayed to the virgins unjustly accused. For it is believed by the Romans, paradoxical though it be, and the historians have made much account of these things.

[135510] 68.2. Now all who practise the godless philosophies — if indeed they ought to be called philosophies at all — deriding all the manifestations of the gods that have occurred among Greeks or barbarians, will bring these histories too to much ridicule, ascribing them to human boastings, on the ground that no one of the gods cares for any of mankind. But those who do not free the gods from concern for human affairs, but think them gracious to the good and hostile to the bad, having gone through much history, will not suppose these manifestations either to be incredible.

[136084] 68.3. It is said that once, the fire having gone out through some negligence of Aemilia, who was then guarding it (she having committed the charge to another virgin, one of those recently enrolled and but lately learning), there was much disturbance throughout the whole city and an inquiry by the hierophants, lest some defilement of the priestess had befallen the fire; whereupon, they say, Aemilia, being innocent but at a loss over what had happened, in the presence of the priests and the other virgins, stretching out her hands toward the altar, said:

[136643] 68.4. "Vesta, guardian of the city of the Romans, if I have for nearly thirty years performed thy rites holily and justly, keeping a pure soul and a chaste body, appear to me and aid me, and suffer not thy priestess to die the most piteous death; but if any unholy thing has been done by me, by my punishment purge away the pollution of the city."

[136992] 68.5. Having said this, and having torn off a strip from the linen garment she happened to be wearing, she cast the band upon the altar after the prayer, they say, and from the ashes, long cold and keeping no spark, a great flame blazed up through the linen, so that the city had no further need of either purifications or new fire.

[137326] 69.1. But still more wonderful than this, and more like a fable, is what I am about to tell. They say that someone unjustly accused one of the sacred virgins, Tuccia by name, being unable to allege a quenching of the fire, but bringing certain other proofs from probable evidence and testimonies, not true; and that the virgin, bidden to make her defence, said only this — that she would clear the slanders by her deeds;

[137748] 69.2. and having said this and called upon the goddess to be her guide on the way, she led on toward the Tiber, the hierophants permitting her and the crowd of the city escorting her; and coming near the river, she undertook the daring deed that is proverbial among the first of impossibilities — having drawn water from the river in a new sieve, and carried it as far as the Forum, she poured out the water beside the feet of the hierophants.

[138193] 69.3. And after this, they say, her accuser, though much search was made, was found neither living nor dead. But, though I have still much to say concerning the manifestations of the goddess, I think these enough to have been said.

[138426] 70.1. The sixth part of the legislation concerning things divine was that assigned to those called by the Romans Salii, whom Numa himself appointed, choosing out twelve of the most comely young men of the patricians, whose sacred objects lie on the Palatine and who are themselves called Palatines. For the Salii called Agonales, or by some Colline, whose sanctuary is on the Colline hill, were appointed after Numa by King Hostilius, according to a

[138877] 70.2. vow which he made in the war against the Sabines. All these Salii are a kind of dancers and hymners of the armed gods. Their festival is about the time of the Panathenaea, in what is called the month of March, held at public charge for many days, during which they lead the dances through the city, into the Forum and the Capitol and many other places both private and public, girt in embroidered tunics with bronze belts, and wearing fastened over them togas bordered with purple and edged with scarlet, which they call trabeae (this is a native Roman garment among the most honoured), and wearing on their heads what are called apices, high caps drawn together into a conical shape, which the Greeks call kyrbasiai.

[139602] 70.3. Each of them is girt with a sword, and in his right hand holds a spear or a rod or some other such thing, while in his left he holds a Thracian shield; this is like a rhomboid buckler with narrower sides, such as those are said to bear who perform the rites of the Curetes among the Greeks.

[139900] 70.4. And the Salii, in my judgment at least, rendered by a Greek name, are Curetes — named by us from their age, after the kouroi (youths), but by the Romans from their vigorous motion. For to leap up and to bound is called by them salire; and from the same cause they call all other dancers also — since in these too there is much leaping and bounding — by a name derived from the Salii, saltatores.

[140303] 70.5. Whether I have rightly conceived in assigning them this appellation, he who wishes may judge from the things done by them. For they move to the pipe in rhythm with their armed motions, now together, now alternately, and sing certain ancestral hymns along with their dances. And the armed dance and motion and the noise produced upon the shields by the daggers, if one must rely on the ancient accounts, the Curetes were the first to establish. The myth concerning them I have no need to write, since well-nigh all know it.

[140833] 71.1. Among the shields which the Salii wear, and which certain attendants of theirs carry hung from poles, being very many, they say one is heaven-fallen, and that it was found in the palace of Numa, no man having brought it in nor any such shape having been known before among the Italians; from both which the Romans supposed the weapon to be god-sent.

[141190] 71.2. And Numa, wishing it to be honoured, borne by the best of the young men on sacred days throughout the city, and to obtain yearly sacrifices, but fearing both plots from enemies and its stealthy removal, had, they say, many shields made like the heaven-fallen one, a certain craftsman named Mamurius undertaking the work, so that the nature of the god-sent one became indistinct and hard to discern to those who should plot, through the indistinguishable likeness of the works of men.

[141681] 71.3. The Curetic rite is native to the Romans and very honoured, as I gather from many other things, but most of all from what occurs at the processions both in the hippodrome and in the

[141870] 71.4. theatres. For in all of these striplings, clad in comely tunics, having helmets and swords and bucklers, march in rows; and these are the leaders of the procession, called by them, after the game thought to have been invented by the Lydians, Lydiones — images, as it seems to me, of the Salii, since they perform nothing Curetic, as the Salii do, neither in hymns nor in dancing. But these ought to be free and native-born and with both parents living; yet they are of whatever fortune. But what need to write more concerning them?

[142409] 72.1. The seventh part of the sacred legislation was assigned to the college of those called fetiales. These, in the Greek tongue, would be called peace-judges. They are picked men from the best houses, consecrated for the whole of their lives, King Numa having been the first to establish this sacred college also for the Romans;

[142741] 72.2. whether, however, he took the model from the so-called Aequicoli, as some think, or from the city of the Ardeates, as Gellius writes, I cannot say; it suffices me to say only this much, that before Numa's reign the college of peace-judges did not yet exist among the Romans.

[143023] 72.3. Numa established it when he was about to war upon the Fidenates, who had made plunderings and raids upon his country, in case they should be willing to come to terms with him without war; which, being brought to necessity, they did. And I think, since the college concerning the peace-judges is not native to the Greeks, it is necessary for me to go through how many and how great matters it has charge of, that to those who are ignorant of the piety of the Romans, which the men of that time practised, it may not seem paradoxical that all their wars took the fairest end.

[143604] 72.4. For they will be found to have made the beginnings and the grounds of all of them most pious, and on this account most of all to have had the gods gracious to them in dangers. To go through, then, all that is committed to these peace-judges is not easy because of its multitude, but in a summary sketch it is such as this: to watch that the Romans wage no unjust war against any city under treaty; and, when others begin to break treaty against them, to send embassies and first to ask justice in words; and, if they obey not what is demanded,

[144155] 72.5. then to ratify the war. Likewise, if any peoples under treaty, saying they are wronged by the Romans, demand justice, these men are to determine whether they have suffered any breach of treaty; and if they seem to bring fitting accusation, they are to arrest those liable to the charges and deliver them up to the wronged; and to judge the wrongs concerning ambassadors, and to keep inviolate what pertains to treaties, and to make peace, and a peace already made, if it seem not to have been concluded according to the sacred laws, to annul; and the transgressions of the generals, as many as are committed concerning oaths and treaties, by their judgment to expiate — concerning which I shall make my account at the

[144880] 72.6. proper times. The things done by them concerning heralds' missions, when they demanded satisfaction of the city that seemed to do wrong (for it is worth not being ignorant of these too, done with much care for things holy and just) — I have received as such. One of the peace-judges, whom the rest should select, adorned in sacred raiment and dress, that he might be distinguished from the rest, came to the city of the wrongdoers; and standing at the borders he called upon Jupiter and the other gods, testifying that he came to demand satisfaction on behalf of the city of the Romans;

[145474] 72.7. then, having sworn that he was going against a city that did wrong, and having called down the greatest curses upon himself and upon Rome if he should lie, then he entered within the borders; then, whomever he first met, taking him to witness — whether he were of the country folk or of the citizens — and adding the same curses, he went on toward the city; and then, before entering the city, taking to witness in the same manner the gate-keeper or the first who met him at the gates, he went on into the Forum; and there, taking his stand, he spoke with those in office concerning the matters for which he came, everywhere adding the oaths and

[146127] 72.8. the curses. If, then, they should submit to justice by giving up those liable to the charges, he departed leading the men away, having now become a friend and from friends; but if they asked time for deliberation, he granted ten days and came again, and waited up to a third demand. When the thirty days had passed, if the city did not render him justice, having called upon the gods of heaven and of the underworld, he departed, saying only this much, that the city of the Romans would deliberate concerning them at its leisure.

[146664] 72.9. And after this he declared to the senate, coming together with the other peace-judges, that all had been done by them that was holy according to the sacred laws, and that, if they wished to vote war, there would be nothing from the gods to hinder. But if any of these things were not done, neither was the senate empowered to vote war nor the people. Concerning the peace-judges, then, we have received this much.

[147085] 73.1. The last division of Numa's ordinance was that concerning the rites which fell to those holding the greatest priesthood and authority among the Romans. These, in their own tongue, from one of the works they perform — repairing the wooden bridge — are called pontifices; but they have charge of the greatest

[147399] 73.2. matters. For these judge all the sacred suits affecting private men, magistrates, and ministers of the gods, and legislate concerning whatever of the rites is unwritten and unusual, judging what may seem fitting to them in laws and usages; they examine all the magistracies to which any sacrifice or service of the gods is committed, and all the priests; and the attendants and ministers whom they use for the rites these watch lest they err at all concerning the sacred laws; and to the private men who do not know the rites of worship of things divine or superhuman they become interpreters and expounders; and if they perceive any not obeying their injunctions, they punish them, having regard to each circumstance; and they are exempt from all suit and penalty, rendering account neither to the senate nor to the people, at least concerning the rites;

[148262] 73.3. so that, if one wishes to call them teachers of sacred things, or sacred lawgivers, or sacred guardians, or, as we think fit, hierophants, he will not stray from the truth. When one of them departs from life, another is established in his place, not chosen by the people but by those very men, whoever seems most fit of the citizens; and the one approved takes up the priesthood, if the auspices chance to be

[148678] 73.4. favourable for him. The things, then, legislated by Numa concerning the divine and divided according to the colleges of the rites, by which it came about that the city became more pious — besides the other lesser matters, these were the greatest and most conspicuous.

[148953] 74.1. But the things leading the life of each man to frugality and temperance, and bringing them into a desire for the justice that keeps the city in concord, were very many — some embraced in written laws, others, outside writing, brought into practices and long habituations. To speak of all of these would be a great task; but it will suffice that two of the proofs which have obtained the greatest memory be given also of the

[149384] 74.2. rest. Of self-sufficiency and of no man desiring what belongs to another, the legislation concerning the marking of properties. For having bidden each man trace round his own property and set stones upon the boundaries, he consecrated the stones to Jupiter Terminalis (of boundaries), and ordained that all should perform sacrifices to them on an appointed day each year, coming together to the place, having established the festival of the boundary gods too among those most honoured.

[149877] 74.3. This the Romans call Terminalia, after the boundary-marks; and the boundaries themselves, by the change of a single letter from our tongue, they call termini. And if anyone should remove or shift the boundaries, he enacted that the one who did any of these things should be sacred to the god, that to anyone who wished to kill him as a temple-robber both safety and freedom from pollution might attach.

[150287] 74.4. And this right he established not over private properties alone, but over public ones also, enclosing these too with boundaries, that boundary gods might divide both the Roman land from that of the neighbours and the common from the private. This the Romans keep down to our own times as memorials of the time, for the sake of the religion itself. For they hold the boundary-stones to be gods and sacrifice to them every year nothing of living things (for it is not holy to bloody the stones), but cakes of

[150801] 74.5. Demeter and certain other first-fruits of crops. But they ought also still to keep faithful the deed for the sake of which Numa held the boundaries to be gods — being content with their own properties and seizing nothing of others' either by force or by guile. But now some mark off their own from others' not for the better, nor as their forefathers handed down, but the boundary of their properties is not the law but the desire of all things — a thing not fair. But concerning these matters I leave it to others to consider.

[151336] 75.1. Numa, then, by such laws restricted the city to frugality and temperance; and to justice concerning contracts he led it on, having devised a thing unknown to all who had established the famous constitutions. For seeing that of contracts those done openly and with witnesses are guarded by the shame of those present, and few are they who do wrong in such matters, but those without witness, being far more than the others, have one safeguard, the good faith of the contracting parties, he thought it necessary to take pains about this above all else and to make it worthy of divine reverence.

[151936] 75.2. For Justice and Themis and Nemesis and what the Greeks call the Erinyes and all things like these had been, he held, sufficiently deified and consecrated by his predecessors; but Faith (Pistis), than which there is no greater nor holier feeling among men, had not yet obtained reverence, neither in the common affairs of cities nor in private ones.

[152292] 75.3. Having considered this, he was the first of men to found a temple of public Faith and established sacrifices to her, as to the other gods, at public charge. And in time, indeed, the common character of the city, having become faithful and steadfast toward men, was likely to render such also the manners of private persons. So venerable a thing and undefiled was good faith held to be, that the greatest oath for each became his own faith, and the strongest of all testimony; and whenever, concerning a contract without witness, any dispute arose between one and one, what decided the quarrel and did not allow the contentions to proceed further was the faith of one of the very parties at law; and the magistrates and the courts settled most of their disputes by the oaths sworn upon faith.

[153091] 75.4. Such inducements to temperance and constraints to justice, devised then by Numa, rendered the city of the Romans more orderly than the best-ordered household.

[153257] 76.1. But what I am now about to tell rendered it careful of necessities and a worker of good things. For the man, reflecting that a city which is to cherish justice and to abide in the temperate life needs to abound in the necessary supply, divided the whole country into what are called pagi (districts), and set over each of the districts a magistrate as overseer and patroller of his own portion.

[153659] 76.2. For these, going round frequently, registered those who had farmed their fields well and those who had farmed them ill, and declared it to the king; and he received the diligent farmers with praises and kindnesses, but reproaching and fining the idle farmers, urged them to tend the land better. And so, being freed from wars and having much leisure from the affairs of the city, and paying with shame the penalty of idleness and sloth, they all became tillers of their own soil, and accounted the wealth from the land, which is the most just of all wealth, sweeter than the gains of war, which have no security.

[154279] 76.3. And to Numa it resulted from these things that he was loved by his subjects, emulated by his neighbours, and remembered by those who came after; through which neither did civil faction dissolve the political concord, nor did war with foreign nations move the city from its best and most admirable pursuits. For so far were the neighbours from taking the unwarlike quiet of the Romans as an occasion of attack upon them, that even if any war arose among themselves against one another, they made the Romans arbitrators and thought fit to settle their enmities with Numa as judge.

[154865] 76.4. This man, then, I should not be ashamed to reckon among the first of those famed for felicity. For he was sprung of a royal race and enjoyed a kingly form, and practised a training not the useless one concerning words, but that from which he learned to be pious and to practise the other virtues.

[155169] 76.5. And he was thought worthy to take up the leadership of the Romans while young, being led to it by them as one summoned for the renown of his virtue; and he continued all his life dealing with subjects who obeyed him in all things; and he drove his age to its furthest, sound, in no way maltreated by fortune, and died the easiest of deaths, withered by old age, the divinity allotted to him from the beginning remaining like itself until he vanished from among men — having lived more than eighty years, reigned forty-three, and left offspring: as the greater number write, four sons and one daughter, whose families are still preserved; but as Gnaeus Gellius relates, a daughter only, from whom was born Ancus Marcius, who became the third king of the Romans after him.

[155947] 76.6. When he died, the city set on great mourning and made for him the most splendid burial. He lies on the Janiculum across the river Tiber. And concerning Numa Pompilius we have received this much.