WORK: De Thucydide  (slug: dionysius-of-halicarnass-de-thucydide-11e75f)

CHAPTER: 01-de-thucydide



[109061] 49. There are also other things in this public speech worthy of blame, about which I have no need to say more; and I think I have made the matter sufficiently plain even through these — that of the style of Thucydides the best is that which has departed moderately from the customary and keeps the first and necessary virtues, and the worse is that which takes much turning aside from the common words and figures into the strange and forced and incoherent, on account of which not even any of the other virtues displays its own power. For this kind of expression is useful neither in the assemblies, in which the cities come together to deliberate about peace and war and the introduction of laws and the ordering of constitutions and the other common and great matters; nor in the courts, where the discourses are made, about death and exile and disfranchisement and bonds and the taking away of property, to those who have taken on the authority over these things ( . . . which distress the political crowd, not being accustomed to such hearings); nor in private conversations, in which we discuss the affairs of life with fellow-citizens or friends or kinsmen, narrating something of what has befallen us, or taking counsel about something necessary, or admonishing or exhorting or rejoicing with friends in their goods or grieving with them in their evils. For I forbear to say that not even their mothers and fathers would endure those who converse thus, because of the unpleasantness, but, as though hearing a foreign tongue, would need interpreters. These are the things of which I was persuaded about the historian, said with all truth according to my power.

[110730] 50. It is necessary also to examine briefly the things some say in his favor, that I may not seem to have passed anything over. That this character is suited neither to political contests nor to private conversations, all will agree who are not corrupted in mind but have their perceptions in their natural state. But certain not undistinguished sophists undertake to say that this character is not suited to those prepared for crowded gatherings and pleading just causes, but that to those who bring out historical works — which need magnificence and dignity and the power to strike — it most of all befits to practice this expression, the glossarial and archaic and figurative, altered from the customary figures toward the strange and superfluous. For these writings, they say, are not constructed for market-place men, nor cobblers, nor handicraftsmen, nor the others who have not shared in a liberal upbringing, but for men who have come through the general studies to rhetoric and philosophy, to whom none of these things will appear strange. And some have undertaken to say that the historian wrote his histories thus, aiming not at those who would come after him, but at those of his own time, to whom this dialect . . . [was familiar]. [But it is] useful neither for the deliberative nor for the forensic contests, in which the men of the assembly and the jurors — not such as Thucydides supposed — come together.

[112154] 51. To those, then, who think that to read and understand the dialect of Thucydides belongs to the well-educated alone, I have this to say: that they take away from the common life the necessary and useful thing for all (for nothing could be more necessary or more profitable), making it the possession of altogether few men — as in cities governed by oligarchy or tyranny; for easily counted are those able to put together all of Thucydides, and not even these without grammatical explanation in some places. And to those who refer the dialect of Thucydides to the ancient life, as though it were familiar to the men of that time, a brief and clear discourse suffices me: that of the many orators and philosophers who arose at Athens during the Peloponnesian War, none of them used this dialect, neither the orators around Andocides and Antiphon and Lysias, nor the Socratics around Critias and Antisthenes and Xenophon. From all these it is plain that the man was the first to have practiced this style of expression, that he might differ from the other historians. When, then, he uses it sparingly and moderately, he is wonderful and comparable to no other; but when he uses it to surfeit and tastelessly, neither marking off the occasions nor seeing the proper measure, he is to be blamed. I, for my part, would not think it right that historical writing be squalid and unadorned and commonplace, but that it should have something poetic too; nor wholly poetic, but having departed a little from what is customary; for surfeit is wearisome even of things very pleasant, while symmetry is everywhere useful.

[113766] 52. One discourse still remains to me, the one about the orators and historians who imitated the man — necessary, like any other, to the completion of the subject, but causing me a certain hesitation and much caution, lest we furnish some occasion of slander to those accustomed to slander everything, foreign to the fairness we have used both about the discourses and about characters; to whom we shall perhaps seem to do a malicious and ill-natured thing, if we bring forward those who have not used imitation well and produce their writings, on which those men prided themselves most, and through which they acquired great wealth and were judged worthy of brilliant repute. But that no such suspicion may arise against us, the reproaching of any and the recalling of their faults we shall let pass; and about those who succeeded in imitation, adding a little, we shall there bring our discourse to an end. Of the ancient historians, then, as far as I know, no one became an imitator of Thucydides in these respects, in which he seems most of all to differ from the rest — in the glossarial and archaic and poetic and strange expression, and in the inverted and complicated thoughts that wish, by clipping, to signify many matters and take their resolutions at a long distance, and besides these, in the awkward figures that wander from the natural conjunction and have no place even in any poetry — from which the obscurity that ruins all that is fine and casts darkness over the virtues passed into discourse.

[115281] 53. Of the orators, Demosthenes alone, just as of all the others who seemed to do something great and brilliant in discourse, so also became an emulator of Thucydides in many things, and added to his political speeches, taking from him, the virtues which neither Antiphon nor Lysias nor Isocrates, who held the first place among the orators of that time, possessed — I mean the swiftness and the compressions and the tensions and the bitterness and the compactness and the force that rouses the feelings; but the over-glossed and strange and poetic in the style, not thinking it suited to true contests, he left out, and neither did he love the wandering of figures from the natural sequence nor the solecistic appearance, but stayed in the customary, adorning his expression by changes and by variety and by bringing out no thought simply unfigured. But the complicated thoughts, signifying much in little and carrying their sequence at a long distance and bringing their reflections out of the unexpected, he emulated and added both to his deliberative and his forensic speeches, less in the private cases, but more lavishly in the public contests.

[116433] 54. I shall set down examples from both — a few, though they are many, and sufficient for those who have read the man. There is a public speech of his having for its subject the war against the king, exhorting the Athenians not to take it up rashly, on the ground that neither is their own power a match for the king's, nor will the allied power lay hold of the dangers faithfully and securely; and he exhorts them, having prepared their own power, to be plain to the Greeks that they will undergo the danger on behalf of the freedom of all, if anyone goes against them; but before being prepared he does not allow them to send envoys to the Greeks to summon them to the war, as they would not obey. Taking this thought, he has constructed and figured it thus: "But then, if indeed you do what we now think you should, no one, surely, of all the Greeks is so high-minded in his own conceit that, seeing a thousand cavalry, and hoplites as many as one likes, and three hundred ships, he will not come and beg, thinking that with these he would most safely be saved. So that from summoning comes, even now, to beg, and to fail if you do not obtain; but from holding back while preparing your own affairs comes both to save those who beg, and to know well that all will come." These things have been altered from the political and familiar manner of expression of the many, and are better than the layman's; yet they have not been darkened, nor become obscure so as to need explanation. And having begun to speak about the preparation, he adds this: "But the first thing of the preparation, men of Athens, and the greatest, is for you to be so disposed in mind that each willingly and eagerly does whatever may be needed. For you see, men of Athens, that whatever you ever willed, and after that each thought it his own concern to act, never once escaped you; but whatever you willed, and after that looked to one another, as though each himself would not act, but his neighbor would do what was needful, never once came about for you." For here too the thought is complicated in a complicated way, yet it has been spoken so as to depart from commonness into the unfamiliar expression, while what is superfluous in it is kept within clarity. And in the greatest of the public speeches against Philip he has at once constructed the very beginning thus: "Many speeches being made, men of Athens, in well-nigh every assembly, about the wrongs Philip does, ever since he made the peace, not only to you but to the rest as well; and all, I know, would say, even if they do not do it, that one must both speak and act so that he may cease from his insolence and pay the penalty — yet I see all our affairs given up and let go to such a point that I fear to say a thing blasphemous, but true: if even all who came forward wished to speak, and you to vote, in such a way that things should be at their very worst, I do not think they could be worse disposed than now." Like to these are also those: "Then do you think that, if to those whom he did no harm, but who guarded perhaps against suffering it, he chooses rather to deceive than, forewarning, to use force, against you he will make war by forewarning, and that while you are willingly deceived?" And in the strongest of the forensic speeches, the one written on the Crown, having made mention of Philip's cleverness, by which he had outgeneraled the cities, he has figured the thought thus: "And I add no longer that of the cruelty which it is possible to see in those over whom Philip became master once for all, it befell others to make trial; but of the humanity which, throwing the rest of his affairs about himself, he feigned toward you, you, doing well, have reaped the fruits." And where he declares those who betrayed their affairs to Philip the cause of all the evils that befell the Greeks, he writes word for word thus: "And yet, by Heracles and all the gods, if one had to look at the truth, removing from the midst the lying and saying anything out of enmity — who in truth were they on whose head all men might reasonably and justly lay the cause of what has happened? You would find them to be the men like this one in each of the cities, not those like me; men who, when Philip's affairs were weak and altogether small, though we often forewarned and exhorted and taught the best things, for the sake of their own shameful gain gave up the common interest, deceiving and corrupting their fellow-citizens each in his own city, until they made them slaves."

[120954] 55. I could bring countless examples from the speeches of Demosthenes, both the deliberative and the forensic, which have been constructed after the character of Thucydides — the one that has its variation in the common and familiar dialect. But that my discourse may not become longer than is needed, being content with these as sufficient to confirm what is proposed, I would not hesitate to lay it down for those who practice political discourse — those at least who still keep their judgments undistorted — that, using Demosthenes as their counselor, whom we are persuaded to have been the mightiest of all orators, they should imitate those constructions in which the brevity and the force and the strength and the tension and the magnificence and the virtues akin to these are plain to all men; but those that are riddling and hard to learn and need grammatical explanations and have much that is tortured and solecistic in their figurings, they should neither admire nor imitate. And to speak summarily, it has no reason that both should be equally worthy of emulation — both the things said unclearly by the historian and those that have taken on, along with the other virtues, clarity. We must rather agree that the more perfect things are better than the more imperfect, and the more manifest than the more obscure. What, then, have we learned, that we praise the whole dialect of the historian and force ourselves to say that Thucydides wrote these things for the men of his own time, as being familiar to all and known, but that of us who were to come after he took no account — we who cast out from the courts and the assemblies the whole style of Thucydides as useless? Rather we do not agree that the narrative part of it, except for a very few places, is wonderfully fine and well-fitted for all uses, but that the public-speaking part is not all suited to imitation, but only that part of it which is easy for all men to understand, though not possible for all to construct. I had things more pleasant than these to write to you about Thucydides, best Quintus Aelius Tubero — but not, indeed, truer.