WORK: Lives of the Sophists  (slug: flavius-philostratus-lives-of-the-sophists-018b19)

CHAPTER: 03-book-2



[109750] 29.1. Quirinus the sophist had as his fatherland Nicomedia, and a lineage neither of good repute nor again condemned, but a nature good at taking up learning and better at handing it on, for he practised not only memory but also clarity. This sophist was epigrammatic, and not copious about the thetic passages, but vigorous and vehement and clever at shaking the ears of a hearer, for indeed he improvised; but seeming more suited to accusations, he was entrusted by the emperor with the tongue of the treasury, and coming into power he seemed neither oppressive nor boastful, but gentle and like himself, nor money-loving, but, just as the Athenians sing that Aristides, after the imposition of the tributes and the islands, returned to them in his former cloak, so too Quirinus came back to his own ways, dignified by poverty. When those of the informers in Asia blamed him as more gentle about the accusations than they themselves instruct, he said, "And indeed it is far better that you take on my gentleness than that I take on your cruelty." And when they informed against a not great city for many myriads, Quirinus won the suit much against his will, and the informers, coming up to him, said, "This suit will raise you great, coming to the ears of the emperor." And Quirinus said, "It is fitting not for me, but for you, to be honored for having made a city uninhabited." Over a son who died, when his relatives consoled him, he said, "When shall I appear a man, if not now?" Having been a hearer of Adrianus, he did not agree with all his sayings, but there were some that he even struck out as not rightly said. The term of his life was the seventieth year, and his tomb is at home.

[111446] 30.1. Philiscus the Thessalian is connected by descent to Hippodromus, and he presided over the chair at Athens for seven years, being deprived of the immunity belonging to it; and how this came about it is necessary to make plain. The Eordaean Macedonians, having proclaimed Philiscus for their local public services, as though this belonged to them over all who were sprung from their mothers, summoned him; the suit, then, coming before the emperor — and it was Antoninus, the son of the philosophic Julia — he was sent to Rome to settle his own affairs, and attaching himself to the geometers and philosophers about Julia, he obtained from her, through the emperor, the chair at Athens. But he, just as the gods are made by Homer to grant things to one another not all willingly but some even unwillingly, so indeed grew savage and was harsh toward him as one who had gone round about him; and when he heard that there was a suit of his too, of which he himself would be the hearer, he bade the man appointed over the suits to give him notice not to contend through another, but through himself. And when he came into the court, his walk gave offense, his stance gave offense, and his dress seemed not graceful and his voice half-womanish and his tongue supine and his looking somewhere else rather than at his thoughts; from these things the emperor, turning away to Philiscus, bridled him and throughout the whole speech let the water run upon him and made narrow questions in it; and when the answers of Philiscus did not match the questions, he said, "The hair shows the man, but the voice the orator," and after many such checks he set himself to the Eordaeans. And when Philiscus said, "You have given me immunity from public services by giving me the chair at Athens," the emperor cried out, "Neither you are immune nor anyone else of those who teach; for I would never, over little and wretched trifles of speech, deprive cities of those who are to perform their public services." Yet nonetheless even after this he voted to Philostratus the Lemnian immunity from public services for declamation, when he was twenty-four years old. The pretexts, then, for which Philiscus was deprived of being immune, were these; but let not the deficiencies about his glance and voice and figure deprive him of having Hellenized and composed in the best manner of orators. The style of his speech was talkative rather than competitive, but pure words shone through it too, and a novel ring. He died, then, leaving a daughter and a son of no worth, and the measure of his life was sixty-seven years. Though he had acquired at Athens a not unpleasant estate, he was not buried in it, but in the Academy, where the polemarch sets the contest over those buried from the wars.

[114216] 31.1. Aelian was a Roman, but he Atticized, like the Athenians of the interior. This man seems to me worthy of praise, first, because he worked out a pure speech while dwelling in a city using another speech, and next, because, being called a sophist by those who grant such things as a favor, he did not believe it, nor flatter his own judgment, nor was he lifted up by the name, great as it is, but, having well examined himself as not suited to declamation, he set himself to composition and was admired from this. The general style of the man is simplicity, attaining something of the grace of Nicostratus, but it sometimes looks toward Dio and his tone.

[114876] 31.2. When Philostratus the Lemnian once met him with a book still in hand, reading it with anger and intensity of voice, he asked him what he was studying, and he said, "I have worked out an accusation of the Wretch" — for so I call the lately deposed tyrant, since he shamed the affairs of the Romans with all licentiousness. And Philostratus said, "I would have admired you, if you had accused him while living. For to check a living tyrant is the part of a man, but to trample on one laid low is the part of anyone."

[115398] 31.3. This man used to say that he had never travelled anywhere of the earth beyond the land of the Italians, nor embarked on a ship, nor known the sea, on which account he was deemed worthy of greater repute at Rome, as honoring its ways. He was a hearer of Pausanias, but admired Herodes as the most varied of orators. He lived above sixty years and died not leaving children, for he declined the begetting of children by never marrying. Whether this is happy or wretched is not for the present time to philosophize.

[115918] 32.1. Since Fortune is most powerful over all human affairs, let not Heliodorus either be deemed unworthy of the sophists' circle, having become a paradoxical contest of Fortune. For this man was elected advocate of his own fatherland to the Celtic peoples along with another, and when the other fell sick and the emperor was said to be striking out many of the suits, Heliodorus ran to the camp in fear about his suit; and being summoned sooner than he thought, he tried to postpone to his sick colleague; but the man who summoned the suits, being insolent, did not allow this, but led him into the courts unwilling and dragging him by the beard. And when he came in and looked boldly at the emperor and asked time of the water, and managed the very deprecation cleverly, saying, "It will seem strange to you, greatest emperor, that one objecting to himself should contend alone in the suit, having no instructions," the emperor leaped up, calling Heliodorus "a man such as I have never yet known, a discovery of my own times" and such things, shaking his hand and the fold of his cloak. At first, then, an impulse to laugh fell upon us too, thinking that he was spitting upon him, but when he gave him the right to ride at public expense, and his sons, as many as he had, Fortune was admired as displaying her own strength through things so paradoxical, and much more was this shown from what followed. For when the Arabian understood that by some good spirit his affairs were advancing, he made full use of the emperor's impulse, like those shipowners who shake out the sails full in fair voyages, and said, "O king, grant me time for a display of declamation," and the king said, "I hear; and speak on this: Demosthenes, having broken down before Philip, and fleeing a charge of cowardice." And as he declaimed, the emperor not only provided himself well-disposed, but prepared the praise from others too, looking fearfully at those who heard without praise. And indeed he set him over the greatest of the advocacies at Rome, as more suited to courts and suits. When the emperor died, an island was assigned to him, but, taking a charge of murder on the island, he was sent up to Rome to make his defense to the commanders of the legions, and seeming clear of the charge, the island too was given back to him. And he grows old at Rome, neither courted nor neglected.

[118290] 33.1. Aspasius the sophist was brought forth by Ravenna, and Ravenna by the Italians, and his father Demetrianus educated him, knowing well the critics of speeches. Aspasius was much-learned and much-heard, and praising novelty, but nowhere falling into tastelessness, from using what he knew in season. And this, no doubt, is best in music too, for the seasons of the tones gave a voice both to the lyre and the flute and taught melody. But devoting himself to expounding in approved fashion and with simplicity, he neglected breath and amplitude, and not having improvisation from nature, he secured it by toil.

[118905] 33.2. He came too to many parts of the earth, both being with the emperor and moving about by himself. He presided over the chair at Rome, in his youth most of good repute, but growing old with the charge of not wishing to give way to another. The quarrel of Aspasius with Philostratus the Lemnian began at Rome, but grew greater in Ionia, increased by Cassianus and Aurelius the sophists. Of these the one, Aurelius, was such as even to declaim in taverns over the wine there, while the other was such as to be bold toward the chair at Athens through the occasions which he abused, but to teach no one except Periges the Lydian. About the manner of the quarrel I have spoken, and why should I again interpret what has been sufficiently shown? But that there is something good to be found even from an enemy was shown in many human affairs, but most of all in these men; for, being at variance, Aspasius gained for himself improvisation with fluency, since Philostratus was renowned in this part too, and the other in turn chastened his own speech, hitherto running wild, toward that man's precision.

[120007] 33.3. The letter composed by Philostratus on how one ought to write letters is aimed at Aspasius, since, having come into the imperial correspondence, he wrote some letters more contentiously than was fitting, and others not clearly, neither of which befits an emperor; for an emperor, whenever he writes, needs not enthymemes nor arguments, but opinion, nor again obscurity, since he speaks laws, and clarity is the interpreter of law.

[120445] 33.4. Aspasius, then, was a pupil of Pausanias, but not without a hearing of Hippodromus, and he was teaching at Rome already well advanced in age when these things were being written by me. So much about Aspasius. But concerning Philostratus the Lemnian — and what this man was in the courts, what in public speaking, what in compositions, what in declamations, how great in extempore speech — and concerning Nicagoras the Athenian, who was crowned herald of the Eleusinian temple, and Apsines the Phoenician, how far he advanced in memory and precision, it is not for me to write, for I would even be disbelieved as showing favor, since I had friendship with them.