WORK: Heroicus  (slug: flavius-philostratus-heroicus-b1daab)

CHAPTER: 01-heroicus



[109489] 728. He existed, stranger, Homer the poet existed and sang—some say twenty-four years after the Trojan war, others a hundred and twenty-seven, when the Athenians sent their colony to Ionia, others say it was a hundred and sixty years after Troy when Homer and Hesiod lived, when indeed both sang at Chalcis, the one the seven verses about the two Ajaxes and how their phalanxes were close-fitted and strong, the other his verses to his brother Perses, in which he bade him take to labor and apply himself to farming, that he might not need others nor go hungry. And these things about Homer's dates are truer, stranger, for Protesilaus agrees with them. At any rate, when two poets once spoke a hymn to him here and departed, the hero on his arrival asked me which of them I voted for; and when I praised the poorer—for he had rather won me over—Protesilaus laughed and said, "Panides has suffered the same as you, vinedresser; for he, being king of Chalcis on the Euripus, voted for Hesiod against Homer, and that with a bigger beard than you." Homer the poet existed, stranger, and the poems are a man's, and he knew the names and gathered the deeds from the cities each of them led—for he went over Greece after a time not yet sufficient to dim the things in Troy—and he learned them in another way too, divine and far in wisdom; for they say Homer once sailed to Ithaca, having heard that the soul of Odysseus still breathed, and used necromancy to summon him. And when Odysseus came up, Homer asked him the matters at Ilium,

[111020] 729. Vinedresser and he said he knew all things and remembered them, but would say nothing of what he knew unless there should be a reward for him from Homer—words of good omen in the poetry and a hymn upon his wisdom and manliness. When Homer agreed to this and said he would gratify him in the poetry however he could, Odysseus went through everything with truth and as it happened, for least of all do souls lie at blood and trenches. And when Homer was already departing, Odysseus cried out, "Palamedes demands of me justice for his own murder, and I know I do wrong, and I shall altogether suffer something, for those who lay down law here are terrible, Homer, and the things from the Avengers are near; but if I shall not seem to the men above to have done these things to Palamedes, the things here will destroy me less. Do not, then, bring Palamedes to Ilium, nor use him as a soldier, nor say that he was wise. Other poets will say it, but it will not seem plausible unless spoken by you." This, stranger, was the fellowship of Odysseus and Homer; and so Homer learned the truth, but rearranged much for the advantage of the story he had set forth.

[112179] Phoenician Did you ever ask Protesilaus about Homer's homeland, vinedresser, and of what parents he was?

[112285] Vinedresser Often, stranger.

[112315] Phoenician And what did he say?

[112348] Vinedresser He says he knows, but that Homer left these things out so that the worthy cities might make him their own citizen, and perhaps too that, by some ordinance of the Fates concerning Homer, he should seem without a city; and that he himself would do nothing dear either to the Fates or to the Muses if he should publish this, which has come round at last to Homer's praise. For all cities lay claim to him,

[112764] 730. Vinedresser and all nations, and would even go to law with one another about him, enrolling themselves under Homer as under a fellow citizen. And that he would not be silent about this account to you, Phoenician, nor hide it, if he knew it, let the things I have said be your proof; for I think I have gone through ungrudgingly for you all that I know.

[113123] Phoenician I believe you, vinedresser, and let us follow the account through which these things are kept silent. But it is time for you to reveal Achilles, unless he too will astonish us, as he did the Trojans when he blazed upon them from the trench.

[113376] Vinedresser Do not fear Achilles, stranger; for you will meet him as a child at the beginning of the account.

[113487] Phoenician You will give great things by going through him from infancy; for after this we shall meet him, I suppose, arming and fighting.

[113627] Vinedresser So it will be, and you will say you know all about Achilles. I heard such things as these about him. To Peleus came an apparition of a sea-deity, and the deity, in love with him I think, kept company with Peleus in Pelion, out of modesty toward the crowd not yet telling her own affairs, nor whence she came; and when a calm held the sea, she happened to be sporting on dolphins and sea-horses, while he, watching this from a height of Pelion, understood the goddess and feared her coming. But she led Peleus to courage, recalling Dawn, how she loved Tithonus, and Aphrodite, how she was overcome by Anchises, and the Moon, how she visited the sleeping Endymion.

[114303] 731. Vinedresser "And I," she said, "Peleus, will give you a son greater than a man." When Achilles was born, they made Chiron his nurturer, and he reared him on honeycombs and the marrow of fawns; and when he came to the age at which boys want little carts and knucklebones, he did not keep him from such things either, but accustomed him to javelins and darts and races, and he had a little ash-spear cut by Chiron, and he was like one lisping toward warlike matters. When he laid hold of his youth, he sent forth a ray from his face, and appeared of extraordinary body, and growing more easily than the trees by the springs, he was much sung in feasts and much in earnest matters. When he appeared to be overcome by spirit, Chiron taught him music, for music is able to soothe the readiness and the loftiness of a temper; and with no labor he learned the harmonies thoroughly and sang to the lyre. He sang of the ancient youths, Hyacinthus and Narcissus and what concerned Adonis; and since the laments over Hyllas and Abderus were fresh—for both, being ephebes, the one had gone off and vanished into a spring, while the mares of Diomedes had devoured the other—he sang these things not without tears. I heard this too: that he sacrificed to Calliope, asking for music and the power in poetry, and the goddess stood over him as he slept and said, "Child, of music and poetry I give you what is sufficient, that you may make feasts sweeter and lull griefs to sleep; but since it seems good to me and to Athena that you be warlike and terrible in camps,

[115860] 732. and the Fates so order, do you exercise in those things and love them; a poet will come in later times whom I shall send to hymn your deeds." These things were given him as an oracle about Homer. As a youth, he was not reared, as most say, hidden away in Scyros—that tale about him among the maidens; for it is not likely that Peleus, who became the best of heroes, would have sent his son off somewhere fleeing wars and dangers, and that when Telamon was urging Ajax forth, nor would Achilles have endured being cast into the women's quarters, leaving to others the being admired and renowned in Troy. For ambition was greatest indeed even in him.

[116515] Phoenician What then does Protesilaus know about these things, vinedresser?

[116592] Vinedresser Things more plausible, stranger, and truer. For he says that Theseus, fleeing from Athens under the curse upon his son, died at the hand of Lycomedes in Scyros; and that Peleus, being the guest-friend of Theseus and his partner in the Calydonian deed, sent Achilles to Scyros to avenge Theseus, and that he, sailing out together with Phoenix, who from old age knew only the matters of counsel, shook Scyros by assault—it was set on high and built upon a rocky height—and overcame Lycomedes, but did not kill him; rather he asked, "What ailed you that you killed a man better than yourself, and a fugitive?" and when Lycomedes said, "Because he came on unjust business, Achilles, and tried to seize my rule," he let him go as one who had killed justly, and said he would speak in his defense before Peleus. And he married Deidamia the daughter of Lycomedes, and Neoptolemus was born to them, named so on account of the youth of Achilles,

[117542] 733. Vinedresser at which he set out to war. While Achilles lived there, Thetis would come and tend her son, like mortal mothers; and when the army was mustering at Aulis, she ferried him over to Phthia, because of what was fated for him, making Peleus master of the child. She is said too to have forged arms for him, such as no one had yet borne, with which he came to Aulis and filled the army with hope, and was thought so much a god's child that they sacrificed to Thetis by the sea and did obeisance to Achilles darting about in his arms. I asked Protesilaus too about the ash-spear, what the marvel about it was, and he says the ash-spear had a length no other spear had, and the wood was straight and so strong that it could not be broken, and the mouth of the point was of adamant and pierced through everything, and the butt-spike on the other end was set with mountain-copper, that the whole, flashing, might fall upon the foe.

[118482] Phoenician And the arms, vinedresser—how does he say they were adorned?

[118555] Vinedresser Not in Homer's manner, stranger; for those too were divinely devised by Homer, who inscribed cities and stars and wars and farmings and marriages and songs—but he says this about them: that Achilles had no other arms than those he brought to Troy, and that arms of Achilles were never lost, nor did Patroclus put them on during the wrath; for he died in his own arms, renowned in battle and already touching the wall, while the arms of Achilles remained inviolate and untaken—for he did not even die in his arms,

[119081] 734. but coming as it seemed to a marriage, he died naked and crowned, like a bridegroom. The arms were fashioned plain and modest, but a varied play of material was blended into them, shifting now into one gleam and now another, as many as the rainbow has; whence they seemed to be sung as beyond art and Hephaestus.

[119400] Phoenician Will you show him too, vinedresser, and describe him from his form?

[119480] Vinedresser Why should I not, having so eager a listener? His hair he says was abundant and sweeter than gold, and graceful however and wherever the wind or he himself moved it; his nose not yet hooked, but as though about to be; his brow crescent-shaped; the spirit in his eyes, which were gray, when he was at rest seemed to be holding back some impulse, but when he set out, it leapt out together with his resolve, and to those who saw him he fawned more sweetly; for the Achaeans felt toward him something like what one feels toward valiant lions—for though we greet them in quiet, we rejoice in them more when, filled with spirit, they rush upon a boar or a bull or one of the fighting beasts. The high temper of Achilles, he says, was shown also by his neck, for it was straight and upright. And he was the most just of heroes by nature and from his company with Chiron. His being slandered as to money came from there, for he was so disposed toward it that out of the twenty-three cities he himself took, he received very many captives, but was overcome by none of them except a girl—whom he did not even give to himself, but asked the Achaeans for her—and when Nestor charged the Achaeans with injustice, if Achilles should not receive the larger share, "Let the greater part of the deeds be mine," he said, "but in money let whoever wishes have the advantage."

[120851] 735. Vinedresser At that assembly, stranger, the wrath of Achilles toward Agamemnon over Palamedes began; for mentioning the cities they had both taken, "Such," he said, "was the treason of Palamedes; let whoever wishes judge me too, for I come from the same things." When Agamemnon took these words to himself and reviled Achilles, and Odysseus said that to speak on behalf of a traitor was itself treason, Achilles drove the latter from the assembly—he too having said nothing dear to the Achaeans—and, having reached Agamemnon with many more reproaches, lived out of range, neither doing anything that bore on the common good nor going to the councils, when the entreaties came to him from Agamemnon, the Achaeans being now in extremity. Ajax and Nestor served as envoys for them—the one because of kinship and because he had already been reconciled to them after being wrathful for the same reasons as Achilles, the other because of wisdom and age, which all the Achaeans honored. When they obtained from him at least that Patroclus should fight as ally for them, the one, having done and suffered all that Homer says, died fighting Troy over the wall; while the other did nothing ignoble over him, nor said anything, but having lamented him stoutly and buried him as he himself wished and thought he would gratify him, went against Hector. The hyperboles Homer uses about those who perished with their chariots when Achilles appeared,

[122292] 736. and about those slaughtered in the river, and the movement of the river when it raised its own wave against Achilles—Protesilaus praises these as poetical, but draws a line through them as overdone; for neither would the Scamander, smaller than the great rivers, have been impassable to Achilles, great as he was, nor would Achilles have rushed to battle with the river, for even if it roared very fiercely against him, he would have escaped by turning aside and not coming to grips with the water. More plausible than these, I think, are the things he goes through: that the Trojans were driven together into the river and more of them perished than perished in the whole war, but that these things were not done by Achilles alone—rather the Greeks, already emboldened by him, came down and slaughtered those in the river, while Achilles took no heed of these, but fought a contest such as this. There was a man come from Paeonia, of whom Homer too made mention, and he calls him Asteropaeus, grandson of the river Axius, and ambidextrous, and the greatest of Achaeans and Trojans, this Paeonian, who came against the spears like a beast; Homer left this out of his account. He had just come to Troy with a fresh force of Paeonian horsemen, whom Achilles routed by terrifying them, for they thought a deity had fallen upon them, never having met such a man; but when Asteropaeus alone stood his ground, he feared for himself more than when he fought Hector, and not unwounded did he take the Paeonian; whence, when his allies forbade him to fight Hector that day, he did not endure these words, but saying, "Let him see me even with my wounds the better man," he rushed against Hector, drawn up before the wall. Having killed him, he became such as I said in the account about him,

[124081] and dragged him about the wall in a barbarous and unpleasant manner, but pardonable, since he was avenging Patroclus. For Achilles, using a kind of divine nature, always did something great on behalf of his friends,

[124298] 736b. Phoenician whence he was wrathful over Palamedes against all the Greeks together, and avenged Patroclus and Antilochus. The words said to Ajax son of Telamon about friends one must know well; for when Ajax afterward asked him which of his deeds were most dangerous to him, Achilles said, "Those for my friends." And when he asked again which were sweetest and least toilsome, he answered the same; and when Ajax wondered how the same deed could be both hard and easy, "Because," he said, "the dangers for my friends, being great, I do eagerly and so cease from the grief over them." "And what wound, Achilles, pained you most?" he said. "The one I was wounded by Hector." "But surely you were not wounded by him," said Ajax. "By Zeus, in my head," said Achilles, "and in my hands; for myself I consider my head, but Patroclus was my hands." Patroclus, Protesilaus says, stranger, was not much older than Achilles, but a divine and self-controlled man, and most suited of the companions to Achilles; for he rejoiced whenever Achilles rejoiced, and grieved in the same manner, and always counseled something and listened to him singing; and the horses too bore him rejoicing, as they did Achilles. He was in size and manliness midway between the two Ajaxes, for he fell short of the Telamonian in all things, but surpassed both in respect to the Locrian; and Patroclus was honey-pale, and dark in the eyes and well-browed, and praising moderation of hair; his head was set upon a neck such as the wrestling-schools train, his nose was straight, and his nostrils widened, like those of eager horses.

[125902] 737. Phoenician You reminded me at a good time of Achilles' horses, vinedresser; for I greatly need to learn why, being better than other horses, they were thought divine.

[126075] Vinedresser I too asked the hero this very thing, stranger, and he says the so-called immortality about them was mythologized by Homer; but that Thessaly, being good for horses and excellent, reared two horses, a white and a chestnut, marvelous in swiftness and brilliant in temper, by some divine providence, when Achilles was in his bloom; and since all the divine things said of Achilles were already believed, the horses too seemed divine and to appear beyond the mortal. The end of Achilles came as Homer too acknowledges; for he says he died by Paris and Apollo, knowing, I suppose, the things in the Thymbraion, and how, at the holy places and oaths of which he made Apollo a witness, he fell treacherously slain. The sacrifice of Polyxena at the tomb, and all you hear from the poets about that love, stand thus: Achilles loved Polyxena and was arranging this marriage for himself on condition of raising the Achaeans from Ilium, and Polyxena too loved Achilles. They saw one another at the ransoming of Hector, for Priam, coming to Achilles, made his daughter his guide, she being the youngest of those Hecuba bore him, and the youngest children always tended the steps of their fathers; and Achilles was so self-controlled, out of justice, even in matters of love, that he neither took the girl, though she was in his power, but agreed with Priam upon her marriage and trusted him when he postponed the wedding. And when Achilles died naked amid the oaths about these things, Polyxena is said—when the Trojan women fled from the temple and the Trojans were scattered, for they did not even bear the fall of Achilles without fear—

[127716] 738. Vinedresser to have deserted and fled to the Greek camp, and being brought to Agamemnon, lived in splendid and chaste tendance, as in a father's house; but on the third day after the corpse lay there, she ran to the tomb by night and leaned herself upon a sword, saying many piteous and wedding-like things, and then indeed she begged Achilles to remain her lover and to wed her, not having lied about the marriage. The things said by Homer in the second Weighing of Souls—if indeed those things are Homer's—that when Achilles died the Muses lamented him in songs and the Nereids with beatings of their breasts, he says are not far overstated; for the Muses neither came nor sang, nor was any Nereid seen by the army, though they knew they were coming, but other wonderful things happened, not far from what Homer said. For out of the Melas gulf the sea swelled, at first bellowing, and not long after, raised to the height of a great hill, advanced toward the Rhoeteum, while the Achaeans were astonished and at a loss what they themselves and the land would suffer; and when it came near and surged against the camp, it sounded a lament, sharp and crowded together, like a throng of women, such as they utter at funerals. And this appearing divine and supernatural, and all agreeing that the wave was bringing the Nereids—for it overwhelmed nothing, but lay down gently and smooth upon the land—the things that followed seemed far more divine: for when night came on, a wailing of Thetis ran through the army as she chanted dirges and cried out for her son. And she cried clear and resounding, like the echo in the mountains; and then most of all the Achaeans understood that Thetis had borne Achilles, not otherwise disbelieving it. This mound, stranger, which you see standing on the front of the headland,

[129533] 739. Vinedresser the Achaeans raised when he was mingled with Patroclus into the tomb, giving the fairest grave-gift to himself and to him; whence those who praise the things of friendship sing of him. He was buried most conspicuously of men with all that Greece brought to him, no longer thinking it noble to wear long hair after Achilles, and heaping upon the pyre, all together, the gold and whatever each had—either bringing it to Troy or receiving it from the division—both at once and when Neoptolemus came to Troy; for he got brilliant gifts again, both from his son and from the Achaeans, who tried to repay him; indeed, even those making their voyage from Troy would put in at the tomb and think they embraced Achilles.

[130263] Phoenician And Neoptolemus, vinedresser—what sort of man does he say he was?

[130341] Vinedresser Noble, stranger, and less than his father, but no worse than the Telamonian; and he says the same about his form, that he was handsome and resembled his father, but fell short of him by as much as the handsome fall short of statues. And Achilles got hymns from Thessaly, which they sang going each year to the tomb by night, mingling something of a mystery-rite with the funeral offerings, as the Lemnians do, and the Peloponnesians descended from Sisyphus.

[130812] Phoenician Another account has come, vinedresser, which, by Heracles, I would not let go, even if you did everything to make it fly past you.

[130955] 740. Vinedresser But some, stranger, count the digressions of an account as idle chatter and nonsense, toward those who have no leisure. And I see that you are a slave of the ship you command, and a slave of the winds, of which, if even a small breeze should stand at the stern, you must shake out the sails and rise up with the ship, counting all things second to sailing.

[131330] Phoenician Let the ship fare well from now on, and the things in it; for the cargoes of the soul are sweeter to me and more profitable, and let us count the digressions of the account no nonsense, but a surplus profit of this trading.

[131566] Vinedresser You are sound, stranger, in thinking thus; and since you wish it, listen. The rites of the Corinthians over Melicertes—for these I called the descendants of Sisyphus—and all that the same people do over the children of Medea, whom they killed for Glauce's sake, are like a dirge, mystic and inspired; for the children they propitiate, but Melicertes they hymn. And over the deed once done against their husbands by the women of Lemnos through Aphrodite, Lemnos is purified, and once each year the fire on it is quenched for nine days, and a sacred ship from Delos brings fire; and if it arrives before the funeral offerings, it anchors nowhere in Lemnos, but rides at sea off the headlands until it becomes holy to sail in.

[132303] 741. Vinedresser For invoking then the chthonic and unspeakable gods, they keep pure, I think, the fire that is in the sea; and when the sacred ship has sailed in and they distribute the fire both to the rest of life and to the fiery crafts, they say a new life begins from there. The Thessalian funeral offerings that came to Achilles from Thessaly were ordained for the Thessalians from Dodona; for the oracle bade the Thessalians, sailing to Troy, to sacrifice yearly to Achilles and to slay some victims as to a god, others as among the dead. At first it was done thus: a ship from Thessaly, rigged with black sails, sailed to Troy, bringing twice seven envoys, and two bulls, a white and a black, both tame, and wood from Pelion, that they might need nothing of the city, and they brought fire from Thessaly and libations and water drawn from the Spercheius, whence the Thessalians first made it custom to use unfading garlands at funerals, so that, even if winds should hold the ship back, they might not bring rotten or withered ones. By night they had to anchor, and before touching the land to sing a hymn from the ship to Thetis, composed thus: "Thetis, dark-blue, Thetis of Peleus, who bore the great son, Achilles, of whom what mortal nature brought, Troy received as her portion, but what of your immortal lineage the child drew, the sea holds.

[133662] 742. Vinedresser "Come to this steep mound with Achilles for the burnt offerings . . . come tearless with Thessaly, Thetis dark-blue, Thetis of Peleus." When they had come to the tomb after the hymn, a shield was beaten, as in war, and with rhythmic runnings they raised the war cry together, calling on Achilles; and having crowned the summit of the mound and dug trenches upon it, they slaughtered the black bull as to one dead. They called Patroclus too to the feast, doing this also as a favor to Achilles; and having cut the victim and made the offering, they went down to the ship and, sacrificing on the shore the other of the bulls to Achilles again—beginning with the basket and the entrails for that sacrifice (for they sacrificed this sacrifice as to a god)—about dawn they sailed away, carrying off the sacrificial meat, so that they might not feast in the enemy's land. These things so august and ancient, stranger, they say were abolished by the tyrants who are said to have ruled the Thessalians after the sons of Aeacus, and were neglected too by Thessaly; for some of the cities sent, but others did not think it worth while, others said they would send next year,

[134845] 743. Vinedresser and others let the matter drop. And when the land was oppressed by drought and the oracle bade them honor Achilles "as is lawful," they took away from the rites the things they did as to a god, interpreting "as is lawful" in this way, and made offerings to him as to a dead man, cutting whatever came to hand; and when the expedition of Xerxes against Greece came, in which the Thessalians, having medized, again abandoned the customs toward Achilles—since a ship had sailed from Aegina to Salamis bringing the house of the sons of Aeacus for the alliance of Greece—and when, in later times, Alexander son of Philip enslaved the rest of Thessaly but released Phthia to Achilles, and, campaigning against Darius, made Achilles his ally at Troy, the Thessalians turned again to Achilles, and drove around the tomb all the cavalry that Alexander led from Thessaly, and fell upon one another as in a cavalry battle, and went away praying and sacrificing, and called upon him against Darius by Balius and Xanthus, crying these things from their horses. But when Darius was taken and Alexander was among the Indians, the Thessalians reduced the funeral offerings and sent a black lamb. And as those who made the offerings either did not come to Troy, or, if they came, did each thing by day and not in order, Achilles grew wrathful, and if I should go through all he inflicted on Thessaly, the account will be full of idle talk. About four years ago Protesilaus, meeting me here, said he had come from the Black Sea—for, finding a ship, he had sailed to visit Achilles, likened to a stranger, and he often does this—and when I said that he was a lover of comrades and good in loving Achilles, "But now," he said, "I come having fallen out with him,

[136606] 744. Vinedresser for perceiving him wrathful with the Thessalians over the funeral offerings, I said, 'Achilles, let this go.' But he is not persuaded, and says he will give them some evil from the sea. And I fear lest that terrible and relentless one has found something for them from Thetis." And I, stranger, hearing this from Protesilaus, thought that mildew and mists would be cast by Achilles on the Thessalians' crops for the destruction of the fruit—for these afflictions seem somehow to settle from the sea upon the fruitful parts of the mainland—and I thought too that some of the cities in Thessaly would be flooded, as Bura and Helice and Atalante among the Locrians suffered; for the one they say sank, and the others were rent apart. But other things seemed good to Achilles and Thetis, by which the Thessalians have been ruined. For, great penalties being set on the shellfish from which men make purple dye, the Thessalians were charged with breaking the law in some way concerning this dye—whether truly, I do not know—and so debts hang over them,

[137672] 745. Vinedresser by which they sell their fields, sell their houses, and of their slaves some have run away from them, others have been sold, and most do not even make offerings to their own parents, for they have sold even the tombs; so that the evil which Achilles threatened to give the Thessalians from the sea, stranger, let us consider this to be it.

[138030] Phoenician A baneful wrath you speak of, vinedresser, and hard to heal. But tell me, what wonder does Protesilaus know about the island in the Black Sea? For there, I suppose, he keeps company with him.

[138234] Vinedresser

[138247] 746. There, stranger, and he says such things about it as these: that there is an island, one of those in the Black Sea, toward the inhospitable side rather, which those sailing in by the mouth of the Black Sea put on their left, extending in length thirty stades and in breadth no more than four, and trees grow on it, white poplars and elms, some at random, but those about the sanctuary already in order. The sanctuary is set toward the Maeotis—which, equal to the Black Sea, empties into it—and the statues in it are Achilles and Helen, joined together by the Fates. For though love lies in the eyes, and the poets sing of love arising from there, Achilles and Helen were the first to love one another though they had not seen one another, but she being in Egypt and he in Ilium, they were moved to love one another, finding their ears the origin of desire.

[139110] [746b] Vinedresser And since it was fated for them to live in immortality, and no land beneath Ilium would do—the Echinades off Oeniadae and Acarnania being already defiled, when Alcmaeon, having killed his mother, dwelt at the outlets of the Achelous in a land younger than the deed—Thetis besought Poseidon to send up some island out of the sea in which they might dwell. And he, considering the length of the Black Sea, and that, no island lying in it, it was sailed uninhabited, revealed the White Island, of the size I said, for Achilles and Helen to dwell in, and for sailors to put in and anchor in the open sea. And being lord of all the watery substance, and reflecting upon the rivers Thermodon and Borysthenes and Ister, how they pour into the Black Sea with measureless and ever-flowing streams, he heaped up the silt of the rivers, which they drag from the Scythians into the sea, and rounded off an island, compacting it on the floor of the Black Sea. There Achilles and Helen first saw and embraced one another, and held their wedding-feast, Poseidon himself and Amphitrite and all the Nereids and all the rivers and deities that come to the Maeotis and the Black Sea. White birds, they say, dwell on it, and these are moist and smelling of the sea, which Achilles has made his attendants, adorning the grove for him with the breeze of their wings and the drops from them, doing this as they fly along the ground and rise a little above the earth. To men sailing the gulf of the sea, the island is holy to enter, for it lies like a hospitable hearth for ships; but to make a home of it is forbidden to all who sail and to the Greeks and barbarians about the Black Sea.

[140795] 747. Vinedresser For they must, having anchored and sacrificed, embark at sunset, not passing the night on the land; and if the wind follows, they sail, but if not, mooring the boat, they rest in the hollow. For Achilles and Helen are then said to drink together and to be in songs, singing of their love for one another, and the verses of Homer about Troy, and Homer himself. For the gift of poetry that came to Achilles from Calliope, Achilles still praises and pursues more earnestly, now that he has ceased from warlike matters. At any rate the song over Homer is composed divinely, stranger, and poetically, for this too Protesilaus knows and sings.

[141451] Phoenician Might it be granted me, vinedresser, to hear the song—or is it not lawful to bring it forth?

[141556] Vinedresser Indeed, stranger, many of those who have approached the island say they hear Achilles singing other things too; but this song, I think, he composed last year, most charmingly, holding to the resolution and the meaning. It is composed thus: "Echo, dwelling by the boundless water along the side of the great Black Sea, my lyre sounds you by my hand; but do you sing me divine Homer, the glory of men, the glory of our labors, through whom I did not die, through whom Patroclus is mine, through whom my Ajax is equal to the immortals, through whom the city won by the spear, sung by the wise, took up glory and did not fall—Troy."

[142198] Phoenician Marvelously did Achilles compose it, vinedresser, and worthily of himself and of Homer. And it is otherwise wise in lyric songs not to draw them out, nor to make them long-drawn. So from old, then, poetry was renowned and wise.

[142438] 748. Vinedresser From old, stranger. For they say that Heracles, having crucified the body of Asbolus the centaur, inscribed upon it this epigram: "Asbolus, fearing the wrath neither of gods nor of men, hangs, fed to the sharp-haired ravens, hung from the well-resined pine, a great feast for the unmeasured-lived crows."

[142761] Phoenician An athlete in these matters too was Heracles, praising grandiloquence, vinedresser, from which the poet must, I suppose, give voice. But let us return to the island; for a current took us up, such as many eddy about the Black Sea, and drove us off our course.

[143033] Vinedresser Let us return, stranger. The songs on it are such, and the voice with which they sing sounds divine and brilliant; at any rate it carries so far over the sea that a shudder rises in the sailors from amazement. And those who have anchored say they hear the noise of horses and the clash of arms and a war cry, such as men utter in battle. And if, when men have anchored at the north or south of the island, a wind is about to blow contrary to the mooring, Achilles proclaims this at the stern and bids them shift their mooring and give way to the wind. Many too of those sailing out of the Black Sea sail to me and report these things, and, by Zeus, how, when they catch sight of the island, being borne over the boundless sea, they embrace one another and come to tears from joy; and having sailed in and greeted the land, they walk to the sanctuary to pray to Achilles and sacrifice. And the victim stands of its own accord at the altar, according to the ship and those who sail in it. As for the matter of the golden pitcher that once appeared in Chios to the island, it has been told, stranger, by wise men, and why should one again touch what has been clearly told? And to a merchant who once frequented the island, Achilles himself is said to have appeared and to have narrated to him the matters at Troy, and to have entertained him with drink, and bidden him, when he sailed out to Ilium, to bring him a Trojan girl, naming her as so-and-so, a slave to such a man in Ilium.

[144527] 749. Vinedresser When the stranger marveled at the saying and, taking courage now, asked him why he needed an Ilian slave, "Because, stranger," he said, "she is of the stock whence Hector and those before him were, and she is the remnant of the blood of the sons of Priam and Dardanus." The merchant, then, thought Achilles was in love, and having bought the girl, sailed up to the island; and Achilles, praising him on his arrival, bade him keep her for him on the ship—because, I think, the island is not to be entered by women—and to come himself in the evening to the sanctuary and feast with him and Helen; and when he came, he gave him much money, of the kind that merchants cannot resist, and said he made him his guest-friend and gave him a thriving trade and a fair voyage for his ship. And when day came, "Do you sail," he said, "having these things, but leave the girl for me on the shore." They were not yet a stade from the land when a wailing of the girl struck them, Achilles tearing her apart and rending her limb from limb. As for the Amazons whom some of the poets say came to Troy to fight Achilles—Achilles did not kill them at Troy, for I do not know how it is plausible that, Priam having warred against them on behalf of the Phrygians about Mygdon, the Amazons should later have come as allies to Ilium; rather, I think, about the Olympiad in which Leonidas the Rhodian first won the stadium, Achilles destroyed the most warlike of them on the island itself, they say.

[146020] 750. Phoenician A great account you have laid hold of, vinedresser, and you have roused my ears, otherwise already standing alert to your words; and it is likely these too came to you from Protesilaus.

[146223] Vinedresser From him, stranger, that good teacher, and they are clear to many of those who have sailed into the Black Sea. For along the inhospitable side of the Black Sea, where the Taurian mountains stretch, certain Amazons are said to dwell, in the mainland that the Thermodon and Phasis enclose as they issue from the mountains; them their father and begetter Ares trained to be in the company of warlike things and to live an armed and mounted life, and a herd of horses sufficient for an army grazes for them in the marshes. To consort with men their land does not allow them, but they themselves, when they need children, go down to the river Halys and trade and consort with the men, wherever it chances, and going off to their haunts and homes, whatever male children they bear they carry to the borders of the country, so that the begetters may take them up, and these take up whichever chanced to be theirs and make them slaves; but whatever females they bear, these they love and consider of their own race, and tend them as is a mother's nature, except for giving suck. This they do because of their battles, that the girls may not become womanish nor have their breasts hang down. The name of the Amazons we take to be from their not being nourished at the breast; and they nourish the infants with the milk of brood-mares and dew of honeycombs, which settles like honey upon the reeds of the rivers. The things said by poets and mythologists about these Amazons let us decline from the account,

[147734] 751. Vinedresser for they would not be suitable to the present earnest matter; but let the deed about the island—what was done by them and how it ended—be told rather, since it is among the accounts of Protesilaus. For sailors once, on a number of ships, and shipwrights of those bringing wares out of the Black Sea to the Hellespont, were carried down to the left bank of the sea, about which the women are said to dwell, and being taken by them, were bound for some time, fed at mangers, so that the women might sell them across the river to the man-eating Scythians. But when a youth, taken along with them, was pitied by one of the Amazons for his beauty, and some love arose from this, she begged the ruler, who was her sister, not to sell the strangers; and being released and mingling with them, they now spoke in the manner of those women, and recounting the storm and the things at sea, they came to mention the sanctuary, having lately sailed past the island, and described the wealth in it. The women, treating the strangers as a find—since they were sailors and shipwrights, and the land was otherwise good for building ships—made ships in the manner of horse-transports, that they might attack Achilles with their horses; for the Amazons, when off their horses, are a female race and simply women. They took first to rowing and practiced sailing; and when they had gathered the knowledge of sailing, setting out about spring from the mouths of the Thermodon, they made for the sanctuary, about two thousand stades, on fifty ships, I think; and having anchored at the island, they first ordered the Hellespontine strangers to cut down the trees with which the sanctuary is adorned in a circle. But when the axes, recoiling upon them, went some into their heads, others into their necks, and all fell beside the trees, the Amazons poured upon the sanctuary, shouting and driving their horses. And Achilles, looking upon them hot and terrible, and leaping as upon the Scamander and Ilium, threw into the horses a panic stronger than the bridle,

[149790] 752. Vinedresser by which they reared up, considering the women an alien and superfluous burden, and changed into the ways of beasts, and falling upon the Amazons as they lay, drove in their hoofs and bristled their manes and set their ears upon them, like savage lions, and ate the bare arms of the fallen, and rending their breasts fastened upon the entrails and devoured them; and filled with human food, they pranced about the island and went mad, full of gore, and standing upon the headlands and seeing the surface of the sea, they thought they had come upon a plain and hurled themselves into the sea. The ships of the Amazons too perished, a strong wind blowing upon them; for being empty and anchored in no order, they fell upon one another and were shattered, and ship sank ship and broke it through, as in a sea-fight, and all the crosswise and prow-to-prow rammings that sea-fighting helmsmen make, all these befell among empty ships sailing without forethought. And when many wrecks had been carried to the sanctuary and men lay in it still breathing, and half-eaten, and human limbs and flesh that the horses had spat out were strewn about, Achilles made an easy purification of the island; for drawing up a crest of the sea, he washed and rinsed these things away.

[151071] Phoenician Whoever does not consider you exceedingly dear to the gods, vinedresser, is himself hateful to the gods; for to know such divine accounts thus, I think, comes to you from those who made you also a friend and intimate of Protesilaus. But since you have filled us with heroic accounts, how he himself came back to life I would no longer ask, since you say he keeps this account profane and unspeakable; but the Cocytuses and the Pyriphlegethons and the Acherusian lake and such names of rivers and lakes, and, by Zeus, the Aeacuses and their courts and places of punishment, perhaps you will report yourself, and he allows you to relate.

[151719] Vinedresser He allows it, but it is already evening, and the ox is at rest;

[151796] 753. Vinedresser the yoke-teams, at any rate, you see, are coming from the unyoking, and I must receive them, and the account is longer than the occasion allows. For now, then, go to your ship rejoicing, taking everything the garden bears; and if the wind is yours, sail, stranger, having poured a libation from the ship to Protesilaus—for this it is customary for those casting off from here to do—but if the wind is contrary, come here at sunrise, and you will obtain what you wish.