WORK: Institutes of Roman Law  (slug: gaius-institutes-of-roman-law-09683f)

CHAPTER: 120-commentarivs-qvartvs



[439707] The interdict Utrubi was of the following form: Utrubi hic homo, quo de agitur, majore parte hujusce anni fuit, quominus is eum ducat, vim fieri veto, Dig. 43, 31. ‘Whichever party had possession of the slave in question during the greater part of the preceding year I prohibit violence being used to prevent him from taking the slave.’ The same exceptions of violence, clandestinity, and permission, as in the interdict Uti possidetis, were either expressed or understood. Before Justinian’s time Utrubi had been assimilated to Uti possidetis, that is, comparative length of possession within the year was made immaterial, Inst. 4, 15, 4. ‘But at the present time the practice is different; for both interdicts, so far as the question of possession is concerned, are on the same footing; so that in respect both of land and movables judgment goes for him who proves that he was in actual possession at the moment of joining issue in the action, not having acquired it from the other party either by violence, or clandestinely, or by his leave and licence.’ Thus the protection of these interdicts is generally afforded to the party in actual possession, the question of his right to possess being disregarded. And this protection of possession is allowed even against the owner himself, who cannot plead exceptio dominii, but to recover possession must prove his title by an independent vindicatio.

[441108] Utrubi and Uti possidetis are classed by Gaius under the head of interdicta Retinendae possessionis. This was their category when either party succeeded in proving that he was in actual possession at the time of bringing the interdict, unless such possession could be impeached by the other party on one of the above mentioned grounds: but the exceptions, vi clam aut precario, when sustained by the non-possessor, might in fact bring Utrubi and Uti possidetis under the category of interdicts Recuperandae possessionis. If, that is to say, a litigant proved that he had actual possession, but his possession was shown to be vitiated by violence, secrecy, or permission, he was dispossessed and his opponent who was equally plaintiff in the action was reinstated in possession, which he was presumed never to have lost, Dig. 43, 17, 3, pr. Utrubi was clearly a recuperatory interdict in its original form: but it might be so equally, in virtue of the exceptions, after its form had been assimilated to that of Uti possidetis. Baron, § 120. Sohm, p. 353.

[442163] The interdict Unde vi (or De vi) which was applicable only to land had two forms, one of which is called by Cicero interdictum quotidianum, and redressed cases of ordinary violence (vis quotidiana), while the other was invoked in cases of armed violence (vis armata). The exceptio vitiosae possessionis (vi, clam, precario) could be pleaded as a defence to the former, but not to the latter, interdict. Like Uti possidetis and Utrubi the interdict Unde vi was based simply on the ground of possession, not on title or right to possess.

[442700] The interdictum quotidianum has been thus restored from indications in Cicero, Pro Caecina and Pro Tullio (Caec. 31 § 91; Tull. 19 § 44): Unde tu aut familia aut procurator tuus illum aut familiam aut procuratorem illius in hoc anno vi dejecisti cum ille possideret, quod nec vi nec clam nec precario a te possideret, eo restituas. ‘In the place whence thou or thy slaves or procurator hast this year violently ousted him or his slaves or procurator from possession, which possession he held without having acquired it from him either by violence, or clandestinely, or by his leave and licence, in that place do thou reinstate him in possession’ (cf. Lenel, p. 379 et seq.).

[443376] The interdict De vi armata may be restored as follows: Unde tu aut familia aut procurator tuus illum aut familiam aut procuratorem illius vi hominibus coactis armatisve dejecisti eo restituas. ‘In the place whence thou or thy slaves or procurator hast violently ejected him or his slaves or procurator by men assembled or armed, in that place do thou reinstate him in possession.’ This differed from the ordinary interdict by the omission of the exceptions, and the omission of limitation to a year. (Cf. Roby, 1, p. 462 et seq., 2, App. D, pro Caecina; Sohm, p. 354 et seq.)

[443953] The interdict Unde vi only applied to immovables. Illud utique in dubium non venit, interdictum hoc ad res mobiles non pertinere, Dig. De vi et de vi armata, 43, 16, 1, 6. ‘It is certain that this interdict is not available in the case of movables.’

[444204] The right of the defendant in the ordinary interdict (quotidianum) to plead by way of exception the vices (violence, secrecy, permission) by which the plaintiff’s possession was tainted, was apparently deemed to be abrogated by a constitution of the emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius, a. d. 389, Cod. 8, 4, 7. ‘Whoever dares to seize by violence things in the possession of the treasury or of private persons without waiting for a judicial order, shall restore possession, and, if he is proprietor, shall forfeit his property, if he is not proprietor, shall forfeit the value.’ In accordance with the spirit of this constitution, the dispossessor was no longer allowed to plead the exceptions in the old form of the interdict, and they are omitted in the new form which we find in the Digest: Unde tu illum vi dejecisti aut familia tua dejecit, de eo quaeque ille tunc ibi habuit tantummodo intra annum, post annum de eo quod ad eum qui vi dejecit pervenerit, judicium dabo, Dig. 43, 16, 1. ‘The land (or house) whence thou or thy slaves hast violently ejected such a one, and the movables which he had therein, shall be recoverable by action within a year; after the expiration of a year he shall only recover what came into the hands of the dispossessor.’ That is to say, the distinction between vis armata and vis quotidiana was no longer recognized. For the difference between the meaning of vis in the interdicts unde vi, uti possidetis, and quod vi aut clam respectively see Windscheid, 1 § 160, n. 5.

[445726] Although violence, armed or unarmed, was prohibited to be employed for the recovery of possession even from possessor vitiosus, yet to repel violence by violence in the defence of possession was permitted, Dig. 43, 16, 3, 9. ‘An armed aggressor may be lawfully repelled by arms, but this must be immediately, not after an interval, and we may not only resist ejectment, but eject the ejector, provided that no interval has elapsed and it is done forthwith.’ Ibid. 17. ‘A possessor who is violently ejected and recovers possession immediately by force is understood rather to return to his former position than to possess by violence. Therefore, if I eject you by force, and am immediately ejected by you, and then eject you again, you may have the interdict Unde vi.’

[446495] We have seen that Uti possidetis and Utrubi, though called interdicts Retinendae possessionis, were also in effect interdicts Recuperandae possessionis whenever any of the vitia possessionis was established by the other party: that if the possession of the actual possessor was tainted with one of three vices, if it was acquired from the other party furtively (clam), acquired from him by violence (vi), or held of him by his leave (precario), then his adversary recovered possession. What, then, it may be asked, was the use of a distinct interdict Recuperandae possessionis, the interdict Unde vi, which, like the Uti possidetis, was only available for a year? The answer is, that Uti possidetis could only have the effect of restoring possession when the dispossessor was in present possession; it gave no redress when a third party was the present possessor: in such cases the party dispossessed required a different remedy, and this was given him in the interdict Unde vi, which could be maintained against a dispossessor for damages, whether the latter continued in possession or not. Further, by Uti possidetis the intermediate profits (fructus) were only recoverable from the commencement of the suit, by Unde vi from the time of the ejectment; and the remedy of the dispossessed person by Uti possidetis was barred by the vices of his own possession, not so his remedy by Unde vi, though, as we see by the text, §§ 154, 155, this difference only applied to vis armata, when Gaius wrote.

[447993] As violent dispossession was remedied by the interdict Unde vi, so other interdicts remedied dispossession whose inception was clandestine or permissive. An interdict De clandestina possessione seems to be mentioned, Dig. 10, 3, 7, 5, though this more probably refers to a particular application of the interdict Uti possidetis, than to be a special interdict of itself (cf. Lenel, p. 377, n. 7). Such a special interdict would scarcely be required in the case of immovables, for as a possessor was not dispossessed until he had notice of the invasion, he could immediately maintain Uti possidetis, Dig. 41, 2, 6, 1—retinet ergo possessionem qui ad nundinas abiit—or he could by attempting an entry convert the clandestine into a violent dispossession. Nor would it be required for movables, for clandestine dispossession of a movable might be redressed by Utrubi combined, perhaps, with an exhibitory interdict or order of production. Accordingly, it is generally supposed that no special interdict against clandestine dispossession ever existed.

[449042] The interdict De precario was in these terms; Quod precario ab illo habes aut dolo malo fecisti, ut desineres habere, qua de re agitur, id illi restituas, Dig. 43, 26, 2, pr. ‘The possession of the thing in question which thou holdest by the permission of such a one, or hast fraudulently ceased to hold, do thou restore to him.’

[449373] Before we quit this topic we may take the opportunity of considering some of the respects in which the relation called Precarium differed from a closely allied institution, the contract called Commodatum.

[449579] (1) Precario rogans (the holder of a thing merely by permission of another) generally had what may be called derivative possession: Commodatarius (the borrower) never had more than detention.

[449772] (2) The obligation in Precarium which was not originally regarded as a contract, cf. Sohm, p. 354, n. 5, is purely unilateral and on the side of precario rogans, being simply that he should restore the thing to the person for whom he holds it. Precario dans (the person who allows another to hold property for him) is under no obligation, not even the semi-bilateral obligation for impensae &c., which is incumbent on Commodans (the lender).

[450215] (3) Precario rogans is not, like Commodatarius, responsible for diligentia, Dig. 43, 26, 8, 3. Precarium seems at first to have been applicable only to land but afterwards to have been extended to movable property.

[450431] At a late period of Roman law Precarium was so far regaided as a contractual obligation that Precario dans could recover by an actio praescriptis verbis, Dig. 43, 26, 2, 2, and 19, 2. Thus Precario dans had two remedies, an action to recover possession (interdictum de precario) and an action on contract: Commodans had only his action on contract; interdicts, as we have stated, not being employed to enforce contracts.

[450853] Paulus mentioned another kind of interdicta duplicia, namely, those for either acquiring or recovering possession. Sunt interdicta, ut diximus, duplicia tam reciperundae quam apiscendae possessionis, Dig. 43, 1, 2, 3. These are the interdicts, Quem fundum, Quam hereditatem, Quem usumfructum, which have been already quoted, § 89, whereby, if the defendant in a real action refused to give security judicatum solvi, possession was transferred to the plaintiff, who in some cases would acquire, in others recover possession. Quem fundum was the interdict employed in Vindicatio: Quam hereditatem in Hereditatis petitio: Quem usumfructum in the action, claiming an usufruct. In interdict procedure, instituted for the retention of possession, analogous functions were performed by further interdicts called interdicta Secundaria, § 170.

[451689] Pending litigation respecting Urban servitudes the plaintiff was protected by a peculiar institution, the interdictum Demolitorium based on Operis novi nuntiatio, the nature of which demands a passing notice. If A, a person entitled to some real right (mortgagee, emphyteuta, superficiarius), was aggrieved by some architectural innovation (aedificatio, demolitio) on the part of B, whereby an urban servitude over the tenement of A was asserted or some urban servitude [jus habendi or jus prohibendi] belonging to A, as owner of a dominant tenement, was violated, A was entitled to serve a formal inhibition or private injunction on B (prohibitio, operis novi nuntiatio) summoning him to desist from the innovation. On this summons B was bound to desist from his work until he either obtained from the praetor a dissolution or discharge of the summons (remissio, missam facere nuntiationem): or entered into a satisdatio or cautio de demoliendo, security that the structure should be demolished in the event of A as plaintiff succeeding in a future actio Negatoiia or Confessoria, i. e. establishing his own jus prohibendi, which would be the same as disproving B’s jus aedificandi. If without obtaining such remissio or giving such cautio B persisted in his work, he was compelled to demolish it by the interdictum Demolitorium. If he desisted from the work for the present, but refused to oppose A’s suit in the regular course by entering into satisdatio de re defendenda, it was the duty of the judge to compel him to enter into a stipulation that he would not again attempt to build before he established his own jus aedificandi, or disproved A’s jus prohibendi, as plaintiff in a suit. This would be actio negatoria of a jus altius non tollendi, if he denied that he was ever under an urban servitude to the tenement of A: actio confessoria of jus altius tollendi, if he affirmed that the servitude was extinguished by usucapio libertatis: or some other actio confessoria, if he claimed a dominant servitude over the tenement of A.

[453728] Pending disputes on wrongs relating to land a similar function was discharged by the interdictum Quod vi aut clam. On a prohibitio from a neighbour, who might have a real right or be a mere lessee, prohibitus was obliged to desist from any agricultural innovation (ploughing up pasture, cutting trees, polluting streams, &c.) until he offered security (satisdatio judicio sisti) in any suit in which he might be made defendant, Dig. 43, 24, 3, 5; or proved by way of exceptio his jus faciendi, or by way of Negation disproved his neighbour’s jus prohibendi, as plaintiff in some real action or, if the opus was on his own land, in Uti possidetis, Dig. 43, 17, 3, 2. If he persisted in his operation in spite of the prohibitio, or avoided prohibitio by omitting to give notice to the party interested, the interdictum Quod vi aut clam compelled him to efface it and to pay damages for the harm it occasioned.

[454637] The interdicts which Gaius calls double are called by Ulpian mixed, Dig. 44, 7, 37, 1. ‘Mixed actions are those wherein each party is plaintiff, as the action for determining boundaries, for partition of an inheritance, for partition of joint property, and the interdicts Uti possidetis and Utrubi.’ The effect of this duplicity or mixture of characters was that each party was liable to condemnation and absolution. According to Justinian, the three personal actions just named are called Mixed because they involve questions both in rem and in personam, Mixtam causam obtinere videntur, tam in rem quam in personam, Inst. 4, 6, 20. Another effect of the duplicity of the interdicts was, as we shall presently see, to increase the number of stipulations in the proceeding by Sponsio.

[455423] In the system of statute-process (legis actio), Vindicatio is framed in the form of a judicium duplex. The contention of the defendant was not merely a negation of the plaintiff’s claim, but also an affirmation of the defendant’s claim, a contravindication. Praetor interrogat eum qui cedit an contra vindicet, 2 § 24; cf. 4 § 16. It was not necessary that the cross claims of the parties should be identical in character. On the one side there might be a claim of status, on the other of property, one party vindicating as free the person whom another claimed as slave: or one party vindicating the freedom of a person whom another, as transferee of patria potestas, claimed to be his bondsman (mancipium); or one party asserting the independence (sui juris) of a person whom another claimed as filius familias or as subject to patria potestas, cf. 1 § 134.

[456283] Similarly under the legis actio procedure Hereditatis petitio, 3 § 32, comm, would probably be in the form of judicium duplex; for Hereditatis petitio is a species of Vindicatio.

[456463] Vindicatio and Hereditatis petitio are related to the actions Communi dividundo and Familiae herciscundae as wholes to parts: the former lay claim to integral ownership and integral succession where the latter merely claim partial ownership and partial succession, Inst. 4, 6, 20. The former became judicia simplicia in the later system of law, while the latter remained judicia duplicia. Ihering, § 52.

[456868] In English jurisprudence both parties are said to be equally plaintiffs and equally defendants in the actions called Quare impedit and Replevin.

[457014] Uti possidetis was sometimes judicium simplex. We may distinguish three applications of this procedure:

[457119] (1) When both parties claim to be in actual possession and one of them is found to be truly in possession without having acquired it from the other by violence, secrecy, or permission. Uti possidetis is then really an interdictum Retinendae possessionis.

[457375] (2) When the possession of the actual possessor is found to be vitiated by violence, secrecy, or permission, he is displaced, and the non-possessor is reinstated. Uti possidetis is then in substance and effect interdictum Recuperandae possessionis. In both of these cases it is judicium duplex.

[457671] (3) Uti possidetis might further be brought against a defendant who made no contention that he himself was or ought to be in possession, but who was guilty of some disturbance or molestation of the possessor; e. g. by prohibitio: Qui colere fundum prohibetur, possidere prohibetur, Dig. 43, 17, 3, 4. Eum qui aedificare prohibeatur, possidere quoque prohiberi manifestum est, Dig. 41, 2, 52, 1. Etenim videris mihi possessionis controversiam facere, qui prohibes me uti mea possessione, Dig. 43, 17, 3, 2.

[458178] Savigny holds that No. (3) was the original application of Uti possidetis; and that Nos. (1) and (2) were subsequent extensions of its employment and due to jurisprudence, i. e. the ingenuity of the jurists: the reverse is the prevalent doctrine, Baron, § 120.

[458440] The formula arbitraria in Unde vi must have contained the clause, Unless the defendant obey the judge’s order of restitution; the rest is uncertain. The analogy of the other interdicts suggests something to the following effect. If it appear that the defendant has disobeyed the praetor’s order to reinstate the plaintiff, then, unless the defendant comply with the judge’s order of restitution, do thou, judge, condemn him in all the damages the plaintiff shall have sustained.

[458920] The mode of restitution would be prescribed by the judex, who would probably require the restitution of all movables that had been removed, though these were not mentioned in the original form of the interdict, § 154.

[459139] The jurists who considered that a defendant who desired a formula arbitraria was guilty by confession of the delict laid to his charge, must have supposed that the only function of the judex in this case was assessment of damages (litis aestimatio), Dig. 9, 2, 25, 2.

[459408] Huschke (Stud. des rom. Rechts. § 11) supposes that the sponsio on Quorum bonorum was of the following form: If the praetor Quintus Caepio in accordance with his edict has granted me possession of the goods left by Turpilia, and if in contravention of his edict thou hast not restored to me the portion of those goods which thou possessest as heir or as occupant, or hast fraudulently ceased to possess; dost thou promise to pay me such and such a sum? I promise. Cic. ad Fam. 7, 21 . . . sponsionem illam nos sine periculo facere posse; ‘Si bonorum Turpiliae possessionem Q. Caepio praetor ex edicto suo mihi dedit.’ (Cf. Lenel, § 227, and p. 359.)

[460059] The stricti juris action based on this sponsio would be followed by another, which was doubtless called judicium Secutorium, § 166 a. The latter would probably contain an intentio in factum concepta, of the form: Si Aulus Agerius Numerium Negidium sponsione vicit, and a formula arbitraria such as that already described for the nonpenal procedure: Ni Numerius Negidius Aulo Agerio bona illa judicis arbitrio restituat, quanti ea res erit, judex Numerium Negidium Aulo Agerio condemna.

[460546] After the first appearance before the praetor (in jus vocatio) and the issue of the interdict (interdictum redditum or editum) it would be necessary to wait a certain time to see whether it was obeyed or disobeyed by the defendant; and if it was disobeyed, there would be at any time within the period of a year a second in jus vocatio, or at least a reappearance in jure secured by a vadimonium which the parties entered into at the time of their first appearance, for the nomination of the judex and the delivery of the formula arbitraria, if the procedure was non-penal; or for the sponsio and delivery of the formulas of action on the sponsio and the judicium secutorium, if the procedure was penal.

[461251] The interdict or command of the magistrate, like the law or command of the legislator, has two members (protasis or minor premiss, and apodosis or conclusion); or two terms, an antecedent (a title expressed by the middle term B) and a consequent (an obligation expressed by the major term A). The antecedent term is usually introduced by a relative (Quorum bonorum, Unde dejecisti, Uti possidetis, &c.) equivalent to a Si: accordingly any interdict may be paraphrased by the proposition: If such and such antecedent title [B, middle term] exists, then thou [C, minor term] art under such and such consequent obligation [A, major term]: and this antecedent, simple as it may appear, is usually analysable into a variety of conditions. Thus in Quorum bonorum the antecedent clause and question for the judex is not only whether certain goods are detained by the defendant, but also whether the plaintiff had obtained a grant of possession of these goods, whether such grant was rightfully obtained, and in accordance with the provisions of the edict, &c.

[462305] From the two sponsiones and two restipulationes which are mentioned, it appears that Gaius is now speaking of double interdicts, and from the words eum fundum easve aedes, § 166 a, it appears that he is speaking not of Utrubi but of Uti possidetis.

[462555] After a first in jus vocatio in which an interdict Uti possidetis had been obtained, there took place, by prearrangement, a molestation of one of the litigants by the other. In the disorderly beginnings of society this molestation was doubtless often in reality a turbulent defiance of the magisterial interdict: but in more orderly periods both parties would be desirous of trying their right by legal course, and the steps taken by both would be prearranged with a view of satisfying the conditions of interdict procedure (vis ex conventu). So a trespass, or at least an act that contains many of the elements of a trespass, is often arranged to be committed for the purpose of enabling parties to try a right before English tribunals. Cf. §§ 166, 170; Cic. pro Caec. 1, 7, 8, 10, 11; pro Tull. 8; Roby, App. D, p. 515.

[463378] It is probable that the lacuna preceding this paragraph contained an explanation of vis ex conventu and of other parts of the procedure in interdicta duplicia.

[463539] After the vis ex conventu had been simulated, there took place a second in jus vocatio, or reappearance in jure in pursuance of the vadimonium, at which the parties entered into five different stipulations.

[463747] Just as interdict procedure was necessary in order to determine which litigant should have interim possession pending the vindicatio, so it was necessary to determine who should have interim possession pending a possibly protracted interdict procedure. This was accomplished by means of Fructus licitatio, which took place in the second appearance before the praetor, and was followed by either (a) the Fructuaria stipulatio, or satisdatio judicatum solvi.

[464205] Each party then wagered a penal sum in two characters, for each party was both plaintiff and defendant: and, as a sponsio was a unilateral contract, in order to produce a bilateral contract, that is, to bind both parties and constitute a single bet or wager in the modern sense of the term, it was necessary to have two stipulations, that is, a sponsio and a restipulatio. For the purpose, therefore, of making two wagers the parties entered into four stipulations (two sponsions and two restipulations); i. e. (b) one sponsio and (c) one restipulatio in which a litigant was promisor and promisee as plaintiff, and (d) a second sponsio and (e) a second restipulatio in which he was promisor and promisee as defendant. The sponsio would be a stipulation to the following effect: Si adversus edictum praetoris possidenti mihi vis a te facta est, tot nummos dare spondes? Spondeo: the restipulatio to the following effect: Si adversus edictum praetoris possidenti tibi vis a me facta non est, tot nummos dare spondes? Spondeo. Thereby each party would be bound to pay, or entitled to receive, two penal sums, according as the actions brought on these four stipulations decided the issue which the stipulations raised.

[465422] A judex was then appointed who tried the four actions.

[465478] Then if the victor in the four actions had not been the higher bidder at the Licitatio, the judex decided a fifth and sixth action: namely one called judicium Secutorium or Cascellianum, which had a formula arbitraria, and whereby possession of the movable or immovable and its fruits was recovered from the higher bidder; and another on (a) the Fructuaria stipulatio, to recover from the higher bidder a penal sum equal to the value of the fructus.

[465929] Instead of suing on (a) the Fructuaria stipulatio the victor had the option of bringing judicium Secutorium for the recovery of this penal sum, and then he was protected against the event of his opponent’s insolvency by sureties (satisdatio). It may be asked what compensating disadvantage of this course should ever induce the victor to sue on (a) Fructuaria stipulatio. Perhaps, as Krueger suggests, if he sued for the penal sum by Secutorium with satisdatio, then when he brought Cascellianum he only recovered the Res without the interim fructus. The satisdatio would thus increase his certainty of obtaining the amount of the penal sum, but would diminish by the value of the fructus the total amount recovered.

[466647] Corresponding to the penal sum incurred by Fructus licitatio, and secured by (a) Fructuaria stipulatio or Satisdatio of the litigant who obtains possession pending interdict procedure, was the liability in twice the value of the fructus incurred by the litigant who obtained possession by Vindiciae dicendae pending statute-process. Such at least appears to be the import of a partly conjectural fragment of the Twelve Tables (Tab. 12, 3): Si vindiciam falsam tulit, si velit is . . . tor arbitros tris dato, eorum arbitrio . . . fructus duplione damnum decidito. Festus. ‘When temporary possession has been wrongfully obtained (the question of property and the value of the fruits of possession) may be decided by three arbiters, by whose arbitration the wrongful possessor shall pay as a penalty twice the value of the fruits of possession to the true proprietor.’

[467515] From this paragraph it appears that as in Real actions the defendant who declined to give satisdatio judicatum solvi and thus impeded the process of the action was deprived of possession by the interdicts Quem fundum, Quam hereditatem, Quem usumfructum, § 156, comm.; so a suitor whose contumacious refusal to take the regular steps prevented interdict procedure from accomplishing its normal course was deprived of possession by interdicta Secundaria.

[467969] The mention of vis (qui vim non faciet) shows that, subsequent to the issue of the interdict and antecedent to further proceedings, one act of the forensic drama was a conventional ejectment (vis ex conventu), cf. § 166, comm.; which has been identified by some writers with what is called Deductio quae moribus fit in suits by Sponsio, and perhaps with the Manuum consertio in Sacramentum, § 88, comm., § 13, comm.

[468386] The inquiry into the nature of possession has been purposely postponed hitherto in order not to interrupt the exposition by Gaius of the details of the possessory interdicts (Utrubi, Uti possidetis, Unde vi); i. e. those interdicts in which the mere fact of possession is itself a title to the continuance or restoration of possession (as to the nature of possession cf. Sohm, § 67).

[468771] Possession may be defined as a relation which consists of two elements; Detention, or physical power over a thing, exercised either by oneself or by some other person as one’s representative, e. g. by depositarius or commodatarius for depositor or commodator, and Animus domini, a certain intention on the part of the person in possession, the intention of holding it against others as a proprietor would, and so of deriving from it the benefits of ownership. Theophilus, the colleague of Tribonian and author of the Greek version of Justinian’s Institutes, says: νέμεσθαί ἐστι τὸ ψυχῃ̂ δεσπόζοντος κατέχειν, 3, 39, 2. The meaning of this definition will best appear from an examination of the instances in which according to the jurists Possession does or does not exist; and in particular from the contrast of the cases where Possession is present with those where Detention, i. e. mere physical control for another, the right of excluding others belonging to him, is present but Possession, which is protected by possessory interdicts, is absent, as e. g. in the case of depositarius or commodatarius. Thus Possession in the sense in which we are using it is equivalent to juristic Possession.

[469970] Possession in this sense, as opposed to mere Detention, is called Possessio civilis, or simply Possessio.

[470077] Mere detention is called Possessio naturalis, corporaliter, Naturaliter tenere, In possessione esse. (For various meanings of the terms Possessio civilis—naturalis cf. Windscheid, Pand. 1 § 148, n. 12. Dernburg, Pand. 1 § 175.)

[470306] Juristic possession (jus possessionis) does not depend on a legal title to possess (jus possidendi) like ownership, but simply on the fact of a man’s having actual control of a thing with the intention of maintaining it. ‘Hujus autem interdicti (uti Possidetis) proponendi causa haec fuit, quod separata esse debet possessio a proprietate; fieri etenim potest, ut alter possessor sit, dominus non sit, alter dominus quidem sit, possessor vero non sit; fieri potest, ut et possessor idem et dominus sit.’ Dig. 43, 17, 1, 2. Hence as far as the possessory interdicts are concerned the law is indifferent whether the possession is that of an owner or of a bona fide, or even that of a mala fide possessor. But it is to be remembered at the same time that these interdicts do not in any way shut out the owner who has a right to possession from asserting his claim by vindicatio.

[471183] The characteristic of possessio civilis is the combination of physical control with the Animus domini: but in certain singular or abnormal instances we shall find that this differentia is wanting, and physical control or detention in the name of another (alieno nomine), i. e. possessio naturalis, is treated as juristic possession, e. g. in the case of pledgee or mortgagee.

[471560] Possession accompanied with certain other extraneous conditions, namely Titulus, Bona fides, and the absence of furtum, is transformed by a certain lapse of time into ownership; and is called Usucapion-possession, 2 §§ 40-61, comm. Our present purpose is with Possession apart from these foreign elements: the Possession which, as protected by Utrubi, Uti possidetis, and Unde vi, is often called Interdict-possession.

[471980] The slave and filiusfamilias were incapable of juristic possession. Quod ex justa causa corporaliter a servo tenetur, id in peculio servi est et peculium, quod servus civiliter quidem possidere non posset sed naturaliter tenet, dominus creditur possidere, Dig. 41, 2, 24. ‘When a slave has corporeal control of a thing originating from some legal cause, the thing is in his peculium, and this peculium which he cannot have juristic possession of, though he holds it in fact, his master has possession of’ Qui in aliena potestate sunt, rem peculiarem tenere possunt, habere possidere non possunt, quia possessio non tantum corporis, sed et juris est, Dig. 41, 2, 49, 1. ‘A person under power is able to keep under his actual control a thing belonging to his peculium, but not to possess it, for the conditions of possession are not purely physical, but partly legal;’ i. e. possession is not mere physical detention, but detention by a person who is regarded by law as being capable of possessing. In respect of this incapacity of filiusfamilias we must except the peculium castrense and quasicastrense. Filiusfamilias et maxime miles in castris adquisitum usucapiet, Dig. 41, 3, 4, 1. ‘What a filiusfamilias and particularly what as a soldier he acquires in the field is converted by usucapion-possession into ownership.’

[473303] A manager or agent (procurator) has detention, not possession. Nec idem est possidere et alieno nomine possidere; nam possidet cujus nomine possidetur; procurator alienae possessioni praestat ministerium, Dig. 41, 2, 18, pr. ‘Possession differs from detention in the name of another, for he has possession of a thing in whose name it is held by another. An agent is the instrument of another person’s possession.’ Generaliter quisquis omnino nostro nomine sit in possessione, veluti procurator, hospes, amicus, nos possidere videmur, Dig. 41, 2, 9. ‘The detention of a thing by another entirely for us as that of a procurator, guest, or friend is our possession.’ Cf. 2 § 95. Inst. 2, 9, 5.

[473995] A borrower (commodatarius) has only detention, the lender (commodator) retains possession. Rei commodatae et possessionem et proprietatem retinemus, Dig. 13, 6, 8.

[474160] A hirer (conductor) has only detention, the letter (locator) possession. Et fructuarius, et colonus, et inquilinus sunt in praedio et tamen non possident, Dig. 43, 26, 6, 2. ‘The usufructuary, hirer of land, and lodger have occupation, but not possession.’ Per colonos et inquilinos aut servos nostros possidemus, Dig. 41, 2, 25, 1. ‘Our farmers, lodgers, and slaves are instruments of our possession.’

[474564] The Emphyteuta, as is thought by most modern writers, though a contrary opinion is held by Windscheid (1 § 15, 4, n. 7) and others, had possession. For the nature of Emphyteusis cf. 3 § 145, comm. The emphyteuta had a jus in re nearly amounting to ownership, for he could recover the land by actio vectigalis in rem, which was analogous to vindicatio from any possessor and, as long as he paid his rent (vectigal) he was irremovable. The real right of the emphyteuta must not, however, be confounded with his possession, for, like ownership and possession, they are two distinct legal relations, the one being protected by the actio in rem, the other by a possessory interdict. The dominus probably retained usucapion-possession by means of the tenant.

[475318] The mortgagor or pledgor had usucapion-possession, the mortgagee or pledgee had interdict-possession. Qui pignori dedit ad usucapionem tantum possidet; quod ad reliquas omnes causas pertinet, qui accepit possidet, Dig. 41, 3, 16. The mortgagee could recover the pledge by actio in rem quasi Serviana or hypothecaria, Inst. 4, 6, 7. But this is the action by which the real right of the mortgagee or pledgee is asserted, which must be distinguished from the possessory interdict by which his possession is protected. Thus instead of identifying the mortgagee’s jus in re and his interdict-possession, it is correct to regard his jus in re and his interdict-possession as distinct though possibly concurrent. In a hypotheca, indeed, which is an agreement establishing a jus in re without delivery, the mortgagee or pledgee acquired no possession. The usucapion-possession attached to the mortgagor or pledgor by means of the mortgagee or pledgee if possession was transferred, and this was in the interest of the mortgagee or pledgee, whose security against third persons would be strengthened through the consequent acquisition of ownership by the mortgagor or pledgor.

[476488] The depositary has mere detention, the depositor retaining his interdict-possession. The depositary only acquires possession in one case, that is, when he is made a stake-holder for this very purpose, Dig. 16, 3, 17, 1. ‘Not only the property but also the possession of the thing deposited remains with the depositor, except when a thing is deposited with a stake-holder (sequester) not simply for safe custody: for in this case the sequestrator possesses, the object being to prevent the time of usucapion from proceeding.’ It seems, then, that in such Sequestration the interim usucapion-possession cannot be counted by the victor in the suit, Dig. 41, 2, 39.

[477151] With Permissive holding of a thing (precarium) possession passes, unless it is expressly agreed that only detention shall pass. Meminisse autem nos oportet, eum qui precario habet etiam possidere, Dig. 43, 26, 4, 1. ‘We must remember that the holder of a thing by permission has possession.’ Is qui rogavit, ut precario in fundo moretur, non possidet, sed possessio apud eum qui concessit remanet, Dig. 43, 26, 6, 2. ‘He who has asked to be allowed to remain on land merely at the will of the owner does not possess, but possession remains with the grantor.’ The grantor always retained usucapion-possession, Dig. 43, 26, 15, 4.

[477781] The person in the enjoyment of a personal servitude has no possession. Usufructuarius usucapere servum non potest, primum quia non possidet, Dig. 41, 1, 10, 5. ‘The usufructuary cannot acquire the slave by usucapion, in the first place because he has no possession.’ Naturaliter videtur possidere is qui usumfructum habet, Dig. 41, 2, 12, pr. ‘The usufructuary seems to have only natural, not juristic possession.’

[478197] [It would be a fallacy to argue that detention is possession because it is naturalis possessio, just as it would be to argue that nine is ten because it is ten minus one, for an epithet sometimes detracts from, instead of adding to, the connotation of a word.]

[478459] As the usufructuary has no possession, it follows a fortiori that the usuary has no possession. [Although the jus in re called usus must be distinguished from possession, the words usucapio, usurpatio show that in the older language usus = possessio.]

[478712] Servitudes, though not the subject of possession, yet as res incorporales, were the subject of quasi-possession, § 139, e. g. Qui fundi possessionem vel ususfructus quasi possessionem amisit, Dig. 4, 6, 23, 2; Si quis diuturno usu et longa quasi possessione jus aquae ducendae nactus sit, Dig. 8, 5. 10, pr.: which was called juris possessio in contradiction to true possession or corporis possessio; Qui possessionem vel corporis vel juris adeptus est, Dig. 43, 26, 2, 3: though if juris possessio was the proper name for possession of a fraction of property, possession that bore the same relation to the totality of property should have been called, not corporis possessio, but dominii possessio.

[479413] The quasi-possession of servitudes, which consists in the actual enjoyment of the right, whether under a valid title or not, like the possession of corporeal things, was protected by interdicts. The quasi-possession of rural servitudes, such as iter, actus, via, jus aquae ducendae, &c., was protected by special interdicts: e. g. Quo itinere actuque privato, quo de agitur, vel via hoc anno nec vi nec clam nec precario ab illo usus es, quo minus ita utaris, vim fieri veto, Dig. 43, 19, 1, pr. ‘The foot-way, horse-way, carriage-way in question, which thou hast used within a year without having done so by violence, or clandestinely, or by permission in respect of the opposite party, the violent hindrance of thy continuing to use them I prohibit.’

[480167] Urbane servitudes, whether positive, as jus tigni immittendi, or negative, as jus altius non tollendi, being closely connected with possession of an immovable, according to Savigny, were always protected by Uti possidetis: according to Vangerow, the protection of the status quo was always by interdictum Quod vi aut clam or Operis novi nuntiatio, § 355. Personal servitudes, e. g. ususfructus, usus, fructus, were protected, according to circumstances, by Uti possidetis, Utrubi, or Unde vi, with a special differentiation, which constituted them interdicta utilia, Vat. fr. 90.

[480748] Four of the cases we have mentioned, the possession of the emphyteuta, the mortgagee, the sequestrator, and the permissive holder, are generally regarded as anomalous; for possession is composed of two elements, physical detention and the intention of holding the property as owner (animus domini), and none of these four possessors can be said to have the animus domini. In these four cases, and these alone, it is necessary to assume that the law recognized a derivative or transferred possession, in which one of the elements of original possession, the animus domini, is absent, and replaced by what may be called the animus alienam possessionem exercendi. (For a different view of the animus required as an element of possession, which is applicable in all cases alike, see Sohm, § 67, n. 3.)

[481547] In three of the above-mentioned cases usucapion-possession remained with the person from whom the interdict-possession was derived (the person from whom the emphyteusis was held, the mortgagor or pledgor, the person who allowed the thing to be held precariously), and only interdict-possession passed to the derivative possessor (the emphyteuta, the mortgagee or pledgee, the person allowed to hold the thing precariously). In all the four cases (including Sequestration) the dominus lost the protection of the interdicts Retinendae possessionis, which were transferred to the derivative possessors. The grantor of precarious tenancy was also protected by the interdict De precario, an interdict Recuperandae possessionis.

[482271] The Superficiarius (holder of a Real right (jus in re) in a house of which the owner of the ground is proprietor, e. g. a person who with permission of the landowner has built out of his own materials a house on and therefore belonging to another person’s land, ‘quod inaedificatur solo solo cedit’) has, according to Savigny, only juris quasi-possessio: but this is inconsistent with the fact that he is protected by the interdicts Unde vi and De precario, Dig. 43, 16, 1, 5. According to Vangerow he has Derivative possession like the four above-mentioned: but this is inconsistent with the fact that he is protected by the special interdict De superficiebus, while the owner of the soil retains the protection of Uti possidetis, Dig. 43, 17, 3, 7, which in Derivative possession is transferred to the Derivative possessor. The true doctrine, then, appears to be that Superficiarius has Original possession of the house, though the landlord has possession of the soil, Baron, § 183 (but cf. on this very difficult subject Windscheid, 1 § 154, n. 7). Superficies as a real right would be vindicated by a special formula in factum concepta, which must be distinguished from the possessory remedy—the interdictum de superficiebus—Ait praetor: Uti ex lege locationis sive conductionis superficie, qua de agitur, nec vi nec clam nec precario alter ab altero fruimini, quo minus ita fruimini, vim furi veto. Si qua alia actio de superficie postulabitur causa cognita dabo. Savigny, 5, p. 81. Lenel, § 249.

[483774] As possession consists of two elements, one corporeal and one mental, it is evident that it cannot be acquired by a purely mental act. Apiscimur possessionem corpore et animo, neque per se animo aut per se corpore, Dig. 41, 2, 3, 1. ‘We acquire possession by the conjunction of a corporeal and a mental act, and not by either separately.’ Neratius et Proculus et solo animo non posse nos adquirere possessionem aiunt, si non antecedat naturalis possessio, Ibid. 3. ‘Intention alone does not suffice for acquiring juristic possession unless preceded by natural possession or detention.’ Detention necessarily implies not corporeal contact, but corporeal control, and is the physical power of dealing with a subject as owner and excluding any one else. The acquisition of detention consists in the fact of obtaining this power which is never by a fictitious or symbolical act, but by a real physical change of relation. The continuance of possession requires a continuance of both the elements, which are essential to its acquisition, that is, both physical control and the intention of enjoying as owner, or at least on one’s own account. Fere quibuscumque modis obligamur, isdem in contrarium actis liberamur, cum quibus modis adquirimus, isdem in contrarium actis amittimus. Ut igitur nulla possessio adquiri nisi animo et corpore potest, ita nulla amittitur, nisi in qua utrumque (utrumque = alterutrum, or read utcunque or utrumcunque) in contrarium actum est, Dig. 50, 17, 153. ‘As obligation is dissolved by a reversal of the conditions under which it is created, so possession is lost by a reversal of the conditions under which it is acquired. As its acquisition demands the concurrence of a corporeal and a mental condition, so its termination requires the reversal of one or the other.’ Ejus quidem quod corpore nostro teneremus [dicam] possessionem amitti vel animo vel etiam corpore, Dig. 41, 2, 44, 1. ‘When we detain in person, possession may be terminated by either a mental or a physical change.’ Windscheid, 1 § 156, n. 2.

[485814] The physical condition, however, is not to be interpreted so strictly in the continuance of possession as in its commencement; for continued possession permits a temporary suspension of physical control, and only requires the power of reproducing this relation at will: for instance, it is not lost if we have left a thing unintentionally in a forest, but remember the exact spot; or have stowed a thing in a place of security, but forgot for the moment where we put it; or abandon an Alpine pasture in winter, with the intention of revisiting it on the return of summer, Dig. 41, 2, 3, 13. ‘Nerva the son is of opinion that the possession of movables, excepting slaves, only lasts so long as they are in our custody, that is so long as we have power of obtaining natural possession or detention of them.’ There was an exception in the case of slaves, for a slave while he was a fugitive was regarded as still in his master’s possession, and in the case of land, for a man did not lose possession of his land which had been invaded in his absence until he had notice of the invasion; that is to say, he retained possession in the interim solely by his mental disposition. Nam saltus hibernos et aestivos, quorum possessio retinetur animo, licet neque servum neque colonum ibi habeamus, quamvis saltus proposito possidendi fuerit alius ingressus, tamdiu priorem possidere dictum est, quamdiu possessionem ab alio occupatam ignoraret, Dig. 41, 2, 44, 2, 45, 46. ‘When a winter or summer pasture, retained in possession without the instrumentality of slaves or tenants, solely by the mental relation, is invaded by a stranger who has the intention of taking possession of it, the prior possessor is not regarded as ejected from possession until he has notice of the invasion. It is by reference to this laxer interpretation and to these exceptions that we can understand the opinion mentioned by Gaius, § 153, that possession may be retained without a continuance of corporeal detention.

[487800] A guardian acting alone may of course acquire possession for an infant ward, that is, a child under the age of seven. But what is peculiar is that an infans, who is generally incapable of performing any legal act, is able, it would seem, also to acquire possession for himself, and this even without the sanction of his tutor in the case of a gift, though requiring his sanction in other cases. Dig, 41, 2, 22, 2; Cod. 7, 32, 3. In other matters, as we have seen, tutoris auctoritas could only be given to a child infantia major, i. e. after completion of seven years of age.

[488377] The possessor of a whole or a substance formed by the combination of various parts (universitas rerum distantium) does not separately possess with intention of ownership the various elements of which it is composed. If, then, a man begins by possessing the whole and completes the usucapion of the whole before its dissolution into its component parts, the result will depend on the question whether all the parts belonged to the original proprietor of the whole or some of them belonged to a third person. If some of the materials belonged to a third proprietor, then, as these have not been separately possessed during the period of combination, the usucapion of them only begins to run after the dissolution of the whole, Dig. 6, 1, 23, 7; Dig. 41, 1, 7, 11. This rule is not a singularity of timber (Dig. 47, 3), but applies to all materials that have been combined into a whole, whether movable, e. g. a flock of sheep, or immovable.

[489317] If all the materials belonged to the owner of the whole, then he who acquires by usucapion the whole is owner of all the materials if they are subsequently separated, just as he would be if he had acquired property in the whole by tradition or any other valid form of alienation from the original proprietor.

[489627] If the dissolution of the whole precedes the completion of usucapion, then the usucapion of the separate materials has to begin ab initio, Dig. 41, 3, 23, pr. Thus, if a man has possessed a house for nine years and six months, he will complete its usucapion or prescription in another four months according to the law of Justinian: but if any of the materials (windows, doors, columns, tiles) are separated, he will require three years to acquire them by usucapion as movables.

[490106] If. on the contrary, a person begins by possessing the materials separately and after a time combines them into a whole, the question whether his usucapion of the materials continues to run depends on the principles which govern the loss of possession. Possession is not lost by the absence of animus possidendi, but by a positive animus non possidendi. As this cannot here be alleged to exist, the usucapion of the materials will continue to run in spite of their combination and will be completed as soon as if they had remained separate, Dig. 41, 3, 30, 1. An exception is produced by the prohibition of the Twelve Tables to sue for building materials as long as they form a portion of a house (tignum junctum aedibus, Dig. 47, 3, 1, pr.): for, as agere non valenti non currit praescriptio, § 110, comm., the usucapion of the timber must be suspended until the house from any cause is demolished. Inst. 2, 1, 29. Vangerow, § 204.

[491040] Having passed in review the nature of Possession and the form of the Possessory interdicts, we may now examine the often mooted question what is the relation of Possession to the classification of Rights as Real or Personal: to which division of actions, Real or Personal, is procedure by the Possessory interdicts to be assimilated?

[491375] The answer to this must begin by distinguishing mere Possession or Interdict-possession, from Possession associated with Titulus, Bona fides, absence of furtum, that is from Usucapion-possession. The latter is incipient property, and is recoverable by actio in rem Publiciana, 2 § 41; that is, it is treated in respect of its remedy as if it were perfect property in respect of all persons except the owner: Usucapion-possession, then, though it is always liable to be defeated by the owner making good his superior claim (except in the case of the possessor having a bonitary title), may be regarded as a Real right and is recoverable from third parties by a Real action.

[492049] All interdict procedure belongs to the class of Personal actions for the enforcement of obligations, Modestinus, Dig. 44, 7, 52, 6. Jure honorario obligamur ex his, quae edicto perpetuo vel magistratu fieri praecipiuntur vel fieri prohibentur. Interdicta omnia, licet in rem videantur concepta, vi tamen ipsa personalia sunt, Ulpian, Dig. 43, 1, 3. ‘All interdicts, though impersonal (Real) in terms, are in substance Personal actions.’

[492487] The party against whom judgment was given in interdict procedure was, it would seem, technically guilty of having disobeyed the mandate contained in the interdict of the magistrate. Interdict procedure, which was carried on by means of a sponsio poenalis, has in some respects more similarity to a delictal than to a strictly civil action. That some interdicts in particular (interdictum fraudatorium, interdictum de vi, and Unde vi) were classed with actions ex delicto, appears from the fact that they were only maintainable against the wrong-doer within a year from their nativity, though originally this was otherwise in the case of the interdictum de vi armata, Cic. ad Fam. 15, 16; and were only maintainable against the heir of the wrong-doer so far as he was enriched by the wrong of his predecessor (quatenus ad eum pervenit . . . ut tamen lucrum ei extorqueatur, Dig. 44, 7, 35, pr.), features which the interdicts have in common with other unilaterally penal actions. Moreover, the interdicta retinendae possessionis appear to have been based, as we have seen, on an act of feigned violence (vis ex conventu), that is on an act of a delictal kind.

[493647] The right of a person who has been dispossessed to be reinstated in possession is a secondary right based on the violation of some primary right. What was the nature of that primary right? According to Savigny it was the right of a freeman to be exempt from violence or corporeal molestation; not the right of a mere possessor to continue in possession till the owner has vindicated his right. He denies, that is, that the mere fact of Possession can give a title investing the possessor who, it is to be remembered, may even be a thief or other malâ fide possessor, with a right to continue in possession; and bases the right of reinstatement on another right, one of the rights that we have called Primordial, the right to immunity from corporeal violence. But the more prevalent view now is that the object of the possessory interdicts, whatever may be their formal character, is to afford fuller protection to ownership, as it is the owner who is, as a rule, in possession, and if he is disturbed in it he finds proof of his possession, which is all that the interdicts require—a much easier task than proof of ownership, which is proverbially difficult. This advantage, however, cannot be given him, unless it is also extended to the possessor who is not owner, and even to the malâ fide possessor, since otherwise the question of proof of title would not be avoided.

[495021] According to this theory then possession is to be regarded as conferring a right against the person interfering with it ancillary to that of ownership. Cf. Ihering, Ueber den Grund des Besitzesschutzes; Sohm, § 67.

[495237] The classical jurists seem not to have considered the question. The delict adjudicated upon in interdict procedure is in form the violation of a public duty, the duty of obedience to the magistrate. That it was in substance the violation of a private or civil right of a person who has been dispossessed did not appear on the face of the proceedings; and consequently the nature of this right had not to be investigated.

[495659] Possession, which involves a right against the world to freedom from molestation till a better right is shown, came to be regarded by the Roman jurists and in subsequent legal history as de facto ownership standing alongside and in close relationship to legal ownership. So the contrast between the possessory interdicts and vindicatio reminds Englishmen of the old division of actions in English law into Possessory and Droitural, which our mediaeval lawyers adopted from the Civil and Canon Law. According to this view the Interdicts Uti Possidetis and Utrubi were, at least at the time when Gaius wrote, not delictal, except in form, but possessory in character, the infringement of the rights they protected wanting the ordinary requisites of a delict. But though the possessory interdicts seem to have for their object simply the protection of possession, as the object of vindicatio is simply the protection of ownership, they are actions in personam not in rem, that is they only he against the party who immediately interferes with the possession of another, not against third parties.

[496754] The primary right on which they are founded cannot be better stated than in the words—‘possessor hoc ipso, quod possessor est, plus juris habet, quam ille, qui non possidet.’ The law assumes that the possessor is owner till the contrary is proved in an appropriate action. Cf. Bruns, Die Besitzklagen des romischen und heutigen Rechts.

[497091] That in a given system of positive law what is in substance an action for the protection of property may assume the form of an action on Delict, we may convince ourselves by remembering some of the anomalies of the scheme of actions in English law. Trover and Detinue, which were brought to recover movable property, were kinds of Trespass, that is of action on delict: Assumpsit, the remedy for enforcing a simple contract, was externally a species of Trespass on the Case, another action on delict: and Ejectment, practically the sole real action for the recovery of land, was theoretically another species of Trespass.

[497714] The Interdict, as originating action, bears some resemblance to a now abolished institution of English law, the Original writ. But the Original writ was a mandate addressed by the head of administration or judicature to the sheriff; that is, to an executive officer, not, as the interdict, to the individual suitor. Besides, this mandate of the crown required the sheriff to command a defendant to obey the crown by obeying the precepts of the legislator: the peculiarity of the interdict, as appears from the preceding account of its character, was that it formed of itself the whole of the law which the suitor was commanded to obey. The possessory interdicts, for instance, simple and meagre as they outwardly seemed, really comprised the whole law that governed the protection of mere Possession. And the same is true of all the other interdicts which have been enumerated, so that the interdicts had the effect of giving protection to rights outside the ordinary law, through the direct interposition of the magistrate. This, as already observed, is apparently the true interpretation of the terms in which Gaius expresses the distinctive feature of Interdicts: certis ex causis Praetor aut Proconsul principaliter auctoritatem suam finiendis controversiis interponit, § 139: i. e. in issuing an interdict the magistrate exercised a principalis auctoritas, wielded a sovereign authority.

[499108] But though originally the subjects of the Interdict had been omitted by the ordinary law, as matters rather of administration than of legislation; yet after many individual Interdicts had been issued, and their conditions had been generalized by the authorities of jurisprudence; after, moreover, the rules which would be observed in their issue had been announced by the magistrate in his annual proclamation; the area of questions decided by Interdict was practically as much subject to law as any other department of Roman life. The code of rules promulgated by the magistrate (jus praetorium), being accepted by the state, was just as much law as if it had been enacted by the legislative assemblies: so that finally Interdict procedure differed from ordinary litigation merely by a fringe of form, that served as a memento of its historic origin, the extraordinary power of the magistrate in republican Rome: this fringe of form disappeared with the formulary process, the procedure in the domain once managed by Interdict being assimilated to the procedure employed in all the other departments of the code; thus Justinian finds it unnecessary to speak in his Institutes of the old forms of Interdict procedure. Inst. 4, 15, 8.

[500343] § 171. —Modo | pecuniaria poena modo iurisiurandi religione — | —; eaque praetor — | — aduersus infitiantes ex quibusdam causis dupli actio constituitur, ueluti si iudicati aut depensi aut damni iniuriae aut legatorum per damnationem relictorum nomine agitur; ex quibusdam causis sponsionem facere permittitur, ueluti de pecunia certa credita et pecunia constituta; sed certae quidem creditae pecuniae tertiae partis, constitutae uero pecuniae partis dimidiae.

[500805] Inst. 4, 16, pr.

[500823] § 172. Quodsi neque sponsionis neque dupli actionis periculum ei cum quo agitur iniungatur, ac ne statim quidem ab initio pluris quam simpli sit actio, permittit praetor iusiurandum exigere non calvmniae ca vsa infitias ire. unde quamuis heredes uel qui heredum loco ha|bentur, — obligati sint, item feminae pupilli|que eximantur periculo sponsionis, iubet tamen eos iurare.

[501199] Inst. 4, 16, 1.

[501216] § 173. Statim autem ab initio pluris quam simpli actio est ueluti furti manifesti quadrupli, nec manifesti dupli, concepti et oblati tripli. nam ex his causis et aliis quibusdam, siue quis neget siue fateatur, pluris quam simpli est actio.

[501457] Inst. l. c.

[501470] § 174. Actoris quoque calumnia coercetur modo calumniae iudicio, modo contrario, modo iureiurando, modo restipulatione.

[501591] Inst. l. c.

[501604] § 175. Et quidem calumniae iudicium aduersus omnes actiones locum habet, et est decimae partis, praeterquam quod aduersus adsertorem tertiae partis est.

[501758] § 176. Liberum est autem ei cum quo agitur, aut calumniae iudicium opponere aut iusiurandum exigere, non calumniae causa agere.

[501887] § 177. Contrarium autem iudicium ex certis causis constituitur, ueluti si iniuriarum agatur, et si cum muliere eo nomine agatur, quod dicatur uentris nomine in possessionem missa dolo malo ad alium possessionem transtulisse, et si quis eo nomine agat, quod dicat se a praetore in possessionem missum ab alio quo admissum non esse. sed aduersus iniuriarum quidem actionem decimae partis datur, aduersus uero duas istas quintae.

[502315] § 178. Seuerior autem coercitio est per contrarium iudicium. nam calumniae iudicio decimae partis nemo damnatur nisi qui intellegit non recte se agere, sed uexandi aduersarii gratia actionem instituit, potiusque ex iudicis errore uel iniquitate uictoriam sperat quam ex causa ueritatis; calumnia enim in adfectu est, sicut furti crimen. contrario uero iudicio omni modo damnatur actor, si causam non tenuerit, licet aliqua opinione inductus crediderit se recte agere.

[502784] § 179. Vtique autem ex quibus causis contrario iudicio agi potest, etiam calumniae iudicium locum habet; sed alterutro tantum iudicio agere permittitur. qua ratione si iusiurandum de calumnia exactum fuerit, quemadmodum calumniae iudicium non datur, ita et contrarium dari non debet.

[503069] § 180. Restipulationis quoque poena ex certis causis fieri solet; et quemadmodum contrario iudicio omni modo condemnatur actor, si causam non tenuerit, nec requiritur, an scierit non recte se agere, ita etiam restipulationis poena omni modo damnatur actor, si uincere non potuerit.

[503352] § 181. Qui autem restipulationis poenam patitur, ei neque calumniae iudicium opponitur neque iurisiurandi religio iniungitur; nam contrarium iudicium ex his causis locum non habere palam est.

[503545] § 182. Quibusdam iudiciis damnati ignominiosi fiunt, ueluti furti, ui bonorum raptorum, iniuriarum; item pro socio, fiduciae, tutelae, mandati, depositi. sed furti aut ui 〈bonorum〉 raptorum aut iniuriarum non solum damnati notantur ignominia, sed etiam pacti, ut in edicto praetoris scriptum est; et recte: plurimum enim interest, utrum ex delicto aliquis an ex contractu debitor sit nec tamen ulla parte edicti id ipsum nominatim exprimitur, ut aliquis ignominiosus sit; sed qui prohibetur et pro alio postulare et cognitorem dare procuratoremue habere, item 〈pro〉curatorio aut cognitorio nomine iudicio interuenire, ignominiosus esse dicitur.

[504191] Inst. 4, 16, 2.

[504208] § 183. In summa sciendum est eum qui cum aliquo consistere uelit 〈in ius uocare〉 oportere et eum qui uocatus est, si non uenerit, poenam ex edicto praetoris committere. quasdam tamen personas sine permissu praetoris in ius uocare non licet, ueluti parentes patronos patronas, item liberos et parentes patroni patronaeue; et in eum qui aduersus ea egerit poena constituitur.

[504583] Inst. 4, 16, 3.

[504600] § 184. Cum autem in ius uocatus fuerit aduersarius neque eo die finiri potuerit negotium, uadimonium ei faciendum est, id est ut promittat se certo die sisti.

[504760] § 185. Fiunt autem uadimonia quibusdam ex causis pura, id est sine satisdatione, quibusdam cum satisdatione, quibusdam iureiurando, quibusdam recuperatoribus suppositis, id est ut qui non steterit, is protinus a recuperatoribus in summam uadimonii condemnetur; eaque singula diligenter praetoris edicto significantur.

[505079] § 186. Et siquidem iudicati depensiue agetur, tanti fit uadimonium, quanti ea res erit; si uero ex ceteris causis, quanti actor iurauerit non calumniae causa postulare sibi uadimonium promitti. nec tamen 〈pluris quam partis dimidiae, nec〉 pluribus quam sestertium c m fit uadimonium. itaque si centum milium res erit, nec iudicati depensiue agetur, non plus quam sestertium quinquaginta milium fit uadimonium.

[505490] § 187. Quas autem personas sine permissu praetoris inpune in ius uocare non possumus, easdem nec uadimonio inuitas obligare possumus praeterquam si praetor aditus permittat.

[505665] We have now to notice that in order to prevent vexatious litigation, both plaintiffs and defendants are restrained sometimes by pecuniary penalties, sometimes by the sanction of an oath which they are compelled to take, sometimes by fear of suffering infamy. The defendant’s denial of his obligation is in certain cases punished by the duplication of the damages to be recovered. This occurs in an action on a judgment debt, or for money paid by a sponsor (depensi), or for unlawful damage to property (damni injuriae), or for legacies left in the form per damnationem. Sometimes a wager of a penal sum is permitted, as in an action of loan of money, or on a promise to pay a preexisting money debt (pecunia constituta), in the former case of one third of the sum in dispute, in the latter of one half.

[506469] § 172. In the absence of the risk of a penal wager, or of duplication of damages on account of denial, and when the action is not one which apart from any denial entails more than simple damages, the plaintiff is allowed by the Praetor to exact an oath from the defendant that his denial is not vexatious. Accordingly, although heirs and those in the position of heirs are always exempt from penalty, and women and wards are exempted from the risk of the penal wager, still the Praetor requires them to take the oath that they are not proceeding vexatiously.

[507029] § 173. But apart from any denial, more than simple damages are involved in various actions: as in an action of manifest theft for a fourfold penalty, for theft not manifest for a twofold one, for stolen goods being discovered or introduced (concepti et oblati) a threefold penalty: for in these and some other cases the action is for something more than mere damages, whether the plaintiff denies or confesses the claim.

[507451] § 174. Vexatious litigation (calumnia) on the part of the plaintiff is also checked sometimes by the judicium calumniae, sometimes by the Contrary action. sometimes by oath, and sometimes by restipulation.

[507658] The action of reckless litigation (calumnia) lies against the plaintiff in respect of all actions and is for the tenth part of the value of what he has claimed by action, but in the case of an asserter of liberty it is for a third part.

[507896] But it is at the option of the defendant whether he will bring the judicium calumniae or will exact an oath from the plaintiff that he is not bringing the action vexatiously.

[508072] § 177. The Contrary action only lies in certain cases, for instance, against the plaintiff in an action of outrage (injuriarum), and in an action against a widow who having been put into possession of property on account of her conceived but unborn child (ventris nomine) has fraudulently transferred it to some one else, or an action for refusing to admit a person [judgment creditor, damni infecti nomine, etc. Digest 42, 4] put into possession (missio in possessionem) by order of the praetor. In the action of outrage it lies for the tenth of what has been claimed, in the two latter actions for the fifth.

[508684] § 178. Of these deterrent measures the Contrary action is the more severe. Plaintiff is condemned by the action of vexatious litigation (judicium calumniae) to forfeit the tenth of the value, unless he knows he has no right of action, and has sued to harass his adversary, in reliance on the error or iniquity of the judex, rather than on the justice of his cause; since vexatious litigation, like the crime of theft, consists in intention. But in the Contrary action the plaintiff is condemned in any case if he loses the previous action, even though he had some grounds for believing in the goodness of his cause.

[509301] § 179. But it is clear that wherever the contrary action (contrarium judicium) lies, the action for vexatious litigation (calumniae judicium) also lies, though one is only allowed to make use of one or other of these actions; on this principle if an oath that the litigation is not vexatious has been exacted, just as the calumniae judicium is not granted, so also the contrarium judicium ought not to be allowed.

[509716] § 180. The penalty of the restipulatio also is commonly required in certain cases; and just as in the contrary action the plaintiff is condemned under all circumstances where he loses his cause whether he knew that he had no proper cause of action or did not, even so he forfeits the penalty of the restipulatio in any case if he could not succeed in the action.

[510080] § 181. But when a person suffers the penalty of the restipulation, neither the action for vexatious litigation can be brought against him, nor can he be bound by the religious form of oath; and that in this case the contrary action has no place is obvious.

[510338] § 182. In some actions condemnation involves infamy, as in the actions of theft, rapine (vi bonorum raptorum), outrage (injuriarum), partnership, fiduciary agreement (fiduciae), guardianship (tutelae), mandate, deposit. In actions for theft, rapine, and outrage, it is not only infamous to be condemned, but also to compromise, according to the terms of the praetor’s edict; and rightly so since obligation based on delict differs widely from an obligation based on contract. But although there is no express statement that a person is to be infamous in any part of the edict, a person is said to be infamous who is prohibited from appearing in a court of law on behalf of another, from appointing a cognitor or procurator, and from himself serving as cognitor or procurator.

[511115] § 183. Finally, it is to be noticed that a party intending to sue must serve a summons on his opponent to appear before the magistrate; and if the summons is disregarded, the party summoned forfeits a penal sum according to the provisions of the praetor’s edict. Some persons, however, cannot be summoned without the praetor’s leave, such as parents, patrons, patronesses, and the children of a patron or patroness; and any one infringing this rule is liable to a penalty.

[511589] Upon an appearance before the magistrate, if the proceedings are not terminated on the same day, the defendant must give security (vadimonium) for an adjourned appearance on a future day.

[511778] § 185. The security is in some cases of a simple kind that is without sureties, in some with sureties, in some cases again it is accompanied by oath, while in some contains a reference to recuperators, so that on default of appearance the defendant may be immediately condemned by the recuperators in the penal sum of the security; all which matters are more particularly explained in the praetor’s edict.

[512185] § 186. In an action on a judgment debt (judicati), or for money paid by a sponsor (depensi), the sum of the security is equal to the sum in question. In other cases it is the amount which the plaintiff swears that he is not vexatiously demanding as necessary to his security, provided that it is not more than half the sum in dispute, nor exceeds a hundred thousand sesterces. If, for instance, the sum in dispute is a hundred thousand sesterces, and the action is not brought to recover a judgment debt or money paid by a sponsor, the penal sum of the security conditioned for reappearance may not exceed fifty thousand sesterces.

[512818] § 187. Those persons who cannot be summoned to appear without leave of the praetor cannot be compelled to give security for the adjourned appearance without similar permission.

[512996] From the duplication of damages against a defendant who denied his delinquency under the lex Aquilia, 3 § 216, and against a heres charged with a legacy in the form of condemnation, § 9; and from the terms, dare damnas esto = dare judicatus esto, employed both in the lex Aquilia, 3 § 210, comm., and in bequest per damnationem, 2 § 201, it may be inferred with much probability that both the author of unlawful damage and the heir charged with a legacy by words of condemnation were subject, in the older period of the law, to the same proceedings as the judgment debtor (judicatus); that is, in early times were suable by Manus injectio, § 25, and in later times were bound to give satisdatio judicatum solvi, § 102. Cf. Roby, 2. p. 292, and the writers there cited.

[513766] Double damages, as a penalty of misrepresentation, were perhaps also an incident of Nexum. Cum ex XII Tabulis satis esset ea praestari quae essent lingua nuncupata, quae qui infitiatus esset dupli poenam subiret, a jureconsultis etiam reticentiae poena est constituta, Cic. de Off. 3, 65. ‘While the Twelve Tables were satisfied with requiring compensation for faults against which a mancipator had expressly warranted, and with punishing a false warranty by double damages, the jurists imposed a similar penalty on reticence.’

[514295] In Condictio and Constitutum the sponsio was optional (permittitur), § 171; cf. § 13: in Interdicts it was compulsory, § 141. Bethmann-Hollweg, § 96; Lenel, § 95, 2.

[514462] A charge of calumny implies guilty knowledge or unlawful intention (dolus), the Contrary action implies unlawful ignorance, that is, recklessness or want of consideration (culpa, temeritas).

[514654] In three personal actions each party was considered as both plaintiff and defendant and had to take both the oath of the plaintiff and the oath of the defendant. Qui familiae erciscundae et communi dividundo et finium regundorum agunt, et actores sunt et rei et ideo jurare debent non calumniae causa litem intendere et non calumniae causa ad infitias ire, Dig. 10, 2, 44, 4. ‘In partition of inheritance, dissolution of joint ownership, and determination of boundaries, both parties are equally plaintiff and defendant, and therefore must swear to the good faith of both the suit and the defence.’

[515254] In the time of Justinian the action of calumny, the Contrary action, sponsio and restipulation had become obsolete, and in their place the losing party was condemned in costs, and the oath received development, being always administered to both parties and their advocates, Inst. 4, 16, 1. ‘Instead of the old checks the oath of the parties and their counsel has been introduced, and the condemnation of the unsuccessful litigant in the costs of his adversary,’ Cod. 2, 58. Payment of costs by the loser of the cause was introduced by a law of Zeno, a. d. 486.

[515816] Vadimonium must be distinguished from the security judicatum solvi. It only referred to reappearance of the defendant in jure, not to appearance before the judex, like the later cautio judicio sisti, and was required whenever there was an adjournment, whereas security judicatum solvi secured satisfaction of the judgment and was only required from the defendant in real actions and in certain exceptional personal actions, § 102, Cf. Keller, § 47.

[516266] In procedure by cognitio extraordinaria, the in jus vocatio, summons of the defendant by the plaintiff, was superseded by summons of the defendant by the magistrate through his lictor (evocari a praetore). Obedience to this summons was compelled by a fine of which we have the formula in Gellius, 11, 1. ‘As M. Terentius on citation has neither answered nor been excused, I fine him in a single sheep.’ If the defendant continued contumacious he was summoned to appear by three proclamations (edicta) at intervals of ten days, and finally an edictum peremptorium was issued in which the magistrate threatened to hear and decide the case in his absence, in default of his appearance, which was done, if he continued disobedient, Dig. 5, 1, 68, &c.

[517014] Procedure before a judex was properly called actio, before the praetor, persecutio, Dig. 50, 16, 178, 2. ‘Persecutio is the proper name for extraordinary procedure, as in trusts and other claims which are not triable by an ordinary judex.’

[517255] The Libellary procedure which existed in the time of Justinian, having superseded the Formulary procedure, was essentially the same as cognitio extraordinaria. Instead of the summons before the praetor (in jus vocatio) and notice of the action which the plaintiff meant to bring (editio actionis) with which the Formulary procedure commenced, Libellary procedure began with libellus conventionis (at an earlier time with what is called litis denuntiatio, instituted by Marcus Aurelius) and writ of summons. The libellus conventionis was a writing addressed to the court, signed by the plaintiff, stating his cause of action, and binding himself to proceed to Litis Contestatio within two months at latest, or pay twice the costs up to thirty-six aurei, to prosecute the suit to judgment, and pay the costs in the event of losing the cause: it was a form of suing out a writ or summons. Thereupon followed an interlocutor of the court, on its finding a valid cause of action disclosed in the libellus, and this formal document something like an English writ was addressed to the defendant and served on him, not by the plaintiff but by an officer of the court (executor) along with the libellus. The defendant then paid a fee (sportula) to executor proportioned to the amount of the claim; delivered his answer or counter-declaration (libellus contradictionis, responsionis) signed by himself and acknowledging the date of the reception of the libellus; and either gave cautio judicio sisti, security for his appearance in the action for the definitive appointment of the trial (judicio ordinando) and for his continuance to the close of the trial (cautio de re defendenda), or was liable to incarceration. As we have already seen, the action was no longer tried by a judex privatus but by an imperial official. Cf. Muirhead, § 77; Sohm, pp. 315, 316.

[519107] Gaius has given us no information concerning Appeal, and very little information has come down to us from other sources as to the origin and development of this kind of jurisdiction under the Principate. (See on this subject Historical Introduction.) Under the republic we hear of no right of Appeal in civil suits: it appears however with the principate, and indeed with the first princeps: and may have been derived from the tribunicia potestas. The jurisdiction may have been only exercised at first in respect of cases belonging to the cognitio extraordinaria of the magistrate, and so not for some time have been applicable to the decisions of private judices. By its extension to these the judex lost the independent position which he held in the time of the republic and was brought under the control of the supreme executive power. The following series of Appeals in civil suits seems to have been instituted: From the Judex to the Praetor who appointed him: from the Praetor to the Praefectus urbi: from the Praefectus urbi to Caesar. In the provinces a Vir consularis, appointed for the purpose, took the place of Praefectus urbi, Suetonius, Augustus, 33.

[520274] For the constitution of the courts in the periods of Legis actio, Formula, Libellus, the student should consult Bethmann-Hollweg’s Romischer Civilprozess.