WORK: Institutes of Roman Law  (slug: gaius-institutes-of-roman-law-09683f)

CHAPTER: 118-consensv-obligationes-2



[110379] § 200 Aliquando etiam suae rei quisque furtum committit, ueluti si debitor rem quam creditori pignori dedit subtraxerit, uel si bonae fidei possessori rem meam possidenti subripuerim. unde placuit eum, qui seruum suum quem alius bona fide possidebat ad se reuersum celauerit, furtum committere.

[110675] Inst. 4, 1, 10.

[110692] § 201. Rursus ex diuerso interdum alienas res occupare et usucapere concessum est, nec creditur furtum fieri, ueluti res hereditarias, quarum heres non est nactus possessionem, nisi necessarius heres extet; nam necessario herede extante placuit nihil pro herede usucapi posse. item debitor rem, quam fiduciae causa creditori mancipauerit aut in iure cesserit, secundum ea quae in superiore commentario rettulimus, sine furto possidere et usucapere potest.

[111149] § 202. Interdum furti tenetur qui ipse furtum non fecerit, qualis est cuius ope consilio furtum factum est. in quo numero est qui nummos tibi excussit, ut eos alius subriperet, uel obstitit tibi, ut alius subriperet, aut oues aut boues tuas fugauit, ut alius eas exciperet. et hoc ueteres scripserunt de eo qui panno rubro fugauit armentum. sed si quid per lasciuiam et non data opera, ut furtum committeretur, factum sit, uidebimus an utilis actio dari debeat, cum per legem Aquiliam quae de damno lata 〈est〉 etiam culpa puniatur.

[111682] Inst. 4, 1, 11.

[111699] § 203. Furti autem actio ei conpetit cuius interest rem saluam esse, licet dominus non sit. itaque nec domino aliter conpetit, quam si eius intersit rem non perire.

[111865] Inst. 4, 1, 13.

[111882] § 204. Vnde constat creditorem de pignore subrepto furti agere posse; adeo quidem, ut quamuis ipse dominus, id est ipse debitor, eam rem subripuerit nihilo minus creditori conpetat actio furti.

[112077] Inst. 4, 1, 14.

[112094] § 205. Item si fullo polienda curandaue aut sarcinator sarcienda uestimenta mercede certa acceperit eaque furto amiserit, ipse furti habet actionem, non dominus, quia domini nihil interest ea non periisse, cum iudicio locati a fullone aut sarcinatore suum consequi possit, si modo is fullo aut sarcinator rei praestandae sufficiat; nam si soluendo non est, tunc quia ab eo dominus suum consequi non potest, ipsi furti actio conpetit, quia hoc casu ipsius interest rem saluam esse.

[112576] Inst. 4, 1, 15.

[112593] § 206. Quae de fullone aut sarcinatore diximus, eadem transferemus et ad eum cui rem commodauimus. nam ut illi mercedem capiendo custodiam praestant, ita hic quoque utendi commodum percipiendo similiter necesse habet custodiam praestare.

[112832] Inst. 4, 1, 16.

[112849] § 207. Sed is apud quem res deposita est custodiam non praestat tantumque in eo obnoxius est, si quid ipse dolo 〈malo〉 fecerit. qua de causa 〈si〉 res ei subrepta fuerit, quia restituendae eius nomine depositi non tenetur nec ob id eius interest rem saluam esse, furti [itaque] agere non potest, sed ea actio domino conpetit

[113174] Inst. 4, 1, 17.

[113191] § 208. In summa sciendum est quaesitum esse. an inpubes rem alienam amouendo furtum faciat. plerisque placet, quia furtum ex adfectu consistit, ita demum obligari eo crimine inpuberem, si proximus pubertati sit et ob id intellegat se delinquere.

[113438] Inst. 4, 1, 19.

[113455] § 183. Thefts are divided by Servius Sulpicius and Masurius Sabinus into four kinds, theft manifest and not manifest, the possession of stolen goods discovered upon search, and the introduction into a house of stolen goods. Labeo makes only two kinds, theft manifest and not manifest, because the possession and introduction of stolen goods are not kinds of theft, but rather circumstances giving rise to special actions connected with theft; and this seems the better opinion, as will presently appear.

[113960] Manifest theft is limited by some to detection in the act of taking; by others extended to detection while the thief is in the place where the theft is committed; for instance, if olives are stolen from an oliveyard, or grapes from a vineyard, while the thief is in the oliveyard, or vineyard; or if a theft is committed in a house, while the thief is in the house. Others extend it to detection before the thief has carried the goods away to the place where he intends to deposit them; others to detection while the thief has the goods in his hands. The fourth opinion has not been adopted, and the third opinion that, until the thief has carried the stolen goods to their place of destination, his theft may be a manifest one, is also impugned on the ground of the uncertainty whether one day or several is the limit of the time within which he must be detected; for a thief often intends to carry the goods he has stolen in one city into another city or province. The first and second opinions are commonly adopted, and more generally the second.

[115011] § 185. What is not manifest theft will be understood from what we have said about manifest theft, for what is not the one is the other.

[115148] § 186. The discovery of stolen goods, when a person’s premises are searched in the presence of witnesses, makes him liable, even though innocent of theft, to a special action for receiving stolen goods called actio concepti.

[115374] § 187. To introduce stolen goods is to pass them off to a man, on whose premises they are discovered, with the intent that they should be discovered on his premises rather than on those of the introducer. The man on whose premises they are found may sue the passer off, though innocent of theft, in an action for the introduction of stolen goods called actio oblati.

[115742] § 188. An action for prevention of search may be brought against the man who prevents a person from searching on his premises for stolen goods.

[115887] The punishment provided by the law of the Twelve Tables for manifest theft was capital; a freeman was first scourged and then assigned, by judgment of the magistrate, to the person from whom he had stolen (whether made his slave by the assignment, or reduced to the condition of an insolvent judgment debtor, was a subject of controversy among the republican lawyers); a slave was also punished by scourging. But later ages disapproved of the severity of this punishment, and theft, whether by a slave or by a freeman, was punished by the praetorian edict with fourfold damages.

[116467] § 190. Not manifest theft is punished by the law of the Twelve Tables with double damages, which penalty the praetor has retained.

[116599] § 191. The penalty for the discovery or the introduction of stolen goods is by the law of the Twelve Tables triple damages, a penalty which the praetor has also retained.

[116771] § 192. Prevention of search renders liable to fourfold damages, a penalty which the edict of the praetor first ordained. The Twelve Tables inflicted no penalty for such an offence, but directed that the person wishing to search must be naked, only wearing a girdle, and carrying a platter in his hands; and if anything was thus discovered the law of the Twelve Tables declares it to be manifest theft.

[117174] What the girdle was is doubted, but it seems to have been a covering for the loins. The whole of this enactment of the Twelve Tables is nugatory, for he who prevents a man from searching in his clothes would prevent him from searching naked, especially as in such a search the finding of stolen goods would subject him to a heavier penalty. Besides, whether the platter is to be held by the searcher in order that his hands being engaged in holding it he may not bring anything into the house, or in order that what is found may be placed thereupon, neither of these reasons can be alleged when the thing searched for is of such a size or nature that it could not be brought into the house by hand, nor placed on the platter. It is not disputed that a platter of any material satisfies the requirement of the Tables.

[117992] § 194. On account of the enactment that a discovery in such a search is manifest theft, some writers say that manifest theft is of two kinds, statutory or actual: statutory being that of which we have just been speaking, actual being that kind of manifest theft which has been previously explained. But in truth, the only mode of manifest theft is the actual one, for law cannot turn a not manifest thief into a manifest thief, any more than it can turn a man who is not a thief into a thief; or make an adulterer or homicide out of a man who has not killed or committed adultery. What a statute can accomplish is this, that a person shall be subject to a penalty just as if he had committed theft, adultery, or homicide, although he have not committed any of those offences.

[118769] Theft is not simply confined to the carrying away the property of another with intent of appropriation, but embraces any kind of physical handling of a thing belonging to another against the will of the owner.

[118980] § 196. Thus, to use a thing committed to one’s keeping as a deposit, or to put a thing that is lent to one for use to a different use than that for which it was lent, is theft; to borrow plate, for instance, on the representation that the borrower is going to entertain his friends, and then to carry it away into the country; or to borrow a horse for a mere ride, and then to take it far away out of the neighbourhood; or, as in the case described by the old lawyers, to take it into battle.

[119474] § 197. It is held, however, that putting a thing lent for use to a different use than the lender contemplated is only theft if the borrower knows it to be contrary to the will of the owner, and that, if he had notice, he would refuse permission; but if he believes that the owner would give permission, it is not theft; and the distinction is just, for there is no theft without unlawful intention.

[119874] But even to deal with a thing in the belief that you are acting against the will of the owner, if the owner is in fact consenting to your doing so, is said not to amount to theft; whence a question arises, if Titius solicits my slave to steal my property, and convey it to him, and my slave informs me of it, and I, wishing to detect Titius in the act, permit my slave to carry my goods to him; it has been questioned whether either an action of theft or one for corrupting a slave can be maintained against Titius. The answer (responsum) is that neither action is maintainable; not the action of theft, because his dealing with my property was not an act done against my will; not the action for corrupting a slave, because the slave was not in fact corrupted.

[120637] § 199. Sometimes there may be a theft even of free persons; as, for instance, of a child in my power, of a wife in my hand, or even of my judgment debtor, or of my hired gladiator, should they be secretly removed from my control.

[120868] § 200. A man may sometimes even steal his own property; as, for instance, a debtor who purloins the goods which he has pledged to a creditor, or an owner who surreptitiously takes away his own property from a bona fide possessor of it; and accordingly it has been held, that concealment by the owner of the fact of his slave having returned to him, from one who had possessed him in good faith, amounted to theft.

[121283] Conversely, property belonging to another may sometimes be seized and acquired by usucapion without committing theft; hereditaments, for instance, before an heir has obtained possession, except in the case of a necessary heir; for where there is a necessary heir it is settled law that no usucapion as quasi-heir is possible (2 § 58). Also a debtor, having conveyed property on trust to his creditor by mancipation or surrender before the magistrate, as I mentioned in the preceding book, may, without committing theft, repossess it and acquire new ownership thereof by usucapion (2 § 59).

[121874] In some cases theft may be chargeable on a person who is not the actual perpetrator, as on one, by whose aid and abetment a theft has been committed; to which class belongs the man who knocks out of your hand money for another to pick up, or stands in your way that another may snatch it, or scatters your sheep or oxen that another may steal them, like the man in the old books, who waved a red cloth to frighten a herd. But if the same thing were done as a frolic, without the intention of committing a theft, we will consider whether a praetorian form of action (in extension of the lex Aquilia) may not be maintainable, since the Aquilian statute relating to damage makes even negligence penal.

[122574] The action of theft is maintainable by the person interested in the preservation of the property, although he is not the owner; and so even the owner cannot maintain it unless he has an interest in the safety of the thing.

[122798] § 204. Hence when a thing pledged is stolen, the creditor can bring it, so much so that he can even maintain it against the owner or debtor who surreptitiously takes away from him the thing he has pledged.

[123005] § 205. So if clothes are delivered to be cleaned or finished or mended for a certain remuneration, and then are stolen, the fuller or tailor has the action, and not the owner; for the owner is not interested in the loss, since he has his action on the contract of letting against the fuller or tailor to recover the value; supposing always, that the fuller or tailor has sufficient means to make the loss good. For if the latter is insolvent, then as the owner cannot recover what he has a right to claim from him, he can himself maintain the action of theft against the thief; because, in this hypothesis, he is interested in the loss of the property.

[123659] § 206. What has been said of the fuller and tailor applies to the borrower of a thing (commodatarius); for as on account of the payment the former receive they are made responsible for safe custody of the thing, so on account of the advantage the borrower derives from the use of the thing he is likewise made responsible for its safe custody.

[124004] § 207. But as a depositary is not answerable for the safe custody of the thing deposited, being only liable for his own fraud, so, if the thing is stolen from him, being not compellable to make restitution by action of deposit, he is not interested in the thing being safe; and therefore cannot maintain the action of theft which is only maintainable by the owner of the thing.

[124383] § 208. Finally, it is a question whether if any one below the age of puberty takes the property of another, he commits a theft; and most jurists agree that as theft depends on intention, one below the age of puberty is not able to be charged with it unless, being near to that age, he understands that he is committing a delict.

[124713] Theft in modern systems of jurisprudence is a crime, that is, belongs to the penal or criminal code. In Roman law, as in other early systems, it is a private injury, and treated as a subject of the civil code. This was recognized by the law of the Twelve Tables, which established the penalty for furtum nec manifestum, § 190, and allowed a compromise or composition for theft, that is, allowed the penalty thereby engendered to be extinguished by private agreement between the party wronged and the wrongdoer.

[125225] Aulus Gellius gives a fragment of Sabinus which combines the first and third definition of furtum manifestum. Manifestum autem furtum est, ut ait Masurius, quod deprehenditur dum fit. Faciendi finis est, cum perlatum est quo ferri coeperat, 9, 18, 1. ‘Manifest theft is that which is detected in the act. The act is finished when the removal of the goods to the place intended is completed.’ Justinian confirms the third definition, Inst. 4, 1, 3.

[125674] The reason why furtum manifestum was subjected to a heavier penalty than furtum nec manifestum was not because the barbarous legislator supposed that detection in the act was an aggravation of the offence, but because he wished, by the amplitude of the legal remedy offered, to induce the aggrieved party not to take the law into his own hands and inflict summary vengeance on the offender, particularly as it was lawful to kill a nocturnal thief, or one who during the day defended himself with a weapon, Gell. 11, 18, 6, 7. In the infancy of society it is an important object to the legislator to induce an injured person to have recourse to the public tribunals instead of righting himself, that is to say, constituting himself both lawgiver and judge.

[126431] That such was really the motive of the legislator we have historic evidence in the declaration of Rotharis, ruler of the Langobards, a. d. 643. He gives the relatives of the slain their election between the primitive vengeance for blood (feud or vendetta) and a composition or pecuniary fine (wergeld or poena) to be recovered by action before the public tribunals. He says that he fixes a high fine in order to induce plaintiffs to forgo their right of feud; and implies that he would gladly have abolished the right of feud or private war, but felt that it was too deeply rooted in the habits of his tribe to be extirpated by legislation. Bethmann-Hollweg, Der Germ. Civ. Process, § 60.

[127121] This writer supposes, Der Rom. C. P., § 96, that the praetorian action Furti manifesti had a Fictitious formula, 4 § 32, and suggests the following:

[127271] Demonstratio. Quod Numerius Negidius Aulo Agerio furtum manifestum fecit paterae aureae,

[127361] Fictio. Si ob eam rem Numerium Negidium ex lege verberari itemque Aulo Agerio addici oporteret,

[127458] Condemnatio: Quanti ea res fuit, tantae pecuniae, judex, Numerium Negidium Aulo Agerio quadruplum condemnato: Si non paret, absolvito.

[127594] According to Gellius a slave after having been scourged was thrown from the Tarpeian rock, and some writers think that Gaius stated this fact in the above passage.

[127759] We must distinguish between furtum conceptum with its threefold penalty, § 191, and furtum lance et licio conceptum. Ea quoque furta quae per lancem liciumque concepta essent, proinde ac si manifesta forent, vindicaverunt, Gellius, 11, 18, 9. ‘Possession of stolen goods discovered on search with the platter and girdle was punished as theft detected in the act.’ Cf. Inst. 4, 1, 4.

[128143] Traces of the word ‘conceptum’ occur in a fragment of the Twelve Tables, vi, 7: Tignum junctum aedibus vineave et concapit ne solvito, ‘Timber built into a house or vineyard of another man and discovered there by the owner must not be severed:’ where et concapit represents either et conceptum or qui concipiet. (On the grammatical form—conceptum—see Roby 2, p. 215, n. 1.)

[128518] The search with a platter and girdle was probably a custom derived from Greece, for a similar formality is described by Plato. Leges, 12, 7.

[128660] In the later period of Roman law, as in modern Europe, the search for stolen goods was not conducted by the private party, but by public officers. In England the object is effected by a search warrant. Upon the information on oath that a party has probable cause to suspect that his goods have been stolen, and are concealed in a certain dwelling-house, and on his showing the cause of his suspicion, a justice of the peace may grant a warrant authorizing to enter and search for the said goods, and to attach the goods and the party in whose custody they are found, and bring them before him, that he may give an account how he came by them, and be dealt with according to law. The warrant is directed to a constable or other public officer and not to any private person, though it is proper that the party complaining should be present as assistant because he knows his goods As touching the party that had custody of the goods, if they were stolen, but not by him but by another that sold and delivered them to him (furtum oblatum), if it appear that he was ignorant that they were stolen, he may be discharged as an offender and bound over to give evidence as a witness against him that sold them.

[129863] The same definition of theft is given by Paulus. Fur est qui dolo malo rem alienam contrectat, Sent. R. 2, 31, 1. ‘A thief is he who with evil intention handles (lifts, moves, touches) the property of another.’ Justinian gives a different definition. Furtum est contrectatio rei fraudulosa, lucri faciendi causa vel ipsius rei, vel etiam usus ejus possessionisve, Inst. 4, 1, 1. ‘Theft is the fraudulent handling of a thing with the object of acquiring gain either from the thing itself or from its use, or from possession of it.’

[130395] It may be observed that Justinian does not say with Paulus, rei alienae, because a man may steal his own property, as when a pledgor steals from a pledgee or an owner from a usufructuary. So, by English law, to take a man’s own goods out of the hands of a bailee, if the taking have the effect of charging the bailee, is larceny. The usus of a thing is stolen when the owner deprives the usufructuary of it, or when a pledgee unlawfully uses a pledge. Si creditor pignore utatur, furtum committit, Inst. 4, 1, 6.

[130909] Cases of Possessio being appropriated are when a thing pledged is taken out of the pledgee’s possession by the owner, or when an owner of a thing surreptitiously deprives the bona fide possessor of his possession, § 200, for though such possessor has no title to the thing, his possession is recognized, till he is evicted, and he may have claims against the owner on account of impensae and on other grounds.

[131320] In English law larceny is defined to be the unlawful taking and carrying away of things personal (asportatio) with intent to deprive the right owner of the same and to make them the property of the taker. To constitute larceny the original taking of possession must be unlawful: therefore, if the owner deliver his property to a person to hold for him, the subsequent appropriation of it by the latter, though an offence and a breach of faith, is not larceny, because the original taking was lawful. But it is larceny if the delivery was obtained by fraud, i. e. with an original design and pre-arranged plan to deprive the owner of his property and convert it to the use of the taker. The possession is then unlawful in its inception. Again, if delivery does not divest the owner of the legal possession, appropriation by the taker constitutes possession unlawful in its inception and so is larceny. In this respect a servant (e. g. a shepherd, carter, porter, butler, clerk) is to be distinguished from a bailee, for the servant is regarded as not possessing, but merely as the instrument of the owner’s possession, and so he may be guilty of larceny of the thing. (See Pollock and Wright, Possession in the Common Law, Pt. III.)

[132553] Roman law, however, did not require an unlawful inception of possession for constituting furtum, as is shown by the fact that the pledgee, who has lawful possession, is guilty of theft, if he make use of the pledge. Had it done so, however, the appropriation of the owner’s property by commodatarius, depositarius, or conductor rei would have constituted an unlawful inception of possession and so have been furtum, since Roman law, differing in this respect from English, does not as a rule transfer possession to such bailees but only detention. But as a matter of fact in Roman law the question whether a person guilty of ‘contrectatio rei fraudulosa’ had or had not been in previous possession of the thing was never entertained (cf. Stephen, Hist. of Criminal Law in England, 1, p. 30, &c.).

[133351] Justinian decided that the attempt to corrupt a slave was as criminal as his actual corruption, and made the offender liable to be sued for theft and for corrupting a slave, Inst. 4, 1, 8.

[133541] Usucapion of the property of a voluntary heir, and usureceptio, or usucapion of the property of a mortgagee, have been mentioned in the preceding book. See 2 §§ 52-60.

[133710] A person who is present aiding and abetting when an offence is committed but is not the actual perpetrator is called, in English law, a principal in the second degree. He who procures or abets another to commit an offence but is absent at the time of the commission is called an accessory before the fact. Their punishment is usually the same as that of the principal in the first degree. An accessory after the fact is one who, knowing an offence to have been committed by another, receives, harbours, or assists the offender. For an explanation of the distinction between actio legis aquiliae directa and utilis see § 219, comm.

[134342] When a sale is complete, property does not, by Roman law, pass to the vendee before delivery, although the thing sold is forthwith at the risk of the vendee. If it is stolen before delivery, in spite of the rule that the action of theft is maintainable by the person interested, the vendee cannot sue in his own name, but the vendor is compellable to cede his actions and the vendee sues in the name of the vendor, Dig. 47, 2, 14, 1. But a person who is neither owner, nor has any real right in the thing may, as we have seen, have sufficient interest to enable him to maintain actio furti, though a person could not under these circumstances make use of the condictio furtiva.

[135021] The quadruple and double damages for furtum manifestum and nec manifestum were purely penal. The owner could further recover the thing stolen by a real action (vindicatio), maintainable against any one in possession of the stolen property, or damages in a personal action (condictio furtiva), Inst. 4, 1, 20. The granting of a personal action in this case, with an intentio declaring that the thief was bound to convey the property (dare oportere), was anomalous, because the property of the thing stolen was not in the thief but in the owner, and so could not be conveyed to the latter, 4 § 4.

[135617] If the thing stolen had been destroyed, or if, being money, it had been spent or mixed with money of the thief, the property of the plaintiff would have been in fact extinguished and condictio would be a suitable action. If the property existed in the hands of the thief or could be traced, vindicatio would be maintainable. The object of the law in allowing the plaintiff in any case to sue by condictio was to relieve him from the necessity of ascertaining whether his property was safe or had been consumed. If we ask why, instead of using the intentio, Si paret dare oportere, 4 § 4, which might be inconsistent with the truth, the plaintiff did not use the formula, Quidquid paret dare facere oportere, which, as including compensation or simple restitution of possession, would always be consistent with truth; the answer is probably what Savigny has suggested, namely, the intention of the legislator to subject the defendant to the sponsio poenalis, the additional forfeiture of a third of the sum in litigation. It is true that this is only mentioned as incidental to a condictio for pecunia certa credita, 4 § 171, but the penalty may have also been recoverable in a claim for certain money stolen (condictio furtiva).

[136847] According to Lenel, p. 263, the following would be the kind of formula for the actio furti nec manifesti:

[136954] Si paret Aulo Agerio a Numerio Negidio, opeve consilio Numerii Negidii, furtum factum esse paterae aureae;

[137062] Quam ob rem Numerium Negidium pro fure damnum decidere oportet,

[137127] Quanti ea res fuit, cum furtum est, tantae pecuniae duplum judex Numerium Negidium Aulo Agerio condemna: si non paret absolve.

[137255] The plaintiff in theft had in the later period of Roman law the option of proceeding by civil action or by criminal prosecution, and Ulpian informs us that the latter was the usual course, Dig. 47, 2, 93.

[137461] § 209. Qui res alienas rapit, tenetur etiam furti. quis enim magis alienam rem inuito domino contrectat quam qui 〈ui〉 rapit? itaque recte dictum est eum inprobum furem esse sed propriam actionem eius delicti nomine praetor introduxit, quae appellatur ui bonorum raptorum, et est intra annum quadrupli [actio], post annum simpli. quae actio utilis est, etsi quis unam rem, licet minimam, rapuerit.

[137859] Inst. 4, 2, pr.

[137876] § 209. Rapine or robbery is chargeable as theft, for who more handles the property of another against the will of the owner than the robber? who has been well denominated a shameless thief. However, as a special remedy for this offence the praetor has introduced the action for rapine with violence; which may be brought within a year for four times the value, after a year for simple damages; and which lies when only a single thing of the slightest value has been taken with violence.

[138364] Keller, der Rom. Civil Process, § 33, cf. Lenel, p. 314, gives the following formula: Recuperatores sunto: Quantae pecuniae paret dolo malo Numerii Negidii vi hominibus armatis coactisve damnum datum esse Aulo Agerio bonave rapta, dumtaxat sestertium tot millium, tantae pecuniae quadruplum, Recuperatores, Numerium Negidium Aulo Agerio condemnate: si non paret, absolvite. The party aggrieved might either proceed by civil action or by criminal prosecution under the lex Julia de vi publica et privata. This law, enacted either by Augustus or by Julius Caesar, made the criminal guilty of public or armed violence, liable to deportation; the criminal guilty of private or unarmed violence, to confiscation of a third of his goods, Inst. 4, 18, 8.

[139113] The quadruple damages in the action of rapine were not purely penal as in the action of furtum manifestum, but included the restitution of the property or its value, a rule which was definitely settled subsequently to the time of Gaius, see 4, 8, and cf. Inst. Just. 4, 2, pr. The penal damages for rapine were therefore only three times the value of the goods plundered, that is, less than the damages in furtum manifestum. If, however, the robber was taken in the act, he was chargeable, as Gaius explains, with furtum manifestum.

[139647] The lex Cornelia repetundarum passed by the dictator Sylla, b.c. 82, instituting a criminal action against governors of provinces guilty of extortion: the formula Octaviana or actio quod Metus causa, introduced by the praetor Octavius, father of Augustus, b. c. 79: and the actio Vi bonorum raptorum, introduced by the praetor Lucullus, b. c. 77, all fall within the space of four years and indicate the lawlessness generated by the civil wars in the time of Sylla.

[140114] Robbery, like theft, requires dolus malus, that is, criminal intention. If then a man, believing himself to be rightful owner, violently seized movable goods, he was not guilty of robbery, Inst. 4, 2, 1; but, by a constitution of the emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius, enacted a. d. 389, in order to repress violence, and deter people from taking the law into their own hands, a person who violently seized either movable or immovable property, if rightful owner, forfeited the property to the person dispossessed; if not rightful owner, was condemned, besides restitution of possession, to forfeit the value of the property, Cod. 8, 4, 7. This constitution increased the civil penalty recoverable for violent dispossession of land by the interdict unde vi, 4 §§ 154, 155. The interdict unde vi could not originally be maintained for violent, but unarmed, dispossession if the person evicted had himself acquired possession from the evictor by an origin, violent, clandestine, or permissive, unless the evictor had come armed with weapons of offence: and for either armed or unarmed dispossession the liability, as far as the property in question was concerned, was only restitution of possession. By the constitution of the three emperors the civil penalty of all violent disseisin was loss not only of possession but of ownership; and subsequently to this constitution, the interdict unde vi ceased to make a distinction between armed and unarmed dispossession.

[141592] This constitution may be regarded as the final blow struck by the Roman legislator at the archaic form of remedial procedure—private violence or self-redress. In archaic society, if society it could be called, before the establishment of central authority, public tribunals, and police or executive functionaries, such was the only possible means of redress; and such redress was recognized and permitted by primeval law, if the sentiments of the tribe at such a period can be called by the name of law.

[142097] Among the German races the disorder implied by the toleration of Feud or private war was gradually mitigated by the introduction of certain Truces, or temporary or local Peaces: the Truce of the King, prohibiting private war within the precincts of the royal residence: the Truce of the Church, giving to the fugitive wrongdoer an asylum in the sanctuary: the Truce of the Assembly, excluding the prosecution of feuds from the place where the Hundred was assembled: and the Truce of the Town, Village, or House, protecting the offender from homicidal attack within these limits.

[142677] At some period, too, society interposed and offered to act as arbitrator, and to procure for the aggrieved party satisfaction of the wrong he had endured. Accordingly all injuries were rated at a certain tariff, and a person who had suffered aggression had the option whether he should avenge himself or, in commutation of his right of Feud, accept the fine fixed by this tariff, and awarded by a tribunal of his countrymen. This mediation of the community, which the plaintiff could accept or decline at his discretion, was the origin of actiones poenales, the poena being the inducement offered to the plaintiff to make him adopt the more peaceful course. In Saxon law the alternative offered to the aggressor was expressed by the maxim Biege spere of side other bere: ‘Buy the spear off the side or bear it’: i. e. make atonement or be liable to Feud. (Kemble.)

[143543] Finally the Peace of the King, proclaimed at each coronation, became universal: the state undertook the decision and composition of all quarrels; and private war at all times and in all places was interdicted and superseded by recourse to the public judicature.

[143806] § 210. Damni iniuriae actio constituitur per legem Aquiliam, cuius primo capite cautum est, 〈ut〉 si quis hominem alienum alienamue quadrupedem quae pecudum numero sit iniuria occiderit, quanti ea res in eo anno plurimi fuerit, tantum domino dare damnetur.

[144063] Inst. 4, 3, pr.

[144080] § 211. Iniuria autem occidere intellegitur, cuius dolo aut culpa id acciderit; nec ulla alia lege damnum, quod sine iniuria datur, reprehenditur; itaque inpunitus est, qui sine culpa et dolo malo casu quodam damnum committit.

[144307] Inst. 4, 3, 3.

[144323] § 212. Nec solum corpus in actione huius legis aestimatur; sed sane si seruo occiso plus dominus capiat damni quam pretium serui sit, id quoque aestimatur, ueluti si seruus meus ab aliquo heres institutus, antequam iussu meo hereditatem cerneret, occisus fuerit; non enim tantum ipsius pretium aestimatur, sed et hereditatis amissae quantitas. item si ex gemellis uel ex comoedis uel ex symphoniacis unus occisus fuerit, non solum occisi fit aestimatio, sed eo amplius 〈id〉 quoque conputatur, quod ceteri qui supersunt depretiati sunt. idem iuris est etiam si ex pari mularum unam uel etiam ex quadrigis equorum unum occiderit.

[144952] Inst. 4, 3, 10.

[144969] § 213. Cuius autem seruus occisus est, is liberum arbitrium habet uel capitali crimine reum facere eum qui occiderit, uel hac lege damnum persequi.

[145118] Inst. 4, 3, 11.

[145135] § 214. Quod autem adiectum est in hac lege qvanti in eo anno plvrimi ea res fverit, illud efficit, si clodum puta aut luscum seruum occiderit, qui in eo anno integer 〈fuerit, ut non quanti fuerit, cum occideretur, sed quanti in eo anno plurimi〉 fuerit, aestimatio fiat; quo fit, ut quis plus interdum consequatur quam ei damnum datum est.

[145475] Inst. 4, 3, 9.

[145491] § 215. Capite secundo 〈aduersus〉 adstipulatorem, qui pecuniam in fraudem stipulatoris acceptam fecerit, quanti ea res est, tanti actio constituitur.

[145641] Inst. 4, 3, 12.

[145658] § 216. Qua et ipsa parte legis damni nomine actionem introduci manifestum est. sed id caueri non fuit necessarium, cum actio mandati ad eam rem sufficeret; nisi quod ea lege aduersus infitiantem in duplum agitur.

[145872] § 217. Capite tertio de omni cetero damno cauetur. itaque si quis seruum uel eam quadrupedem quae pecudum 〈numero est uulnerauerit, siue eam quadrupedem quae pecudum〉 numero non est, ueluti canem, aut feram bestiam, ueluti ursum leonem, uulnerauerit uel occiderit, hoc capite actio constituitur. in ceteris quoque animalibus, item in omnibus rebus quae anima carent damnum iniuria datum hac parte uindicatur. si quid enim ustum aut ruptum aut fractum 〈fuerit〉, actio hoc capite constituitur, quamquam potuerit sola rupti appellatio in omnes istas causas sufficere; ruptum 〈enim intellegitur quod quoquo modo corruptum〉 est. unde non solum usta [aut rupta] aut fracta, sed etiam scissa et conlisa et effusa et quoquo modo uitiata aut perempta atque deteriora facta hoc uerbo continentur.

[146660] Inst. 4, 3, 13.

[146677] § 218. Hoc tamen capite non quanti in eo anno, sed quanti in diebus xxx proximis ea res fuerit, damnatur is qui damnum dederit. ac ne plvrimi quidem uerbum adicitur. et ideo quidam putauerunt liberum esse iudici uel ad id tempus ex diebus xxx aestimationem redigere, quo plurimi res fuerit, uel ad id quo minoris fuerit. sed Sabino placuit proinde habendum, ac si etiam hac parte plvrimi uerbum adiectum esset; nam legis latorem contentum fuisse, 〈quod prima parte eo uerbo usus esset.

[147164] Inst. 4, 3, 14.

[147181] § 219. Ceterum〉 placuit ita demum ex ista lege actionem esse, si quis corpore suo damnum dederit; ideoque alio modo damno dato utiles actiones dantur, ueluti si quis alienum hominem aut pecudem incluserit et fame necauerit, aut iumentum tam uehementer egerit, ut rumperetur; item si quis alieno seruo persuaserit, ut in arborem ascenderet uel in puteum descenderet, et is ascendendo aut descendendo ceciderit 〈et〉 aut mortuus fuerit aut aliqua parte corporis laesus sit; sed si quis alienum seruum de ponte aut ripa in flumen proiecerit et is suffocatus fuerit, corpore suo damnum dedisse eo quod proiecerit non difficiliter intellegi potest.

[147825] Inst. 4, 3, 16.

[147842] Damage unlawfully caused is actionable under the lex Aquilia, whose first chapter provides, that if a slave of another man, or a quadruped of his cattle, be unlawfully slain, whatever within a year was the highest value thereof, that amount the offender shall pay to the owner.

[148121] § 211. Unlawful slaying means slaying by intention or negligence; loss occasioned by no fault of the person committing it being punished by no law; hence a person who damages another accidentally and not wilfully or negligently does so with impunity.

[148373] It is not only the body of the slave or animal slain that is appraised in the action under this statute, but if the killing of a slave occasion to the owner the loss of anything in addition to his price, this loss is also appraised; for instance, if my slave has been instituted somebody’s heir, and before by my order he has signified his acceptance, he is slain, valuation is made not only of his body but also of the inheritance I have missed; or if one of two twins, or one of a company of players, or one of a band of musicians is slain, an estimate is made not only of his value but also of the extent to which the remainder are depreciated. The same holds if one of a pair of mules, or one of a team of four chariot horses is killed.

[149115] The owner whose slave is killed has the option of prosecuting the homicide for a capital crime or of suing him under this statute for damages.

[149259] § 214. From the words of this statute, ‘Whatever within a year was the highest value thereof,’ it follows that if the slave killed was lame or blind of one eye, but had been sound within a year, the owner will recover not simply his value at the time of his death but his highest value within a year, the result being that a plaintiff will in some cases recover more than the amount of the loss he has sustained.

[149673] By the second chapter an adstipulator who defrauds a principal stipulator by releasing the promissor can be sued for the amount of the loss occasioned.

[149826] § 216. It is evident that in this part of the statute also an action was instituted on account of damage to property, though here the provision was not absolutely necessary, because the action of Mandate would give a sufficient remedy, except for this that the lex Aquilia, when the action is defended, gives double damages.

[150152] The third chapter makes provision for all other damage. Therefore if a slave, or a quadruped included under the name of cattle, is wounded, or if a quadruped not included under the name of cattle, as a dog, or a wild beast, for instance, or a bear or lion, is wounded or is killed, in this chapter an action is provided: so too if other animals or any things inanimate are unlawfully damaged, this part of the statute supplies a remedy, since in this chapter an action is expressly established in case of anything burnt, broken in pieces, fractured: although the single word ‘broken’ (ruptum) will suffice to cover all these offences, for the word ‘broken’ (ruptum) is interpreted to mean injured in any way (corruptum quoquo modo); hence not only burning, breaking, crushing, but any cutting, bruising, spilling, vitiating in any way, destroying, or deteriorating, is hereby comprehended.

[151043] § 218. We should notice that in this chapter it is not the value which the thing had within a year, but which it had within the last thirty days, that is chargeable on the person causing the damage, though the statute itself does not expressly mention the term highest value (plurimi). Hence some of the other school have held that it was left to the discretion of the judex whether the damages should be measured by the highest value or by any lower value which the thing may have had within the last thirty days: but Sabinus held that the law must be interpreted as if it contained the word ‘highest’ (plurimi), the legislator having thought it sufficient to use this word in the first chapter.

[151741] It has been held that an action under this statute only lies when the body of the offender is the instrument of mischief; and therefore for any other mode of occasioning loss praetorian actions (actiones utiles) must be brought: for instance, if a slave or quadruped is shut up and starved to death, or a horse is foundered by hard driving, or a slave is persuaded to climb a tree or descend a well, and in climbing or descending falls and is killed or hurt. But if a slave is pushed off a bridge or bank into a river and there drowned, the body of the person by pushing him may fairly be held to have caused his death.

[152362] The lex Aquilia was a plebiscite carried by a tribune called Aquilius, according to Theophilus, at one of the secessions of the plebs, probably at the secession to the Janiculum, b. c. 287, on which same occasion the lex Hortensia was carried, making the plebiscites binding on the patricians. (See Grueber, Lex Aquilia, p. 183.)

[152693] The words of the first clause are preserved in the Digest: Qui servum servamve alienum alienamve quadrupedem vel pecudem injuria occiderit, quanti id in eo anno plurimi fuit, tantum aes dare domino damnas esto, Gaius in Dig. 9, 2, 2, pr. ‘If a slave, male or female, of another person, or a quadruped of his cattle is unlawfully slain, whatever was the highest value it bore in the previous year, such sum the slayer shall be condemned to pay to the owner.’ Cattle are animals that feed in flocks or herds, and include horses, mules, asses, oxen, sheep, goats, and swine, Dig. l. c. 2.

[153280] The words Quanti ea res est, erit, or fuit occur in the condemnatio or last part of a formula when a defendant is bound to indemnify a plaintiff, that is, to pay him a certain value. These words have two meanings: they mean either (1) the value of a thing to the world in general, i. e. its selling value or market value, called verum rei pretium, or vera rei aestimatio; or (2) its value to this particular plaintiff, id quod interest actoris, or utilitas actoris; a value which might be either less or greater than the market value. Early law does not include more than the market value of the thing, but in course of time a wider view is taken of the plaintiff’s interest (Grueber. Lex Aquilia, p. 265).

[153988] Where a claim is founded on some kinds of contract, say a contract of insurance against some kind of loss, the market value of the thing lost is generally intended, though this of course depends on the nature and terms of such contract; in this case the loss of the plaintiff does not include the damages he has indirectly experienced (damnum indirectum) nor the gain he has failed to realize (lucrum cessans). When a claim of indemnification is founded on delict or on breach of a contract, if this is not contrary to the intention of the parties, the plaintiff’s interest is the measure of the indemnity to be paid, and includes not only the immediate damage that he has suffered, but also the mediate, when it was certain and capable of being foreseen; and not only the positive loss which he has suffered but also the gain which he has been hindered from realizing. If a creditor has been kept out of a sum of money, he will at least be entitled to the current rate of interest: but this is not the limit of his claim, if he can prove that the current rate of interest is insufficient to cover the specific disadvantage he has suffered from the Mora of his debtor.

[155158] The plaintiff’s interest is the measure of the damages he recovers by the Interdicts Uti possidetis, Utrubi, and Unde vi; as it is in all actions founded on delinquency. The actio vi bonorum raptorum, however, is one of the exceptions to the rule. Here, in consequence, probably, of the peculiar wording of the edict, the measure of damages, the simplum or unit to be quadrupled, is not the plaintiff’s interest but the market value, Dig. 47, 8, 2, 13, Savigny, System, Appendix 12.

[155642] Instances of indirect damages due to the act or omission of a defendant, are: the depreciation of the remaining horses of a team when one has been killed: the penal sum which a plaintiff is liable to pay from inability to fulfil another engagement in consequence of the default of the defendant: the sale of goods mortgaged by the plaintiff as security for another engagement which he cannot fulfil in consequence of the default of the defendant: the downfall of a house in consequence of the rottenness of the timber supplied by the defendant: the infection and extermination of a whole herd of cattle in consequence of a diseased beast being sold by the defendant.

[156310] Although in respect of computation of damages claims of indemnity founded on breach of contract, whether in consequence of dolus or culpa, may stand on the same footing as claims founded on delict; yet an important distinction was introduced by Justinian, who enacted that in the former case the damages recoverable by this computation of lucrum cessans and damnum indirectum should not exceed the double of the immediate value, hoc quod interest dupli quantitatem minime excedere, Cod. 7, 47; but left claims founded on delict without any similar limitation. In claims founded on breach of contract we may distinguish two obligations: the primary obligation as defined by the promise of the contractor, the secondary or sanctioning obligation produced by the non-fulfilment of the promise. According to the nature of the contract, this non-fulfilment will be either the non-performance of some service; or the non-delivery of some goods, movable or immovable; or non-delivery at the convenanted time or covenanted place; or negligent custody and consequent deterioration or destruction of some article deposited by the plaintiff; or eviction of the plaintiff from some property transferred to him by the defendant; or any other omission or non-feasance The secondary obligation of a defendant may be divided into two portions, one corresponding to the immediate value to the plaintiff of the fulfilment of the primary obligation, the other corresponding to his mediate or indirect losses occasioned by its non-fulfilment. The first portion may be regarded as principal, the second as accessory. Similarly the active obligation or claim of the plaintiff may be divided into two parts, principal and accessory. By the enactment of Justinian, in an action founded on contract, the accessory claim can never exceed the principal, or, in other words, the total claim of the plaintiff can never exceed in amount twice the value of his principal claim. In obligations arising from delict there is no primary obligation or principal claim capable of furnishing a corresponding unit of measurement. The primary obligation of the defendant is here a necessity of abstention which is not called by the Romans obligatio: and the primary right of the plaintiff is a real right, a right against all the world to freedom from molestation; which real right is not so definite or capable of exact valuation or appreciation as a personal claim. Accordingly the sanctioning right of the plaintiff in this case is left by Justinian without limitation or maximum; and the judex is directed to assess the amount of whatever damage the plaintiff has actually incurred.

[158958] The enactment of Justinian was probably suggested by the stipulatio duplae annexed to contracts of sale, whereby in case of eviction the purchaser was entitled to recover from the vendor twice the purchase-money. Vangerow, § 571.

[159189] The owner of a murdered slave both had a civil remedy by the lex Aquilia, and could prosecute criminally under the lex Cornelia de sicariis, passed in the dictatorship of Sylla, b. c. 82.

[159378] The lex Aquilia, like many other Roman laws, combined heterogeneous dispositions. The first and third chapters contain remedies for destruction of property, or jus in rem, that is, the injury of what is called in English law a chose in possession; the second chapter contains a remedy for the destruction of an obligation, or jus in personam, that is, the injury of what is called in English law a chose in action. The power of one promisee, the adstipulator, to extinguish by acceptilation the right of the other promisee, the principal stipulator, was a consequence of their Correality, § 110, comm. The remedy of the stipulator against the adstipulator, mentioned in the text, by actio mandati would not have been in existence at the time when the lex Aquilia was enacted.

[160155] The terms of the third chapter are preserved in the Digest: Ceterarum rerum, praeter hominem et pecudem occisos, si quis alteri damnum faxit, quod usserit, fregerit, ruperit injuria, quanti ea res erit in diebus triginta proximis, tantum aes domino dare damnas esto, Ulpian in Dig. 9, 2, 27 § 5. ‘For property, other than slave or cattle slain, damaged by burning, breaking, crushing, unlawfully, the value it bore in the thirty days preceding the offender shall be condemned to pay to the owner.’ The general meaning which the jurists gave to the word ‘ruptum’ is an early example of extensive interpretation.

[160767] An action founded on the text of a law was called actio directa, an action not founded on the very text of the law, but granted by the praetor in the exercise of his judicial authority in circumstances which, though different, are similar to those which founded the direct action, was called actio utilis. The direct Aquilian action could only be brought by the owner (dominus) and when damage was immediately caused by a body to a body. If the damage was not caused by a body, or not by immediate contact, only the actio utilis could be brought. An actio utilis was brought in the following cases:

[161367] (1) When the Aquilian remedy was given to a person who was not owner but who had a jus in re aliena or was bonae fidei possessor.

[161498] (2) If the damage was not caused by a body, that is, not by immediate physical contact (damnum not corpore but only corpori datum).

[161631] (3) In a case of damage where neither the agent nor the patient was a body, i. e. physically affected (damnum neither corpore nor corpori datum).

[161778] (4) In a case of injury to a freeman.

[161817] There were three varieties of actio utilis:

[161862] (1) actio ficticia, 4 §§ 34-38;

[161895] (2) actions in which there was a variation in the persons named in the condemnatio from those previously named in the intentio, as in formula Rutiliana, 4 § 35;

[162057] (3) actio in factum concepta, 4 §§ 45-47.

[162100] It is probable that the utilis actio legis Aquiliae was generally in the form of actio in factum concepta, though the actio ficticia in jus concepta was sometimes used. Cf. 4 § 37.

[162282] The statement in the corresponding passage of the Institutes (4, 3, 16) that the actio in factum is to be distinguished from the actio utilis legis Aquiliae is probably erroneous. There is no trace of such a distinction in Gaius, and in the Digest the term actio in factum is used in all cases of extension of the statute. It is to be remembered that at the time of the compilation of the Institutes the formulary procedure, to which the terms actio utilis and actio in factum refer, had long ceased to be the practice. (Grueber, Lex Aquilia, pp. 199-208.)

[162840] The mode of growth of Roman law and the relation between directa Aquilia and utilis Aquilia may be illustrated by similar phenomena in English law, and the relation between the two forms of action called Trespass and Trespass on the Case. Trespass, which lies for injury to real or personal property or to the person, accompanied with violence, has a more extensive application than directa Aquilia, but viewed only as redressing injuries to personal property, is nearly coextensive in its range. The original scheme of actions, devised in comparatively barbarous times, contained no remedy for injuries where there is no act done but only a culpable omission, or where the act is not immediately injurious, but only by consequence or collaterally, or where the idea of force is inapplicable because the subject-matter is not corporeal or tangible, although the injury may be by act direct and immediate in its operation. To supply such deficiencies the statute of Westminster, 13 Edward I, had directed the clerks in chancery to frame new writs whenever the old scheme of writs contained no remedy for a wrong resembling in its features other wrongs for which a remedy was provided. Accordingly, a new writ of Trespass on the Case was framed upon the analogy of the old form of Trespass (confer, ad exemplum institoriae, § 162, comm.), applying to cases where the injury is not immediate, or the subject affected is not corporeal, or the agency is not bodily force. What Edward I directed to be done by the clerks in chancery, and what was done by the introduction of the action of Trespass on the Case, was exactly analogous to what the praetors did when, in virtue of their magisterial authority, they supplemented the civil law by the introduction of actiones ficticiae and actiones in factum. In respect of torts to personal property, the latter have nearly the same sphere as Trespass on the Case. The innovations of the praetor, however, were not confined to the region of torts to personal property, but pervaded every sphere and constituted a mass of supplementary law (jus praetorium), having to the remainder of the law (jus civile) somewhat similar relations and proportions to those which equity has to common law in English jurisprudence.

[165094] All attempts to reconstruct the formula in an action for damages under the lex Aquilia are to be regarded as highly conjectural. Lenel, Das Edictum Perpetuum, p. 158, suggests the following as a possible formula, when the action was brought adversus infitiantem in duplum, see § 216, 4 § 9. Si paret Numerium Negidium illum servum injuria occidisse, quam ob rem, quanti is servus in eo anno plurimi fuit, tantam pecuniam Numerium Negidium Aulo Agerio dare oportet, tantae pecuniae duplum, judex, Numerium Negidium Aulo Agerio condemna: si non paret, absolve. The actio confessoria may, according to Lenel, have contained the following demonstratio—quod ille servus occisus est, quem Numerius Negidius injuria se occidisse fassus est.

[165829] § 220. Iniuria autem committitur non solum cum quis pugno puta aut fuste percussus uel etiam uerberatus erit, sed etiam si cui conuicium factum fuerit, siue quis bona alicuius quasi debitoris sciens eum nihil sibi debere proscripserit, siue quis ad infamiam alicuius libellum aut carmen scripserit, siue quis matrem familias aut praetextatum adsectatus fuerit, et denique aliis pluribus modis.

[166224] Inst. 4, 4, 1.

[166240] § 221. Pati autem iniuriam uidemur non solum per nosmet ipsos, sed etiam per liberos nostros quos in potestate habemus; item per uxores nostras, quamuis in manu nostra 〈non〉 sint. itaque si filiae meae quae Titio nupta est iniuriam feceris, non solum filiae nomine tecum agi iniuriarum potest, uerum etiam meo quoque et Titii nomine.

[166575] Inst. 4, 4, 2.

[166591] § 222. Seruo autem ipsi quidem nulla iniuria intellegitur fieri, sed domino per eum fieri uidetur; non tamen isdem modis, quibus etiam per liberos nostros uel uxores iniuriam pati uidemur, sed ita cum quid atrocius commissum fuerit, quod aperte in contumeliam domini fieri uidetur, ueluti si quis alienum seruum uerberauerit; et in hunc casum formula proponitur. at si quis seruo conuicium fecerit uel pugno eum percusserit, non proponitur ulla formula nec temere petenti datur.

[167071] Inst. 4, 4, 3.

[167087] § 223. Poena autem iniuriarum ex lege xii tabularum propter membrum quidem ruptum talio erat; propter os uero fractum aut conlisum trecentorum assium poena erat, si libero os fractum erat; at si seruo, cl; propter ceteras uero iniurias xxv assium poena erat constituta. et uidebantur illis temporibus in magna paupertate satis idoneae istae pecuniariae poenae.

[167449] Inst. 4, 4, 7.

[167465] § 224. Sed nunc alio iure utimur. permittitur enim nobis a praetore ipsis iniuriam aestimare, et iudex uel tanti condemnat quanti nos aestimauerimus, uel minoris, prout ei uisum fuerit. sed cum atrocem iniuriam praetor aestimare soleat, si simul constituerit, quantae pecuniae eo nomine fieri debeat uadimonium, hac ipsa quantitate taxamus formulam, et iudex quamuis possit uel minoris damnare, plerumque tamen propter ipsius praetoris auctoritatem non audet minuere condemnationem.

[167949] Inst. l. c.

[167962] § 225. Atrox autem iniuria aestimatur uel ex facto, ueluti si quis ab aliquo uulneratus aut uerberatus fustibusue caesus fuerit; uel ex loco, ueluti si cui in theatro aut in foro iniuria facta sit; uel ex persona, ueluti si magistratus iniuriam passus fuerit, uel senatori ab humili persona facta sit iniuria.

[168273] Inst. 4, 4, 9.

[168289] Outrage is committed not only by striking with the fist or a stick or a whip, but by scandalous vociferation, or, though knowing that nothing is due to him, seizing and advertising for sale under an order of the praetor the goods of a person as if he were an insolvent or an absconding debtor, or by writing defamatory prose or verse, or by constantly following a matron or youth wearing the praetexta, and by many other modes.

[168718] Outrage may be suffered not only in one’s own person, but also in the person of a child in our power, or of a wife though not in our hand. So that if you insult my daughter who is married to Titius, but has not passed out of my power into his hand, you are suable for outrage, not only in her name, but also in my name, and in the name of her husband.

[169071] § 222. A slave cannot be outraged himself, but his master may be outraged in his person, not however by all the acts whereby he might be outraged in the person of a child or wife, but only by atrocious assaults, clearly intended to dishonour the master, for instance, by flogging the slave; and for this affront a formula is provided in the praetor’s album: but for verbal abuse of a slave, or striking him with the fist, no formula is provided, nor would an action be readily granted.

[169558] § 223. The penalty of outrage in the Twelve Tables for a limb broken was retaliation (talio): for a bone broken or bruised three hundred asses, if the person injured was a freeman; one hundred and fifty, if he was a slave; for other injuries twenty-five asses: and in those days of excessive poverty such sums seemed an adequate reparation.

[169900] § 224. The rule now in use is different: the plaintiff is permitted by the praetor to assess his own damages for the outrage, and the judex may either condemn the defendant in the whole of this sum, or in a lesser sum at his discretion Atrocious outrage, however, is generally for the praetor to estimate; and when he has once fixed the sum in which the defendant must give security to appear at the trial, the limit is fixed at this sum in the taxatio clause of the formula; and the judex, though he has the power of condemning the plaintiff in less, generally, out of deference to the praetor, will not venture to reduce the condemnation.

[170542] § 225. Outrages are atrocious either by the act, as when a man is wounded, horse-whipped, or beaten with a stick; or from the place, as when an affront is offered in the theatre or the forum; or from the persons, as when a magistrate or a senator is insulted by one of inferior rank.

[170827] Injuria in this chapter denotes not any wrongful or unlawful act, but contumelious wrong, wrong tending to degradation, a violation of the right to respect, honour, reputation; such as libel, malicious prosecution, assault and battery, and the like.

[171078] If the husband were a filiusfamilias, the offender would be liable to a fourth action, on the part of the father of the husband. In each of these actions the damages might be different, being measured by the varying dignity of the party dishonoured by the outrage, § 225.

[171351] Outrage, like theft and robbery, and unlike damage under the lex Aquilia, requires dolus malus, or unlawful intent. In outrage, as in other delicts, the plaintiff had his option of proceeding civilly or criminally, Inst. 4, 4, 10.

[171583] Lenel, § 190, suggests the following as the formula of the actio injuriarum. Quod dolo malo Numerii Negidii Aulo Agerio pugno malo percussa est, qua de re agitur, quantam pecuniam vobis bonum aequum videbitur ob eam rem Numerium Negidium Aulo Agerio condemnari, dumtaxat HS . . . . , tantam pecuniam, si non plus quam annus est, cum de ea re experiundi potestas fuit, recuperatores, Numerium Negidium Aulo Agerio condemnato: si non paret, absolvito.

[172034] In the Roman law which was in force as the Common Law of German jurisprudence, till recently superseded by the German Civil Code, simply penal suits appear to have been obsolete, with the exception of Injuriarum (see on this subject Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, or German Civil Code, § 823, &c.); and here the modern plaintiff has his election between pecuniary damages and an apology or revocation of the injurious utterance. An inquiry into the reason why the actio injuriarum alone has survived will illustrate the nature of simply penal suits. Their principal object, as already suggested, was to induce the aggrieved party to abstain from the remedy offered him in archaic society, self-redress or private revenge. In the case of other wrongs such inducement is no longer necessary. But in the case of Affront or Dishonour the effect of the modern code of honour has led the moderns even more than the ancients to prefer the archaic institution of Feud or private war, as embodied in the Duel, to an unromantic appeal to the public tribunals. Here, then, the inducement to abstain from self-help, which elsewhere is not needed, is still required.

[173183] Theft and Rapine are removed in the present day from the Penal branch of the Private code to the Criminal code; that is, are not punished at the discretion of a private plaintiff, but by the action of a public prosecutor. Savigny, Law of Obligation, § 84.

[173440] Gaius seems to have been misled by a double meaning of Injuria when he connects the actio Injuriarum with the redress given by the Twelve Tables for grievous bodily harm, § 223. There seems to be no necessary connexion between bodily harm and dishonour, although both may have been denoted in Latin by the word Injuria.

[173761] In actions on Delict more especially, Real actions differing in this respect from the liability of a defendant necessarily implies that he is convicted either of Dolus or of Culpa, unlawful intention or unlawful negligence, § 211.

[173993] The opposite of Negligence is Diligence, vigilance, attention, which, like Negligence, admits of an infinite variety of gradations.

[174126] Actions under the lex Aquilia, instituted to recover for unlawful damage, are subject to this rule that, when Culpa, that is absence of ordinary care, is once established, the amount of the defendant’s liability does not depend on its degree.

[174370] In actions founded on Dispositions, that is on Contract and quasicontract, the liability of the defendant may depend on the degree of his negligence. In most relations a man is bound to make good losses occasioned by slight negligence (culpa levis in abstracto), that is, is liable for lack of ordinary care or care taken by an average paterfamilias; in others he is judged by a somewhat lower standard, being only bound to take the same care of the property of another as he is accustomed to take of his own (culpa levis in concreto): in others again he is only made answerable for the consequences of gross negligence, culpa lata.

[175004] The terms, Gross and Slight, like other quantitative terms, have no positive signification until we fix upon some unit of measurement or standard of comparison to which any given instance may be referred and by which it may be measured. Two standards are frequently employed by the Roman jurists: the vigilant care (exacta diligentia) of a good man of business (diligens paterfamilias, homo frugi) and the care which a given individual habitually bestows on his own interests (suus modus, diligentia quam suis rebus adhibere solet). Slight negligence is the absence of the diligence of the careful man of business; gross negligence falls considerably below this standard. Diligence and negligence, when referred to the standard of the careful man of business, are sometimes called abstract or absolute; when referred to the habitual conduct of the individual in the management of his own affairs, concrete or relative.

[175924] The degree of diligence required of a man in any relation and the standard by which it is judged depends generally on the question whether he is benefited or not benefited by the relation. He who derives no benefit from it, e. g. the depositary and lender (commodator, e. g. where the borrower is thrown from a horse lent to him), is only answerable for dolus and culpa lata. On the other hand, the depositor (e. g. if the depositary is injured by an explosive deposited with him, without notice of its character) and the commodatarius are bound to show exacta diligentia. It would seem that Mandate (mandatum) forms an exception to this rule, for businesslike care (exacta diligentia) is required of the Mandatary (mandatarius), and the same rule applies to the negotiorum gestor; yet such agents, like the depositary, are strictly speaking unremunerated, though in later Roman law, as we have seen, the mandatary could often enforce payment of his honorarium by recourse to the cognitio extraordinaria of the praetor. But the real ground for imposing this liability no doubt is to be found in the confidential relation in which the mandatary stood to the mandator. Similarly, according to English law, strict diligence is required of Trustees, although they are unremunerated. The Roman Tutor and Curator, who were called on to fulfil a public function, were only bound to take the same care of their ward’s property as of their own.

[177361] He then who derives advantage from a contract or disposition is required to show businesslike care, and is responsible for abstract or absolute negligence (culpa levis in abstracto); nor does it matter whether he is exclusively advantaged by the relation, like the depositor and the gratuitous borrower for use (commodatarius); or whether both parties to the disposition derive a benefit from it, e. g. venditor, emptor, locator, conductor, mortgagor, mortgagee.

[177825] Exceptions to this rule, however, are to found in the cases of the partner (socius), the tenant in common (communio), the husband in respect of dotal property, the co-heir, the co-legatee. In these relations both parties have an advantage, and yet their diligence is only estimated by the relative standard: they have to show as much care as they show in their own affairs; not more, apparently, than the tutor or curator; not the absolute care of diligens paterfamilias.

[178298] The old trichotomist division of culpa into lata, levis, and levissima, is now generally abandoned, levissima disappearing, the opposition being between culpa levis, whether in abstracto or in concreto, and gross negligence, culpa lata, which is hardly distinguishable from dolus, or intentional wrong.

[178602] Under the head of Obligatio ex delicto should be placed, according to Savigny, the doctrine of possession (Interdict-possession), or, rather, of Dispossession, with its remedies, the Interdicts Utrubi, Uti possidetis, and Unde vi. This would agree with the Roman arrangement: at least the Roman jurists, instead of treating possession by the side of ownership, possession being the actual control of a thing as owner, while ownership is the legal right to such control, were content with regarding Dispossession as a ground of liability, imposing a secondary positive obligation on the individual dispossessor, 4 § 140, comm.

[179229] But the true place of Possession seems indicated by Vangerow, who distinguishes between the Interdicta Retinendae and Recuperandae possessionis. The Interdictum Recuperandae possessionis, i. e. Interdict Unde vi, is really based on something analogous to a delict, and might perhaps have been ascribed to delictal law: whereas Possession, as contemplated by the Interdicta Retinendae possessionis, i. e. the Interdicts Uti possidetis and Utrubi, is protected as if it were a primary right demanding universal recognition (jus in rem) that has its place in connexion with the law regulating Dominium: and the interdicts allotted for its protection, though perhaps nominally based on acts of a delictal character, are really co-ordinate not with delictal actions, but with Real actions or Vindicatio. Gaius only deals with Possession and possessory Interdicts as belonging to the code of Procedure, without indicating their position in the code of Substantive law.