WORK: Institutes of Roman Law  (slug: gaius-institutes-of-roman-law-09683f)

CHAPTER: 120-commentarivs-qvartvs



[110203] The Condemnatio is that part of the formula which empowers the judex to condemn or absolve the defendant, thus: ‘Do thou, judex, condemn Numerius Negidius to pay to Aulus Agerius ten thousand sesterces; if it be not proved, declare him to be absolved;’ or thus: ‘Do thou, judex, condemn Numerius Negidius to pay to Aulus Agerius a sum not exceeding ten thousand sesterces; if the case be not proved, declare him to be absolved;’ or thus: ‘Do thou, judex, condemn Numerius Negidius to pay to Aulus Agerius,’ et cetera, without inserting any maximum limit as, e. g., of not more than ten thousand sesterces.

[110810] These parts are not concurrent, but where some are present others are absent. Sometimes the Intentio is found alone, as in the prejudicial formula to decide whether a man is a freedman, or to ascertain the amount of a dower, or to settle other preliminary inquiries. But the Demonstratio, Adjudicatio. and Condemnatio are never found alone, for the Demonstratio is inoperative without an Intentio and Condemnatio, and the Condemnatio and Adjudicatio are inoperative without a Demonstratio or an Intentio.

[111316] Besides the four parts mentioned by Gaius the formula always contained a nomination of a judex, and sometimes an exceptio, praescriptio, or arbitrium, accessory parts which will be presently explained.

[111519] The demonstratio seems not to have occurred in real actions nor in personal actions in factum, but in personal actions in jus, whether founded on contract or on delict, where the intentio was incerta res—quidquid paret dare facere oportere—but not where the intentio was certa, as in the condictio certi. It was introduced in order to form a basis for aestimatio, whenever an intentio incerta left the quantum of the condemnatio to be determined by the judex. In actio in rem Publiciana, § 36, and Condictio certi, § 55, the causa is introduced, not in Demonstratio, but as a part of the Intentio.

[112118] If the contract had a technical name (e. g. depositum, venditio) the demonstratio contained the name (deposuit, vendidit); if the contract was nameless, it was described in the praescriptio, which was a substitute for the demonstratio, by a circumlocution, and this kind of process was called agere or at a later time actio praescriptis verbis, 3 §§ 90, 91, comm. That a demonstratio was found in actions ex maleficio appears from Gaius, below, § 60, and from Paulus, as quoted in Collatio, 2, 6. Sicut formula posita est: Quod Aulo Agerio a Numerio Negidio pugno mala percussa est: Illud non cogitur dicere, dextra an sinistra, nec qua manu percussa sit. Item si dicat infamatum se esse, debet adjicere quemadmodum infamatus sit. Sic enim et formula concepta est: Quod Numerius Negidius sibilum inmisit Aulo Agcrio infamandi causa. ‘As the formula is worded: Whereas Aulus Agerius was struck on the cheek by the fist: the plaintiff is not compelled to declare whether he was struck on the right or left cheek, or whether with the right or left hand. And if he sue for defamation, he must allege the means, for so the formula is framed: Whereas Numerius Negidius hissed Aulus Agerius with the purpose of defamation.’

[113336] The absence of a demonstratio in the formula of condictio certi may be inferred from the example given by Gaius, § 86, and from the assertion of Cicero, pro Roscio Comoedo, 4, that it did not appear whether Fannius, who sued Roscius by condictio certi, founded his claim on mutui datio, expensilatio, or stipulatio. He could hardly have asserted this, if the title on which Fannius sued had been expressed in a demonstratio. On the other hand, we have a praescriptio corresponding to a demonstratio in the actio ex stipulatu for an uncertain amount, §§ 136, 137. It is obvious that if a man sues for an indeterminate sum of money he ought to give the defendant some further information of the cause of action; but if he sues for a determinate sum or a definite thing, the defendant can scarcely be ignorant of the cause of action on which the plaintiff relies.

[114198] The adjudicatio was only found in the three actions familiae erciscundae, communi dividundo, and finium regundorum. It was not a declaration of existing rights of property, but a partition of property by a judex between the litigants. Adjudicatione dominium nanciscimur . . . nam si judex uni ex heredibus aut sociis aut vicinis rem aliquam adjudicaverit, statim illi adquiritur sive mancipi sive nec mancipi sit, Ulpian, 19, 16. ‘Adjudication is a means of acquiring dominion, for the heir, partner, or neighbouring landowner, to whom a thing is adjudicated by the judex, forthwith acquires ownership therein, whether it is mancipable or not mancipable.’ In quibus tribus judiciis permittitur judici, rem alicui ex litigatoribus ex bono et aequo adjudicare, et, si unius pars praegravare videbitur, eum invicem certa pecunia alteri condemnare, Inst. 4, 6, 20. ‘In these three actions the judge has the power to assign a thing in accordance with fair-dealing and equity to one of the litigants, and, if this one obtains more than his share, to condemn him to make pecuniary compensation to the other.’

[115301] Taxatio [signified by the word ‘dumtaxat’] was a limitation to the condemnatio, §§ 51, 52; cf. 3 § 224. Besides the kind noticed here by Gaius, there were several others. If a paterfamilias was sued for the debt of a person in his power whom he had authorized to trade, the condemnation was limited to the amount of the peculium (quatenus in peculio sit); if the slave or son had traded without authority, it was limited to the amount of profit the father or master had thereby received (quatenus in rem ejus versum sit), §§ 72, 73; if the heir of a wrongdoer was sued, it was limited to the amount that he gained from the wrong or fraud by his succession (dumtaxat in id quod ad eum pervenit quanto locupletior factus est).

[116027] Again, in an analogous way, some debtors enjoyed a privilege that is called Beneficium competentiae: the privilege of not being condemned to pay the whole amount of their debt but only such an amount as will leave them the means of subsistence (condemnatio in tantum quantum facere potest. Cf. Inst. 4, 6, 37, 38). A soldier sued by any creditors; a debtor who has made cessio bonorum, sued by his original creditors in respect of after-acquired property, Inst. 4, 6, 40; cf. 3 §§ 77-81, comm.; a person sued on becoming a paterfamilias, but without inheriting much property, by a creditor in an obligation other than a delictal one, incurred when he was a filiusfamilias, Dig. 14, 5, 2-7; an ascendant sued by a descendant, Inst. 4, 6, 38; a husband sued by a wife or a wife by a husband before or after divorce for a debt incurred during marriage; a father-in-law sued by a son-in-law for a promised dower; a donor sued by a donee; a partner sued by a partner, Inst. 4, 6, 38; were only liable to be condemned in such a sum as would leave them the necessaries of life. The privilege was enforced by Exceptio, Dig, 44, 1, 22. It was forfeited by dolus and did not apply to liabilities arising from delict. If such a privileged debtor was condemned in the whole amount of his fortune he could claim to have a deduction for his means of subsistence made in the levy of execution.

[117407] The obligation of the privileged debtor, however, was not extinguished until his creditor had received full satisfaction, and any after-acquired property of the debtor was liable to the claims of the creditor. Accordingly, at the period when Res judicata operated either ipso jure or ope exceptionis to extinguish all rights of action arising from the same ground, 3 § 180, it was necessary, in order to preserve the creditor’s right of subsequent action for the residue, that the judge, as a condition of allowing the Beneficium competentiae, should compel the debtor to enter into a stipulation on which a subsequent suit could be grounded. At a later period, when Res judicata had lost its power of necessary Novation, it was no longer requisite to exact this cautio from the debtor before he was allowed to enjoy the Beneficium competentiae. Vangerow, § 174.

[118271] A praejudicium is mentioned, 3 § 123, to try whether a creditor had openly declared to the sureties the amount of the debt and number of sureties; on which facts would depend the several liabilities of each surety.

[118487] When Manus had fallen into desuetude, Dos, the contribution by or on behalf of the wife to the expenses of matrimony, became during the subsistence of the marriage tie the property of the husband, 2 § 63, but might have to be restored at its termination. The law, however, by a partial extinction of the dower, allowed him to retain whatever necessary outlay he had made for its maintenance: Impensae necessariae dotem ipso jure minuunt, Dig. 23, 2, 61. Cf. § 102, comm. If, now, we assume with Ihering that there was a period when every action was required to have an intentio certa, § 50, we can understand the necessity of a praejudicium to ascertain quanta dos sit. For when the divorced wife sued for restitution of her dower, having no means of knowing the amount of her husband’s outlay upon it or what portion of his outlay was necessary to its maintenance, she would certainly have incurred the penalties of plus petitio, § 53, if she was not allowed to ascertain by a preliminary issue the amount of the dower after deduction of the necessary outlay. See §§ 115, 137, comm.

[119572] So when by the lex Falcidia all legacies were proportionally abated until a fourth remained to the heir, it was necessary, in order to enable the legatee to avoid plus petitio, to allow him to ascertain the amount of the inheritance by a preliminary inquiry: Cum dicitur lex Falcidia locum habere, arbiter dari solet ad ineundam quantitatem bonorum, Dig. 35, 3, 1, 6. ‘When Falcidia is alleged to be applicable, an arbiter is appointed to ascertain the amount of the inheritance.’

[120054] Could a formula consist solely of a Demonstratio and a Condemnatio? Yes, if Savigny is right in supposing, § 312, that the Praetor sometimes granted a formula of the following shape:

[120238] Quod Aulus Agerius juravit, Numerium Negidium fundum Cornelianum ipsi dare oportere, quanti is fundus est, eum condemna. ‘Whereas the plaintiff has sworn that the defendant owes him such and such a thing, do thou, judex, condemn the defendant to pay him its value.’

[120505] To explain this we must notice a peculiar use of the oath (jusjurandum) in Roman litigation.

[120599] The Teutonic tribes, including our ancestors, allowed a defendant to purge himself by his own oath supported by the oath of a certain number of his neighbours; of which institution we have a vestige in the Wager of law, which was recently an incident of the action of Detinue, in which the defendant might clear himself by his own oath and that of eleven compurgators. With such principles of evidence it is not surprising that in the German forests the struggle between litigants was not, who should escape the burden of proof but, who should enjoy the privilege of proof. The Roman method was not so liable to abuse. Either litigant might tender (deferre, delatio) an oath to his adversary, i. e. offer to be concluded by his adversary’s oath, on an issue either of fact or of law (as to the existence of obligation, ownership, succession, &c.). The oath was then equivalent to a judgment in favour of the person by whom it was sworn, Inst. 4, 13, 4. If a litigant was prepared to take an oath his adversary might release him from actually swearing (dare, praestare jusjurandum); but this release (remittere, remissio) was equivalent to an actual oath. Instead of taking a tendered oath, the adversary might make a counter-tender (referre, relatio), i. e. submit the issue to the oath of the original tenderer. To decline either to swear or to make a counter-tender was equivalent to a confession of the party who declined, or to an oath of the party who tendered. From this necessity imposed on the party to whom it was tendered, the oath was called jusjurandum necessarium, Dig. 12, 2, 34, 6. If now on a tender or counter-tender by a defendant a plaintiff swore to the justice of his claim, the assessment of damages (rei aestimatio) would still remain as a question for the judex, and the praetor might, according to Savigny, give him a formula consisting, as above, of a Demonstratio and a Condemnatio. (But see Lenel, § 54.)

[122533] Similarly in case of a Confessio in jure, where anything but pecunia certa was admitted to be due, a litis aestimatio would be necessary, of which the formula as constructed by Savigny would be: Quod Numerius Negidius in jure confessus est, fundum illum Aulo Agerio se dare oportere, Quanti is fundus est, judex, Numerium Negidium Aulo Agerio condemna: si non paret absolve. Savigny, § 303; Keller, § 63.

[122939] § 45. Sed eas quidem formulas, in quibus de iure quaeritur, in ius conceptas uocamus, quales sunt, quibus intendimus nostrvm esse aliqvid ex ivre quiritivm aut nobis dari oportere aut pro fvre damnvm 〈decidi oportere; sunt et aliae, in〉 quibus iuris ciuilis intentio est.

[123212] § 46. Ceteras uero in factum conceptas uocamus, id est in quibus nulla talis intentio concepta est, 〈sed〉 initio formulae nominato eo quod factum est adiciuntur ea uerba, per quae iudici damnandi absoluendiue potestas datur: qualis est formula, qua utitur patronus contra libertum, qui eum contra edictum praetoris in ius uocauit; nam in ea ita est recvperatores svnto. si paret illvm patronvm ab illo liberto contra edictvm illivs praetoris in ivs vocatvm esse, recvperatores illvm libertvm illi patrono sestertivm x milia condemnate. si non paret, absolvite. ceterae quoque formulae, quae sub titulo de in ivs vocando propositae sunt, in factum conceptae sunt, uelut aduersus eum, qui in ius uocatus neque uenerit neque uindicem dederit; item contra eum, qui ui exemerit eum qui in ius uocatur; et denique innumerabiles eius modi aliae formulae in albo proponuntur.

[124081] § 47. Sed ex quibusdam causis praetor et in ius et in factum conceptas formulas proponit, ueluti depositi et commodati. illa enim formula, quae ita concepta est ivdex esto. qvod a. agerivs apvd n. negidivm mensam argenteam deposvit, qva de re agitvr, qvidqvid ob eam rem n. negidivm a. agerio dare facere oportet ex fide bona, eivs ivdex n. negidivm a. agerio condemnato, nisi restitvat. si non paret, absolvito, in ius concepta est. at illa formula, quae ita concepta est ivdex esto. si paret a. agerivm apvd n. negidivm mensam argenteam deposvisse eamqve dolo malo n. negidii a. agerio redditam non esse, qvanti ea res erit, tantam pecvniam ivdex n. negidivm a. agerio condemnato. si non paret, absolvito, in factum concepta est. similes etiam commodati formulae sunt.

[124853] § 48. Omnium autem formularum, quae condemnationem habent, ad pecuniariam aestimationem condemnatio concepta est. itaque et si corpus aliquod petamus, ueluti fundum hominem uestem 〈aurum〉 argentum, iudex non ipsam rem condemnat eum cum quo actum est, sicut olim fieri solebat, 〈sed〉 aestimata re pecuniam eum condemnat.

[125174] § 49 Condemnatio autem uel certae pecuniae in formula proponitur uel incertae.

[125254] § 50. Certae pecuniae uelut in ea formula, qua certam pecuniam petimus; nam illic ima parte formulae ita est ivdex n. negidivm a. agerio sestertivm x milia condemna. si non paret, absolve.

[125444] § 51. Incertae uero condemnatio pecuniae duplicem significationem habet. est enim una cum aliqua praefinitione, quae uulgo dicitur cum taxatione, uelut si incertum aliquid petamus; nam illic ima parte formulae ita est ivdex n. negidivm a. agerio dvmtaxat sestertivm x milia condemna. si non paret, absolve. uel incerta est et infinita, uelut si rem aliquam a possidente nostram esse petamus, id est si in rem agamus uel ad exhibendum; nam illic ita est qvanti ea res erit, tantam pecvniam, ivdex, n. negidivm a. agerio condemna. si non paret, absolvito. quid ergo est? iudex si condemnet, certam pecuniam condemnare debet, etsi certa pecunia in condemnatione posita non sit.

[126120] § 52. Debet autem iudex attendere, ut cum certae pecuniae condemnatio posita sit, neque maioris neque minoris summa posita condemnet, alioquin litem suam facit. item si taxatio posita sit, ne pluris condemnet quam taxatum sit; alias enim similiter litem suam facit. minoris autem damnare ei permissum est. at si etiam —|—| qui formulam accipit, intendere debet, nec amplius|— certa condemnatione constringi—|—|—|usque uelit.

[126546] Those formulae are said to be framed in jus, which raise a question of right; when, for instance, we claim in the intentio of the formula that the thing is ours by the law of the Quirites, or claim in it that the defendant is bound to convey something to us or to make composition to us as a thief; for in such formulae the intentio is one of civil law.

[126901] But other formulae, on the contrary, are said to be in factum when they are not drawn up with an intentio of the above kind; but, after proposing a question of fact in the intentio, proceed at once to the Condemnatio and Absolutio; as in a formula used by a patron when suing his freedman for summoning him before the magistrate in contravention of the edict. The formula then runs thus: ‘Let M N be recuperators. If it be proved that such and such a patron was summoned to appear by such and such a freedman against the edict of such and such a praetor, do you, recuperators, condemn the said freedman to pay to the said patron ten thousand sesterces; if it be not proved, declare him to be absolved.’ The other formulae, which are set out in the title of the edict about summoning before the magistrate, raise questions of fact, as the formula in an action against a defendant who on service of summons neither appears nor finds a vindex, or against a person who makes a violent rescue of a person summoned to appear; and many other formulae of this kind are set out in the praetor’s album.

[127995] But some actions may be instituted by formulae either of law or of fact, as for instance the actions of Deposit and Loan for use. Thus the following formula is one of law: ‘Let C D be judex. Whereas Aulus Agerius deposited a silver table with Numerius Negidius, which is the ground of action, whatsoever it be proved that Numerius Negidius is on that account bound by good faith to convey or render to Aulus Agerius, do thou, judex, condemn Numerius Negidius to pay its value, unless he make restitution; if it be not proved, declare him to be absolved.’ Whereas a formula thus framed: ‘Let C D be judex. If it be proved that Aulus Agerius deposited a silver table in the hands of Numerius Negidius, and that by the fraud of Numerius Negidius it has not been restored to Aulus Agerius, do thou, judex, condemn Numerius Negidius to pay Aulus Agerius whatever shall be the value of the table; if it be not proved, declare him to be absolved:’ is a formula of fact. And there is a similar alternative in the case of Loan for use.

[129023] Whenever a formula contains a condemnation clause, such clause is so framed as to express value in money. So even when we claim a corporeal thing, like land, a slave, a garment, gold or silver, the judex condemns the defendant to deliver not the thing itself, as in the older system of procedure, but its value in money.

[129345] The formula either sets out a certain sum in the Condemnatio or is for an uncertain sum.

[129435] § 50. It is for a certain sum in that formula by which we claim in the intentio that a person is bound to pay us a liquidated debt, for then this final part of the formula runs as follows: ‘Do thou, judex, condemn Numerius Negidius to pay Aulus Agerius (say, e. g.) ten thousand sesterces; if it be not proved, absolve him.’

[129761] § 51. A condemnation in an uncertain sum of money may be one of two kinds. In the first kind it is preceded by some limitation (commonly known as taxatio). This kind may occur, for example, when we sue for an uncertain amount, in which case the concluding part of the formula runs thus: ‘Do thou, judex, condemn Numerius Negidius to pay Aulus Agerius not more than ten thousand sesterces; if it be not proved, absolve him;’ or it is named without a limitation, as when we demand our property from the possessor in a real action, or demand the production of a person or thing in a personal action, where the conclusion runs as follows: ‘Do thou, judex, condemn Numerius Negidius to pay Aulus Agerius whatever shall be the value; if it be not proved, absolve him.’ But whatever the claim, the judex must condemn the defendant to pay a definite sum, even though no definite sum is named in the condemnatio.

[130666] When a certain sum is laid in the condemnatio, he must be careful not to condemn the defendant in a greater or lesser sum, else he makes the cause his own: and if there is a limitation he must be careful not to exceed the maximum, else he is similarly liable; but he may condemn him in less than the maximum.

[130976] Cf. § 34, comm. In an action with a formula in factum concepta, the Intentio, Si paret fecisse, ‘If it appear that the defendant has done this or that’—‘If the defendant’s act place him in a certain class,’ corresponds to the minor premiss of a syllogism of which the conclusion is: ‘Then this defendant is under such and such an obligation to this plaintiff,’ or ‘This defendant is condemnable to perform such and such a service to this plaintiff.’ The major premiss will be: ‘All persons who have done such and such an act,’ or, ‘who belong to such and such a class, are under such and such an obligation,’ or ‘are compellable to render such and such a service to such and such a plaintiff.’ This major premiss is withdrawn from discussion, is not permitted to be disputed; and the issue in such an action can only relate to the minor premiss; in other words, is always an issue of fact.

[131867] In an actio with a formula in jus concepta, the intentio, Si paret oportere, ‘If it appear that the defendant is under such and such an obligation,’ corresponds to the conclusion of a syllogism of which the minor premiss is: ‘The defendant belongs to such and such a class:’ and the major: ‘All persons belonging to such and such a class are under such and such an obligation.’ The major premiss may be an alleged rule either of law or of equity, a proposition either of civil law or of praetorian law; and in neither case is it withdrawn from discussion. The issue, that is to say, in an action with a formula in jus concepta may either relate to the minor or to the major premiss: may be either an issue of fact or an issue of law.

[132602] The following passage of Cicero speaks of actions whose formula was in jus concepta with the additional terms, ex fide bona or the like; and thus making it an actio bonae fidei. Privata enim judicia maximarum quidem rerum in juris consultorum mihi videntur esse prudentia. . . . In omnibus igitur iis judiciis in quibus ex fide bona est additum; ubi vero etiam ut inter bonos bene agier; in primisque in arbitrio rei uxoriae, in quo est, quod aequius melius, parati esse debent. Illi enim dolum malum, illi fidem bonam, illi aequum bonum, illi quid socium socio, quid eum qui aliena negotia curasset ei cujus ea negotia fuissent; quid eum qui mandasset eumve cui mandatum esset alterum alteri praestare oporteret, quid virum uxori, quid uxorem viro, tradiderunt, Topica, 17. ‘Private suits of the highest importance turn on the doctrines of the jurist. . . . In all the actions, therefore, where the judge is instructed to look to the requirements of good faith, to the practice of honest men, or, as in the suit of a wife against her husband, to what is fair and equitable, the jurist should be ready to speak. For he is the authority on what constitutes fraud or good faith, what is good and equal, what are the mutual duties of partners, of principal and agent, whether authorized or unauthorized, or of husband and wife in respect of delivery of property.’

[133964] Actions in personam with formulae in jus conceptae may be either stricti juris or bonae fidei. The actio stricti juris is generally called condictio, § 18. (As to the proper use of the term condictio cf. Sohm, § 80, n. 6.) The gist (gîte) of the civil action of Condictio, i. e. the circumstance whereon it lay, the title or ground of action, was the increase of the defendant’s fortune or patrimony by the reduction of the plaintiff’s patrimony without any consideration or equivalent gain to the plaintiff. This disturbance the law restored. The simplest, and probably the earliest, instance of the principle was mutui datio, 3 § 90. Here the defendant’s wealth is increased and that of the plaintiff diminished by a voluntary act of the plaintiff; but the principle equally covers cases where the relation is not knowingly and intentionally initiated by the plaintiff, e. g. payment by mistake (solutio indebiti). Many other cases of transfer of property come under the same principle, imposing on the transferee the obligation to re-transfer on account of failure of consideration (causa data, causa non secuta). From mutui datio, or actual loan, the Condiction was, as we have seen, §§ 18-20, applied or extended to Expensilatio and Stipulatio, one if not both of which, probably, were imaginary loans, that is, agreements solemnized and fortified by the fiction of a loan. We are expressly informed that this was the case with Expensilatio, 2 § 129, and from one etymology of stipulation which has been suggested (stips = pecunia) and the supposed analogy of Nexum (assuming this to have been a fictitious weighing out of bars of bronze), some writers conjecture the same of Stipulation.

[135659] The introduction of actions stricti juris is probably of more ancient date than the introduction of actions based on bona fides; the necessity, that is, of applying the power of the State to enforce the class of obligations pursued by Condictio was earlier felt than the necessity of compelling men by law to perform their so-called obligations ex fide bona. From the antithesis of strictum jus and bona fides it might be imagined that trust, confidence, credit, reliance on good faith, were entirely foreign to civil obligations, and were only ingredients in equitable obligations. This is the reverse of the truth. Greater confidence (fides) is involved in mutui datio, greater risk is incurred by the obligee, who starts by alienating his property and making it the property of the obligor, who denudes himself, that is, of the remedy of vindicatio, than in any other of the real contracts, most of which leave the promisee, even before the invention of personal actions, armed, if need be, with the legal remedy of vindicatio. Other real contracts we can imagine left to the protection of the moral code, to the forum of conscience, to the sanction of public opinion, at a time when the immense confidence implied in a loan for consumption made the enforcement of this contract by strict legal process a matter of practical necessity. (Cf. on this subject Muirhead, Roman Law, §§ 8, 12.)

[137052] When the short, sharp, and decisive remedy of a civil action had once been invented for mutui datio, the ingenuity of contracting parties and jurists would soon extend the remedy to other relations by means of a fiction of mutui datio. Expensilation, then, and Stipulation may be regarded as artifices for transferring agreements, originally perhaps, from the ethical code to the legal code; but certainly, in later times, from the laxer equitable code to the more rigorous civil code. A great part, however, of human dealings refuses to be governed by formal conditions, and pre-arranged, pre-capitulated stipulations. Hence alongside of stipulatio and expensilatio existed Real and Consensual contracts; alongside of Condictio existed Judicis arbitrive postulatio; alongside of formulae stricti juris existed formulae bonae fidei.

[137886] The general difference between actions stricti juris and actions bonae fidei consisted in the greater latitude of discretion allowed to the judge in the latter. The principal specific points of difference were the following:

[138112] (a) Actions stricti juris are based on unilateral contracts, which only ground an action for one of the parties: actions bonae fidei are based on bilateral contracts, on which both parties can bring actio directa; or on semi-bilateral contracts, on which one party can bring actio directa, and the other actio contraria. So one-sided were condictions or actions stricti juris that before the time of Marcus Aurelius a set-off or counterclaim of the defendant (compensatio) could not be pleaded except as a ground of absolution in the form of Exceptio doli. Inst. 4, 6, 30.

[138686] (b) Actions stricti juris are governed by a literal interpretation of the words of a disposition: in actions bonae fidei the judge inquires what was the true intention of the parties; he attends not only to express but also to implied terms of an agreement, Dig. 3, 5, 6, and, to ascertain these, takes notice of local usages, Dig. 21, 1, 31, 20. As we distinguish between the manifestation of the will or overt act of a delinquent and his intention, so bona fides distinguishes between the exact words used by contractors and their intentions. Strictum jus adheres more rigidly, at least in early times, to a grammatical or literal interpretation of a disposition, and assumes that words exactly correspond to intentions. It is then called summum jus: e. g. Verbis et literis et summo jure contenditur, Cicero.

[139499] (c) The ground to support any given condictio or actio stricti juris is precisely defined: whereas an actio bonae fidei, e. g. an actio empti or venditi, can be brought not only to enforce the principal contract—emptio venditio—but also to enforce any accessory agreements made at the same time (ex continenti) as the principal contract (pacta adjecta) or to obtain relief in respect of any circumstances of fraud (dolus) or intimidation (metus) In the later law, however, accessory informal agreements coalesced into a single contract when annexed to a loan (mutuum): Omnia quae inseri stipulationibus possunt, eadem possunt etiam numerationi pecuniae et ideo et conditiones, Dig. 12, 1, 7. In the case of a loan of money, however, interest could not be recovered on a contemporaneous, informal agreement, because the only action a loan of money could support was condictio certae pecuniae: on a loan of any other quantitas but money, such as oil or wheat, interest could be recovered, because though the intentio of the formula was certa, the value of such things was uncertain (condemnatio incerta); but this exception to the rule that interest could not be due on a mutuum seems only to have been made, in late times, a special stipulation on account of interest having perhaps been required in all cases by classical law, Cod. 4, 32, 23. Cf. Dig. 50, 16, 121 Usura pecuniae, quam percipimus, in fructu non est, quia non ex ipso corpore, sed ex alia causa est, id est nova obligatione. Savigny, § 268.

[141006] (d) The defence in an actio stricti juris could only allege matters which ipso jure extinguished or annihilated a claim (e. g. solutio, acceptilatio, novatio), or, if they founded an indirect answer of the defendant, had been disclosed to the praetor in the preliminary pleadings (in jure) in the form of an exceptio: whereas the judex or arbiter who tried an actio bonae fidei could consider any pleas in exception even when they were averred for the first time in the course of the trial: cum doli exceptio insit de dote actioni ut in ceteris bonae fidei judiciis, Dig. 24, 3, 21.

[141590] (e) In respect of the accessions (omnis causa) in which a defendant was condemned in damages, namely fructus and usurae, there was a difference between actiones stricti juris and bonae fidei: in the former the defendant was only liable to pay these from the date of Litis contestatio; whereas in the latter he was liable from the date of Mora, 2 § 280.

[141944] (f) As all condemnations under the formulary system were in pecuniary damages it was necessary in the event of a condemnation that the thing in dispute should be valued in money. In actions stricti juris the moment fixed for the valuation (aestimatio) was Litis contestatio: in actions bonae fidei the date of valuation was the date of Condemnatio: In hac actione sicut in ceteris bonae fidei judiciis . . . rei judicandae tempus, quanti res sit, observatur, quamvis in stricti (juris judiciis) litis contestatae tempus spectetur, Dig. 13, 6, 3, 2. This is so uncontroverted that in another passage, which seems to fix the moment of condemnatio as the moment of aestimatio in a stricti juris action, Dig. 13, 3, 3, the opinion of the jurist Servius is perhaps inadvertently adopted by the compilers: we see elsewhere that the jurists differed on this subject, cf. Dig. 12, 1, 22. Both in stricti juris and bonae fidei actions, if a day was fixed for the performance of a contract, this day was the date of aestimatio; and if a debtor was guilty of Mora, the creditor had his election between Lis contestata and Res judicata respectively and the date of Mora. In an action on Delict the date of Valuation was none of these but the date of the Delict, i. e. the date of the inception of the obligation. Savigny, System, § 275.

[143270] (g) Another difference related to jusjurandum in litem, i. e. the plaintiff’s sworn declaration of the value of the thing in dispute. When a defendant contumaciously disobeys a judge’s order in a certain class of actions where judgment is preceded by an order (arbitrium) of the judex, namely actiones Arbitrariae, including Real actions and Personal actions brought to obtain Restitutio or Exhibitio; or when by dolus or culpa lata the defendant has disabled himself from obeying the judge’s order; then the oath of the plaintiff as to the value of the subject of litigation fixes the amount of damages (aestimatio) in which the defendant will be condemned subject to the approval of the judex, who would generally allow exemplary damages. Cf. Sohm, § 53. The same rule was also applicable in actions bonae fidei. Examples of such actions are the actions Depositi, Commodati, Locati, Dotis, Tutelae, Doli, Metus, and the interdict Unde vi. In condictions or actions stricti juris it was only admissible under special circumstances; and in delictal actions when the subject of litigation had ceased to exist by the fault of the defendant, e. g. in the actio legis Aquiliae, and litis aestimatio would otherwise be impossible to the judex, he might use the plaintiff’s oath as a subsidiary evidence for ascertaining what was the selling value of the thing that had been destroyed or what therein was the plaintiff’s exceptional interest.

[144708] (h) If performance of a contract was due at a certain place, a bonae fidei action could be brought to recover damages for non-performance at any other forum as well as at the forum of the specified place, whereas a plaintiff who brought an action stricti juris at any other forum than the forum of the place where the contract was to be executed would have incurred the penalties of Plus petitio; and to avoid this was obliged to bring his action in the form of actio Arbitraria, § 53, comm. Inst. 4, 6, 33.

[145217] The division of actions into stricti juris and bonae fidei, properly speaking, only embraces actions founded on contract and quasicontract with a formula in jus concepta: that is to say, Real actions, actions with a formula in factum concepta, actions on delict, praetoria cognitio (cognizance by the praetor without reference to a judex) were neither stricti juris nor ex bona fide. It is probable, however, that delictal actions (e. g. the actions furti nec-manifesti and legis Aquiliae) were governed by the rules of actions stricti juris; while actiones in rem arbitrariae, and actiones in factum, and cognitio extraordinaria were governed by the rules of bonae fidei actiones. Vangerow, § 139. Cf. Inst. 4, 6, 28-30.

[145940] Many preliminary questions of law were undoubtedly decided at the initial stage of an action in jure, that is, at the appearance before the tribunal or curule chair of the praetor. At this appearance the parties were attended by counsel (haerere in jure atque praetorum tribunalibus [advocatos] De Oratore, 1, 38); and here, though the praetor would not settle a dispute about facts, many demurrers or simple issues of law or equity might be decided, and the controversy might be terminated, if it could not be brought under any rule of jus civile or of the edict, or if there was a confessio in jure, without ever reaching the stage of reference to a judex. But it was an important constitutional principle that the issue itself, which might involve questions both of law and fact, should be decided by an independent private person as judex, and not by the magistrate. This principle, weakened by the growth of extraordinaria cognitio, was abandoned under Diocletian and his successors, when, as we have seen, all private causes came to be decided either by the magistrate himself or by an official to whom he delegated his authority (judex pedaneus).

[147095] According to the Institutes, a man might not summon his patron or parent to appear in an action without the permission of the praetor, under a penalty of fifty solidi, Inst. 4, 16, 3. A solidus or aureus was a hundred sesterces, so that we must either, with Savigny, for ten thousand read five thousand sesterces in the text of Gaius, or suppose that Justinian reduced the penalty to half its original amount.

[147506] In the formulary system an appearance of the defendant before the praetor (in jure) was indispensable as the first stage of an action. In English law, after service of summons or proof that all proper means for the service of summons have been used in vain, the court will grant leave to the plaintiff to enter substituted service for the defendant. But in Roman law an original appearance of the defendant was necessary. On service of a summons (in jus vocatio) he was bound either to obey at once and accompany the plaintiff into court, or to send a responsible representative (vindex, § 46) in his stead, or to find security, called cautio judicio sisti (to be thus interpreted: cautio sisti in jure ad judicium ordinandum), for his appearance in jure on a future day. If he took none of these steps he was liable to an actio in factum, and he might be apprehended and taken by force (duci in jus, Dig. 2, 8, 5, 1); and any person who made a violent rescue was liable to be condemned by actio in factum to pay the amount of the plaintiff’s claim, quanti ea res est ab actore aestimata, Dig. 2, 7, 5, 1. At the first appearance in court, after the plaintiff had stated which of the actions set out in the album he proposed to bring, or had shown cause why a new action not contained in the album should be granted to him (editio actionis), the defendant was required to give security (vadimonium) for his second appearance in court to receive a judex. At the second appearance, after the nomination (addictio) of the judex and the joinder in issue or delivery of the formula (litis contestatio, judicium ordinatum, judicium acceptum), there was (at all events in the legis actiones) an adjournment to the next day but one (comperendinatio), and on this day the trial before the judex (judicium) proceeded. In the formulary system, then, there were two appearances in jure, one in obedience to the in jus vocatio, and a second for the assignment of a judex. In the Libellary system which prevailed in the time of Justinian the former of these appearances was suppressed, and instead thereof the plaintiff by a libellus conventionis sued out from the court a commonitio or summons to the defendant to appear before the court. On the service of this by a public officer the defendant was required to give cautio judicio sisti, security for his appearance for the arrangement of a judicium, and in default thereof was arrested, § 184, comm.

[149946] The formula says Ejus [aestimationem] condemnato, not Id condemnato, because the Condemnatio did not impose specific performance but only pecuniary compensation. Bethmann-Hollweg, § 87. The lawyer’s manual of practice contained alternative formulae for the same ground of action. Sed tamen non parcam operae, et ut vos in vestris formulis, sic ego in epistolis, de eadem re alio modo, Cicero ad Familiares, 13, 27. ‘However, I will spare no trouble, and as you lawyers do in your books of formulae, I will present you in my correspondence with the same matter in another form.’ Quae cum Zeno didicisset a nostris, ut in actionibus praescribi solet, de eadem re dixit alio modo, De Finibus, 5, 19. ‘Zeno learnt this from the teachers of our school, and then, as the headings of the formulae say, handled the same subject in a different form.’

[150789] One great advantage of the actiones in factum was that they were available to filii familiarum. In factum actiones etiam filii familiarum possunt exercere, Dig. 44, 7, 13. It may have been for the purpose of enabling filii familiarum to sue that formulae in factum were given in some actions as well as formulae in jus. Cf. 1 § 55, comm.

[151128] We shall see hereafter that actio in factum differed from actio in jus in respect of (1) Plus petitio and in respect of (2) Novatio.

[151262] (1) An actio with a formula in factum concepta, having an intentio specifying a particular state of fact as the basis of the plaintiff’s claim, cf. § 60, would be capable of plus petitio: while an actio with a formula in jus concepta would only be capable of plus petitio where the intentio was certa, e.g. condictio certae pecuniae or certae rei, not where the intentio was incerta, Quidquid paret, &c.

[151667] (2) Novatio necessaria was only produced by Litis contestatio when the formula was in jus concepta, the right of the plaintiff not being referred to in the intentio of a formula in factum, § 107.

[151864] The words Nisi restituat (cf. formula of actio depositi, § 47), exhibeat, are the clause which constitutes a formula arbitraria. In the formulary system the condemnation was always pecuniary, § 48; the defendant was always condemned by the judgment to pay the plaintiff a sum of money. By means, however, of the alternative clause, nisi restituat, &c., in a formula arbitraria the plaintiff could put pressure on the defendant to make him restore or produce to the plaintiff a specific thing which would be a remedy something like that of specific performance in English Law. Thus by this clause the judex, having pronounced against the defendant, made a preliminary order (jussus, arbitrium) for the restitution or production of the thing; and if it was obeyed the defendant was absolved, but if it was disobeyed the plaintiff was allowed to assess his own damages on oath, whereby the defendant might in fact suffer a penalty for disobedience to the order. In later times, indeed, it seems to have become the practice for the judex in case of a recalcitrant litigant to forcibly (manu militari) compel restitution. Inst. 4, 6, 31.

[152998] Actiones arbitrariae included real actions, framed as formulae petitoriae, § 92 (e.g. vindicatio, publiciana, hereditatis petitio, confessoria, hypothecaria, cf. Inst. 4, 6, 31, where only praetorian actions are given as examples), and such other actions, whether civil or praetorian (e. g. depositi, commodati, locati, tutelae, rei uxoriae, doli, metus, interdictum de vi, §§ 162, 163), as were brought to obtain restitution or production. The formula arbitraria could not be used in an actio empti, for the object of this action was not of the nature of a restitution: nor could the formula arbitraria be employed in actions stricti juris or actions founded on delict, since a pecuniary condemnation was in these actions also sufficient remedy.

[153746] Of the formula arbitraria in a real action with a formula petitoria, §§ 91, 92, we have an instance in Cicero: Lucius Octavius judex esto: Si paret fundum Capenatem, quo de agitur, ex jure Quiritium [P. Servili] esse, neque is fundus [Q. Catulo] (cf. Roby, 2, 443, n. 1) restituetur, In Verrem. 2, 12; cf. 1, 45. In an action for the production as a preliminary to the restitution of a person or thing (ad exhibendum) the clause would be of the form ‘nisi exhibeat,’ ‘si arbitratu tuo Aulo Agerio non exhibebitur’ and generally some special modification of nisi actori satisfaciat. (As to the attempts which have been made to reconstruct this formula see Lenel, tit. xv. § 90.) In noxal actions, § 75, which are analogous in procedure to actiones arbitrariae, there was probably no clause ‘nisi noxae dedat,’ but the judgment was of the form Publium Maevium Lucio Titio decem aureis condemno aut noxam dedere, Inst. 4, 17, 1; the defendant being intended to exercise the election of paying damages or surrendering the author of the mischief.

[154789] As soon as the rule was established: omnia judicia esse absolutoria, § 114, that in every action a defendant might avoid condemnation by satisfying the plaintiff’s claim even after litis contestatio, it might seem at first sight that the formula arbitraria was rendered unnecessary. But this was not so; for in actiones which were not arbitrariae no alternative was allowed to the judex in the condemnatio, and the damages were not meant as a penal sum to enforce obedience to the judge’s order. Whereas in an actio arbitraria as soon as the arbitratus or order was pronounced, the defendant would know that he would inevitably be condemned unless he made the restitutio or exhibitio required.

[155484] The intentio of an action with a formula in factum concepta was sometimes one-limbed: e. g. Si paret . . . vocatum esse, § 46, and sometimes two-limbed: e. g. Si paret (1) Aulum Agerium rem deposuisse (2) eamque dolo malo Numerii Negidii Aulo Agerio redditam non esse, § 47. A one-limbed intentio would be used when the defence was a simple traverse or contradiction of the fact alleged by the plaintiff: a two-limbed formula would be used when the defendant confessed the fact alleged by the plaintiff, but alleged a second fact (performance, release, novation, &c.) whereby the obligation created by the former was extinguished or counteracted.

[156132] Accordingly it would be a mistake to suppose that the clause: eamque dolo malo Numerii Negidii Aulo Agerio redditam non esse: was equivalent to the arbitratus or clause ‘Ni restituat’ which in the preceding formula limits the condemnatio. The former clause raises the question whether restitution was made before the action was brought to trial (ante judicium acceptum), i. e. it is a clause in the intentio raising the question whether the action is well founded: the clause ‘Ni restituat,’ which concerns the condemnatio, gives the defendant power to make restitution at any time after the action was brought but before the condemnatio: and there is no reason why the clause ‘Ni restituat’ should not be added to the double-limbed as well as to the single-limbed formula in factum concepta or the formula in jus concepta. Thus we see that an actio in factum or an actio bonae fidei may or may not be also arbitraria (cf. Sohm, p. 289). The position of the clause ‘Nisi restituat’ varied: (1) in real and praetorian personal actions, the latter with an intentio in factum concepta, the words Neque (or nisi, &c.) ea res arbitrio judicis restituetur, Dig. 4, 2, 14, 11, intervened between the intentio and condemnatio; (2) in a bonae fidei actio ‘Nisi restituat’ followed the first clause of the condemnatio, § 47. The Edict used the clause ‘Nisi restituat’ or its equivalent in other actions which are not Arbitrariae: e. g. in actio de recepto:—Nautae, caupones, stabularii, quod cujusque salvum fore receperint, id Nisi restituent, in eos judicium dabo, Dig. 4, 9, 1, pr.; and against Publicani, Dig. 39, 4, 1, pr. Here, it would seem, the non-restitution would form a part of the intentio, and would refer to the time before Litis contestatio. In actio Constitutae pecuniae the intentio was composed of three allegations: a pre-existing debt, a promise to pay, and its non-fulfilment, § 171, comm.

[158035] From the expression of Gaius, non ipsam rem condemnat sicut olim fieri solebat, we might suppose that statute-process (legis actio) differed from Formulary procedure in that, while in the latter the condemnation was always pecuniary, in the former, as in the last stage of Roman Law, the plaintiff recovered the specific object of litigation and not its pecuniary value. But it would be strange if Roman jurisprudence had thus retrograded, and its second stage had been less perfect than its first: and the meaning of Gaius doubtless is, that, whereas in the Formulary system a single action decided the claims of the plaintiff and assessed their money value, in the primitive system two actions were necessary; a principal action to decide on the justice of the plaintiff’s claim, and a supplementary action or proceeding to transform it into money. Probus (see Huschke, Jurispr, Antejust.) apparently refers to such a proceeding in which the plaintiff who had succeeded in his principal suit demanded an arbiter to assess the damages, when he uses the term A. L. A. or Arbitrum liti aestimandae. This arbitrium would not be reckoned among the forms of statute-process because it was merely accessory to the actio sacramenti or principal action. Bethmann-Hollweg, § 87. Keller, C. P. § 16.

[159327] Two incidents of litis aestimatio in the formulary procedure deserve notice: (1) Jusjurandum in litem, and (2) the determination of the moment to be considered by the judex in appraising the value of the plaintiff’s interest.

[159554] (1) Jusjurandum in litem was not like jusjurandum necessarium a substitute for a judgment, but only one of the means of proof whereon in certain actions a judgment might be founded. These actions were (a) principally actiones arbitrariae, though they might be also simply bonae fidei actiones. To induce the defendant to avoid condemnation by obedience to the judge’s arbitratus, if the defendant contumaciously refused obedience, or by dolus or culpa lata had rendered himself unable to yield obedience to the order of the judex, the value of the plaintiff’s interest in the subject of litigation (litis aestimatio) was not ascertained, as in other cases, by the judex with or without the aid of experts, but by the oath of the plaintiff. Although he was required to name the true value (quanti actoris intersit), not a mere fancy value or so-called value of affection, yet his conscientious estimate would naturally be higher than that of an impartial judge or disinterested valuer: and the largeness of the alternative condemnation would incline the defendant to make a specific restitution.

[160650] (b) Even in actiones stricti juris and actiones ex delicto, if litis aestimatio, owing to the culpa of the defendant, is otherwise impossible to the judex; if, for instance, in the actio legis Aquiliae the subject has ceased to exist, then the judex may employ the oath of the plaintiff as a subsidiary evidence of the plaintiff’s particular interest in the subject and of its market value. The actio injuriarum given by the Praetor is specially called aestimatoria because damages in it were assessed in this way, 3 § 224. Vangerow, § 171.

[161192] (2) The Date of valuation, or time at which the value of the specific thing due from the defendant was estimated, depended on the nature of the action. As a general rule the date of valuation in stricti juris actions was the date of Litis contestatio, in Bonae fidei and Real actions the date of Condemnatio, Dig. 13, 6, 3, 2. But if a date for performance had been fixed in a contract that date was the date of valuation, Dig. 13, 3, 4. Again, if the defendant had been guilty of Mora, 2 §§ 260-289, comm., the plaintiff had his election between any of these dates and the date of Mora, Dig. 19, 1, 3, 3, Dig. 17, 1, 37. The foregoing only relates to Real actions and Personal actions grounded on Dispositions (contracts and quasicontracts): in personal actions grounded on Delict, the date of valuation was the date of delict, the date, in other words, of the inception of obligation.

[162080] These different dates for valuation were expressed in the formula by a different wording of the Condemnatio. In Real actions, § 51, and in Bonae fidei actions, § 47, where the date was the date of passing judgment or condemnation, the formula contained the words: quanti ea res erit; in delicts, where the date of valuation was the date of delict, it contained the words: quanti ea res fuit, Dig. 9, 2, 2. No traces exist of the condemnatio employed in Condictions whose time of valuation was the time of Litis contestatio; but there can be little doubt that it contained the words: quanti ea res est, Savigny, § 275.

[162699] It has already been mentioned, 3 § 212, comm., that the value assessed might be not simply the market value of the thing but its value to the plaintiff, including mediate as well as immediate value.

[162899] In the legislation of Justinian the rules respecting litis aestimatio were of somewhat less importance, because the condemnatio would be in some cases no longer pecuniary but might command the conveyance of property (dare), delivery of possession (tradere), restitution (restituere), or production (exhibere), of the specific thing itself that was the object of litigation. The defendant was no longer invited, as in the actio arbitraria of the formulary system, but compelled by the armed force of the state, to make specific delivery or restitution, Dig. 6, 1, 68. ‘If a defendant allege inability to obey an order of restitution, if the thing exists, the court uses the military power to put the plaintiff in possession, and only condemns the defendant for the mesne profits and deteriorations. If the defendant has maliciously disabled himself from restitution, he is condemned in the amount, subject to no taxation of the amount, at which the plaintiff on oath assesses his loss; if the inability is not maliciously produced, the judge assesses the damages. This applies to all interdicts and actions, real and personal, where the court orders restitution.’ But in most obligations of performance or non-performance the condemnation was still necessarily pecuniary: Quia non facit quod promisit, in pecuniam numeratam condemnatur, sicut evenit in omnibus faciendi obligationibus, Dig. 42, 1, 13.

[164301] In condictio certae pecuniae, as we have seen, § 5, comm., both the Intentio and the Condemnatio are certae: in condictio Triticaria, as in Real actions, the Intentio, naming certa res, is likewise certa; but the Condemnatio, containing the words, Quanti ea res est, is incerta. A loan (mutuum) of money (pecunia certa credita) always gave rise to a condictio certae pecuniae and could not be recovered by any other form of suit: whereas a loan (mutuum) of any other quantitas (corn, wine, oil, &c.) founded a condictio triticaria. The difference of the formulae in these actions explains the following rule of substantive law, which otherwise seems capricious: A valid informal convention (nudum pactum) for interest could be annexed to a loan of corn, wine, or oil, Cod. 4, 32, 23, but not to a loan of money, Dig. 19, 5, 24.

[165130] The reason was this: the loan of any other quantitas than money, having an incerta condemnatio, allowed the judge of a suit brought for recovery of the principal to include interest in the sum which he condemned the defendant to pay: whereas the money loan having a certa condemnatio, coinciding with the intentio in the sum it defined, the judge of a suit brought for the principal, under pain of litem suam facere, § 52, could only condemn the defendant to pay the principal.

[165609] If, then, interest on a loan of money was intended to be paid, it was necessary to secure it by a formal contract (stipulatio) which would found an actio ex stipulatu distinct from the condictio certi which might be brought for the principal: whereas interest for any other quantitas could be secured by a pactum nudum annexed to the agreement to return number, weight, or measure of the principal, and recovered in the action brought for the principal.

[166064] As the stringency of the rule respecting money loans depended on the peculiarity of the formula, it should not have been retained by Justinian after the abolition of the Formulary procedure. Savigny, System, § 268.

[166280] The wording of the formula in Condictio certae pecuniae was doubtless the reason why in the Formulary period the legatee could not recover interest on his legacy, 2 § 280.

[166453] A judex might make a cause (liability, condemnation) his own (litem suam facere) by corruption or carelessness, Inst. 4, 5, 1, pr. Thus if he gave a wrong judgment from dolus, he was liable to be condemned in the whole amount under litigation, Dig. 5, 1, 15, 1. If from culpa, he was liable to be condemned in such damages as the judge in his discretion should assess, Dig. 50, 13, 6. This is one of the obligations classified in the Institutes of Justinian and also by Gaius in the passage of the Digest last cited, which is an excerpt from his writings, under the head of obligationes quasi ex delicto or quasi ex maleficio.

[167081] § 53. |Si quis intentione plus conplexus fuerit, causa cadit, |id est rem perdit, nec a praetore in integrum restituitur exceptis | quibusdam casibus, in quibus—praetor non patitur |—|—

[167268] Inst. 4, 6, 33.

[167285] § 53 a. Plus autem quattuor| modis petitur: re, tempore, loco, causa. re, ueluti si quis pro x |milibus quae ei debentur xx milia petierit, aut si is, cuius | ex parte res est, totam eam aut maiore ex parte suam | esse intenderit.

[167517] Inst. l. c.

[167530] § 53 b. Tempore plus petitur, ueluti si quis | ante diem petierit.

[167598] Inst. l. c.

[167611] § 53 c. Loco plus petitur, ueluti si quod certo loco | dari promissum est, id alio loco sine commemoratio|ne eius loci petatur, uelut si quis ita stipulatus fuerit ephesi | dare spondes?, deinde Romae pure intendat dari sibi oportere. |—|dare mihi oportere—|—

[167872] (2 uersus in C legi nequeunt) — petere id est non adiecto loco.

[167937] Inst. l. c.

[167950] § 53 d. Causa plus petitur, uelut si quis in intentione tollat electionem debitoris quam is habet obligationis iure: uelut si quis ita stipulatus sit sestertivm x milia avt hominem stichvm dare spondes? deinde alterutrum ex his petat; nam quamuis petat quod minus est, plus tamen petere uidetur, quia potest aduersarius interdum facilius id praestare quod non petitur. similiter si quis genus stipulatus sit, deinde speciem petat: ueluti si quis purpuram stipulatus sit generaliter, deinde Tyriam specialiter petat; quin etiam licet uilissimam petat, idem iuris est propter eam rationem quam proxime diximus. idem iuris est, si quis generaliter hominem stipulatus sit, deinde nominatim aliquem petat, uelut Stichum, quamuis uilissimum. itaque sicut ipsa stipulatio concepta est, ita et intentio formulae concipi debet.

[168770] Inst. l. c.

[168783] § 54. Illud satis apparet in incertis formulis plus peti non posse, quia, cum certa quantitas non petatur, sed qvidqvid aduersarium dare facere oportet intendatur, nemo potest plus intendere. idem iuris est et si in rem incertae partis actio data sit: uelut talis qvantam partem paret in eo fvndo qvo de agitvr actoris esse; quod genus actionis in paucissimis causis dari solet.

[169163] § 55. Item palam est, si quis aliud pro alio intenderit, nihil eum periclitari eumque ex integro agere posse, quia nihil ante uidetur egisse: ueluti si is, qui hominem Stichum petere deberet, Erotem petierit; aut si quis ex testamento dari sibi oportere intenderit, cui ex stipulatu debebatur; aut si cognitor aut procurator intenderit sibi dari oportere.

[169520] Inst. 4, 6, 35.

[169537] § 56. Sed plus quidem intendere, sicut supra diximus, periculosum est; minus autem intendere licet; sed de reliquo intra eiusdem praeturam agere non permittitur. nam qui ita agit, per exceptionem excluditur, quae exceptio appellatur litis diuiduae.

[169787] Inst. 4, 6, 34.

[169804] § 57. At si in condemnatione plus positum sit quam oportet, actoris quidem periculum nullum est, sed 〈reus cum〉 iniquam formulam acceperit, in integrum restituitur, ut minuatur condemnatio. si uero minus positum fuerit quam oportet, hoc solum consequitur 〈actor〉 quod posuit; nam tota quidem res in iudicium deducitur, constringitur autem condemnationis fine, quam iudex egredi non potest. nec ex ea parte praetor in integrum restituit; facilius enim reis praetor succurrit quam actoribus. loquimur autem exceptis minoribus xxv annorum; nam huius aetatis hominibus in omnibus rebus lapsis praetor succurrit.

[170413] § 58. Si in demonstratione plus aut minus positum sit, nihil in iudicium deducitur, et ideo res in integro manet; et hoc est quod dicitur falsa demonstratione rem non perimi.

[170589] § 59. Sed sunt qui putant minus recte conprehendi, ut qui forte Stichum et Erotem emerit, recte uideatur ita demonstrare qvod ego de te hominem erotem emi, et si uelit, de Sticho alia formula agat, quia uerum est eum qui duos emerit singulos quoque emisse; idque ita maxime Labeoni uisum est. sed si is qui unum emerit de duobus egerit, falsum demonstrat. idem et in aliis actionibus est, ueluti commodati et depositi.

[171009] § 60. Sed nos apud quosdam scriptum inuenimus, in actione depositi et denique in ceteris omnibus, ex quibus damnatus unusquisque ignominia notatur, eum qui plus quam oporteret demonstrauerit, litem perdere: ueluti si quis una re deposita duas pluresue 〈se de〉posuisse demonstrauerit; aut si is, cui pugno mala percussa est, in actione iniuriarum etiam aliam partem corporis percussam sibi demonstrauerit. quod an debeamus credere uerius esse, diligentius requiremus. certe cum duae sint depositi formulae, alia in ius concepta, alia in factum, sicut supra quoque notauimus, et in ea quidem formula, quae in ius concepta est, initio res de qua agitur demonstratorio modo designetur, deinde inferatur iuris contentio his uerbis qvid-qvid ob eam rem illvm illi dare facere oportet; in ea uero quae in factum concepta est, statim initio intentionis alio modo res de qua agitur designetur his uerbis si paret illvm apvd 〈illvm rem〉 illam deposvisse: dubitare non debemus, quin si quis in formula, quae in factum conposita est, plures res designauerit quam deposuerit, litem perdat, quia in intentione plus pos—

[172116] (24 uersus in C legi nequeunt)—

[172149] Inst. 4, 6, 36-38

[172168] (24 uersus in C legi nequeunt)

[172200] Inst. 4, 6, 39.

[172217] If the Intentio claim more than the plaintiff is entitled to, he loses his entire claim, and is not restored to his original position by the praetor except in a few cases where minors and others are not permitted by him to suffer the consequences of their mistake.

[172483] § 53 a. A plaintiff may claim too much in four ways, (1) in amount, (2) in time, (3) in place, (4) in his statement of the case: in amount, if instead of ten thousand sesterces, which are due to him, he claims twenty thousand, or if being co-proprietor he claims as sole proprietor, or more than his share:

[172791] in time, if he demands to be paid at an earlier time than he stipulated for:

[172869] § 53 c. in place, if he demands payment at a forum without mentioning that it is not the place at which he contracted to be paid: if, for instance, having stipulated—‘Do you promise to pay at Ephesus?’ he subsequently sues at Rome for payment without referring in his formula to Ephesus.

[173158] § 53 d. He claims too much by his statement of the case if he deprives the debtor of an election to which he was entitled by the contract; for instance, if he stipulated to receive alternatively either ten thousand sesterces or the slave Stichus, and makes an unconditional claim for one or the other. For though the one that he claims be of lesser value, he nevertheless seems to claim too much because the other may be more convenient for the debtor to render. So if he stipulated for a genus and demands a species, stipulated, for instance, for purple and demands Tyrian purple, even though he demand the cheapest species, he claims more than his due, for the same reason. So he does if he stipulated generally for a slave and claims a certain slave, Stichus, for instance, however worthless. The intentio, then, must exactly pursue the terms of the stipulation.

[174025] § 54. It is clear that an intentio naming an uncertain sum as due to the plaintiff, cannot be excessive, for it claims no certain quantity, but only whatever the defendant ought to convey or perform. The same is true of real actions to recover uncertain shares, as that whereby a plaintiff claims whatever portion of an estate he may be entitled to, which kind of action is very seldom granted.

[174421] It is also clear that the plaintiff who claims the wrong thing in his intentio, runs no risk and can bring a fresh action because his right has not been tried; if he is entitled, for instance, to Stichus and claims Eros, or if he is entitled by stipulation and alleges in the intentio that he is entitled to have the object made over to him under a will, or if a cognitor or procurator claim to have the object made over to him in his own right instead of in the right of his principal.

[174909] To claim too much in the intentio, as I have said, is dangerous; but a man who claims in the intentio less than his right does not forfeit his right, but cannot sue for the remainder in the same praetorship, for he is repelled by the exception against division of actions.

[175183] § 57. If too much is claimed in the condemnatio the plaintiff is not imperilled, but, since the defendant has taken a formula which is unfair to him, he may obtain a reduction of the condemnation by in integrum restitutio. If less is laid in the condemnatio than the plaintiff is entitled to, he only obtains that amount, for his whole right has been brought before the judex and is restricted by the amount laid in the Condemnatio, a limit which the judex cannot exceed; and in this case the praetor gives no relief by in integrum restitutio, for he is more ready to relieve defendants than plaintiffs, excepting always minors, whom he invariably relieves.

[175842] If more or less is laid in the demonstratio, the plaintiff’s right is not at all brought into the action and therefore remains intact, and this is the meaning of the saying, that a right is not consumed by a false demonstration.

[176072] § 59. Some think that the demonstratio may be properly restricted to less than is due; thus a man who has bought both Stichus and Eros may state in his Demonstratio, ‘Whereas I bought of you the slave Eros,’ and sue for Stichus by another formula, because it is true that the purchaser of both is also the purchaser of each; and this was more especially Labeo’s opinion. But if the purchaser of one sues in respect of two, the Demonstratio is false; and the same principle applies to actions of Loan for use and Deposit.

[176594] I have read in some writers that in actions of Deposit, and wherever condemnation involves infamy, a plaintiff loses his action if his demonstratio exceeds the amount due, for instance, if he deposited one thing and says in the demonstratio that he deposited two, or if he was struck in the face and his demonstratio in an action of assault says he was struck in other parts also. But let us carefully examine this opinion. There are two formulas of the action of Deposit, one framed in jus, the other in factum, as we said before, § 47. The formula in jus begins by defining the title or ground of action in the demonstratio, and then in the Intentio which follows introduces as a consequence the question of law in these terms: ‘Whatever the defendant ought on account of this thing to convey or perform.’ Whereas the formula of fact commences at once without any preceding demonstratio with another form of intentio designating the ground of action, thus: ‘If it be proved that such a plaintiff deposited such a thing with such a defendant.’ Certainly in the latter case, that is, in a formula of fact, if the plaintiff asserts that he deposited more things than he really deposited, he loses the action, because the excess is in the intentio . . . .

[177849] According to Roman law a judex could only condemn a defendant to make payment at a place within the jurisdiction. Hence when the Forum or jurisdiction of a court in which an action on a contract is brought happened to differ from the place specified in the contract as the place where a certain act (payment, delivery, conveyance, &c.) was to be performed, if the contract was such as naturally to ground a Condictio (actio stricti juris), he could not condemn; and so in order to avoid the fault of Plus petitio, which would be fatal to the present claim and to any subsequent claim on the same contract, it was necessary to sue, not by a Condictio which would be the proper form if the action were brought at the stipulated place of performance, but by a special kind of formula Arbitraria (actio de eo quod certo loco). In such an actio Arbitraria the judge could consider the difference of place and meet the demands of equity by increasing or diminishing the amount which his arbitratus required the defendant to pay in order to avoid condemnatio. If the contract were such as to give rise to an actio bonae fidei, it would not be necessary to sue by formula Arbitraria in order to avoid Plus petitio, for the judex of an actio Ex bona fide had more discretion than the judex of a Condictio and by the wording of his commission, Ex fide bona, could allow for the difference of place if performance were enforced at a place different from that specified in the contract. A defendant who lost an action was bound to make payment at the forum where the action was brought: ibi erit praestandum ubi petitur, Dig. 30, 47, 1. So where no place of performance was implied or fixed by the contract, the plaintiff could sue the defendant, in any place where the condemnation could be enforced against him.

[179652] To understand the foregoing we must consider the various tribunals before which an action can be instituted: at what forum or before what judge a plaintiff can sue a defendant.

[179830] The Forum at which an action can be brought is twofold: it is either General or Special. The General forum is the forum of the domicil of the defendant: actor rei forum, sive in rem sive in personam sit actio, sequitur, Cod. 3, 19, 3. Juris ordinem converti postulas, ut non actor rei forum sed reus actoris sequatur, Cod. 3, 13, 2. See 3 § 75, comm.

[180182] The Special forum depends on the nature of the right to be litigated: or the department of the code to be applied.

[180298] The special forum of a Real right may be the forum where the Res (object of property, servitude) is situated (forum rei sitae). This was not established in classical Roman law, when execution related not to res but to litis aestimatio, but only in the later period. Non ejusdem provinciae praesidem adeundum ubi res de quibus agitur sitae sunt, sed in quâ is qui possidet sedes ac domicilium habet. Frag. Vat. § 326.

[180716] The special forum of an Obligation is generally, in Roman law, the forum of the place where the act is covenanted to be performed (forum Solutionis). It was when a stipulation was enforced at the general forum of the defendant instead of at the special forum of the stipulation that it was necessary to use the formula Arbitraria. For the rules of English law on this subject, which are of a less restricted character than those of Roman law, see order 11 rule 1.

[181181] The special forum of a Delict is the place where the delict was committed.

[181257] The special forum of Insolvency coincides in Roman law with the general forum, i. e. is the domicil of the insolvent.

[181376] The special forum of the action for claiming anything by title of an inheritance (hereditatis petitio) is the forum of the place where the object of inheritance is situated which the heir is claiming (forum rei Sitae).

[181596] Distinct from the question of the Forum that has jurisdiction over a right or obligation is the question of the Law that defines such right or obligation: what local, municipal, or national Law governs the relation of the plaintiff and defendant, and has to be administered by the Forum, whatever and wherever it may be, that exercises jurisdiction.

[181947] The question of the Forum before which a suit must be instituted and of the particular Law which such Forum must administer may arise (1) within the limits of a single state when divided, like the Roman empire, into municipalities with separate jurisdictions and, to a certain extent, separate laws: or (2) in more or less intimate unions of cantons, or states, such as we see in Switzerland, Germany, America; or (3) between different sovereign states.

[182402] The territorial, local, or municipal law that governs a particular question may be determined by various circumstances such as the domicil or the nationality (as in some modern codes) of a person (testator, intestate, insolvent, husband, disposer, debtor, &c.): the place where the object of property is situated: the place of performance of an act past or future (disposition, stipulated service): or the place where the formalities of an act were transacted.

[182864] Thus in a question of Ownership the law to be applied may be the lex loci rei Sitae. E. g. in France property in goods passes by contract of sale, in Germany by tradition. A Frenchman in France sells to another Frenchman his goods in Germany. The property only passes by tradition. A German in Germany sells to another German his goods in France. The property passes by the mere contract of sale.

[183262] In a question of contract the law to be applied generally depends on the intention of the parties as shown by their agreement; thus the law which is intended is often presumed to be that of the place of performance.

[183479] The Roman doctrine that Inheritance is a Universal succession implies that the ideal patrimony has its single seat in the nationality or domicil of the heritage-leaver and is governed by the law of that nationality or domicil. Thus the law which governs Succession is not, after the analogy of the former cases, the law of the special forum of Succession: for whereas the law which governs Succession is the law of the heritage-leaver’s nationality or last Domicil, we have seen that the special forum of Succession, in respect of objects of ownership, is the forum rei Sitae.

[184057] But though the law of the testator’s nationality or last domicil principally governs his dispositions (questions relating to institution, disinheritance, preterition, inofficiositas, legacies, &c.), yet there are some elements of a will to which other laws must be applied. The capacity of the testator (testamenti factio, commercium) must exist both at the date of executing the will and at the date of his decease: and must be tested at the former date by the law of his then domicil. Again the capacity of honoratus (heir or legatee) is governed by the law of the domicil of honoratus at the time of the testator’s death. Indeed in Roman times, though not in modern Germany, this capacity was required at tria tempora, the making of the will, the death of the testator, and the acquisitio by honoratus, 2 §§ 109-114, comm., and was governed at each period by the law of his then domicil.

[184949] The Capacity of a person for contracting and otherwise disposing is governed by the law of his nationality or domicil: with this reservation, that Majority once attained cannot be divested in respect of past acts by a mere change of domicil: by settling, that is to say, in a new domicil where majority comes later.

[185266] The validity of the Form of any disposition (contract, marriage, testament, &c.) may depend on the law by which the substance of the disposition is governed (the law of the stipulated place of performance, the law of the husband’s nationality or domicil, the law of the testator’s domicil at the time of making his will). But inconveniences would arise if this law were exclusive. For instance, a German will can only be made with the assistance of a court. In France no court is authorized to give its assistance to the execution of a will, which is the function of the Notary. A German, then, domiciled in Germany but dying in France, would be unable to execute a will if he could only do it in the form prescribed by German law. Accordingly, as an alternative to the law that governs the disposition, the law of the place where the disposition is made is accepted: and the form of a disposition is valid if it satisfies either the proper law of the disposition or the law of the territory in which the disposition is made. The applicability of the latter law is expressed by the maxim: Locus regit actum. We must except the forms of Alienation which must always satisfy the lex rei sitae.

[186459] Procedure is governed by the law of the forum where a suit is instituted. Dilatory exceptions, accordingly, as based merely on rules of procedure, depend on the law of the forum. But the material contentions of the defence, that is, the rights of the defendant, whether ipso jure extinctive, or per exceptionem peremptoriam counteractive, of the rights of the plaintiff, are governed by the same law as the rights of the plaintiff; that is by the local law that governs the obligation. The Exceptio Sc. Macedoniani and Sc. Vellaeani, however, as relating to personal Capacity, are governed by the law of the domicil of the person in question.

[187103] Procedure in Bankruptcy being a partial or imperfect Execution, its leading feature, the Classification or marshalling of creditors, like other matters of Procedure, is governed by the law of the Forum by which the execution is superintended, which will, generally speaking, be the law of the nationality or domicil of the Insolvent. The priorities of the purely personal creditors, that is to say, will be governed by the law of the forum: but where there are hypothecary creditors who hold mortgages over property of the insolvent in other lands, their priorities involving questions of Real rights will depend on the lex rei sitae. The preliminary Proof by the creditors of their particular claims will be governed by the law (law of the stipulated place of performance, &c.) which according to general rules is applicable to the obligations they respectively seek to enforce.

[187984] Exceptions to most of the preceding rules are produced not only by general variations in principle between the administration of Private International Law in different states but also by the existence of Imperious and Anomalous laws: laws based on religious, moral, political, financial, administrative, instead of purely civil, motives: such as laws relating to heresy, usury, gambling, revenue, mortmain; or laws implying institutions (e. g. slavery, civil death) unrecognized by other states. Each forum enforces its own Imperious or Anomalous laws, and disregards those of its neighbour. For instance a monogamist forum will not enforce polygamistic laws, nor will any forum enforce the penal laws which a neighbour levels against its coreligionists.

[188740] Obligation founded on Delict is always the subject of such Imperious laws: accordingly civil obligation ex delicto, unlike obligation ex contractu, is governed by the laws of the state in which it is remedied.

[188951] The rules of which the above are a specimen constitute what is called the Comity of nations or Private international law. The ideal aim of the Comity of nations is: that the judgment passed on any controversy should be identical whatever may be the tribunal that happens to exercise jurisdiction. Savigny, System, vol. 8. Cf. Westlake, Treatise on Private International Law, and Dicey, Conflict of Laws.

[189356] The penalty of plus petitio in respect of time was reduced by Zeno, who merely doubled the term that was still to run before payment, and required the creditor to pay the costs of the former action before he brought a second, Cod. 3, 10, 1. The effect of this was to change the meaning of the term ‘dilatoria,’ which, as applied to an exceptio and opposed to peremptoria, denoted an exceptio alleging plus petitio in Time.

[189780] When Gaius wrote, such an exception, if successfully alleged, was just as fatal to the creditor as an exceptio peremptoria. It was temporary, not in respect of its effects, but of the limited period during which it was at the command of the debtor. But after Zeno such an exceptio was temporary in its effects, and did not prevent a renewal of the action after a certain lapse of time, that is, after the expiration of the term originally fixed for the payment, and an additional term measuring the temporal excess of the plaintiff’s claim. Justinian retained Zeno’s law in respect of Time, and disarmed the other modes of plus petitio of their terrors, by merely making the creditor liable to three times the amount of the loss that his exorbitant claim had caused to the debtor, particularly in respect of the fees (sportulae) of the executive officers (executores), Cod. 3, 10, 2.

[190665] A plaintiff who had made a mistake in the subject of his claim was allowed by Justinian to amend his claim without instituting a new action.

[190807] It seems from this paragraph that the title or ground of action (causa debendi) was sometimes specified in the Intentio. Perhaps this was done in condictio ex testamento and actio ex stipulatu, which had no Demonstratio, and then availed to prevent the consumption of the right of action; that is, the allegation of the plea of Res judicata when the plaintiff afterwards claimed the same sum but founded his claim on a different title. Cf. § 131.

[191255] A plaintiff whose intentio claimed less than he was entitled to was allowed by Zeno to obtain the full amount without instituting a new action, Inst. 4, 6, 34.

[191416] As plus petitio implies intentio certa, and the existence of a demonstratio involves intentio incerta, it follows that excess in the demonstratio cannot involve plus petitio. Again, as the demonstratio does not determine what is the res in judicium deducta, a falsa demonstratio cannot consume the true ground of action.

[191738] It appears that some jurist had regarded the first clause of an actio in factum, si paret . . . fecisse, as a demonstratio. Gaius himself, in speaking of this clause, used ambiguous terms, nominato eo quod factum est, § 46. But it is clear from § 60 that he holds it to be no Demonstratio, but an Intentio.

[192046] The plaintiff who lost an actio in factum did not, strictly speaking, lose his right to bring another action, for novatio, or transformation of his original right into a right to have judgment, was only operated by the commencement of a personal action in jus. But this made no practical difference, for though his own right (ipsum jus) was not extinguished, it was counterpoised by an opposite right of the defendant based on the claim having been brought to trial (exceptio rei in judicium deductae or judicatae), which would cause any suit instituted by the plaintiff to be dismissed.

[192635] § 61. — continetur, ut habita ratione eius, quod inuicem actorem ex eadem causa praestare oporteret, in reliquum eum cum quo actum est condemnare.

[192783] Inst. 4, 6, 30.

[192800] § 62. Sunt autem bonae fidei iudicia haec: ex empto uendito, locato conducto, negotiorum gestorum, mandati, depositi, fiduciae, pro socio, tutelae, rei uxoriae, 〈commodati, pigneraticium, familiae erciscundae, communi diuidundo〉.

[193031] Inst. 4, 6, 28.

[193048] § 63. Liberum est tamen iudici nullam omnino inuicem conpensationis rationem habere; nec enim aperte formulae uerbis praecipitur, sed quia id bonae fidei iudicio conueniens uidetur, ideo officio eius contineri creditur.

[193269] § 64. Alia causa est illius actionis qua argentarius experitur: nam is cogitur cum conpensatione agere, et ea conpensatio uerbis formulae exprimitur: adeo quidem, ut ab initio conpensatione facta minus intendat sibi dari oportere. ecce enim si sestertium x milia debeat Titio, atque ei xx debeantur, sic intendit si paret titivm sibi x milia dare oportere amplivs qvam ipse titio debet.

[193657] § 65. Item bonorum emptor cum deductione agere iubetur, id est ut in hoc solum aduersarius eius condemnetur quod superest, deducto eo quod inuicem ei bonorum emptor defraudatoris nomine debet.

[193851] § 66. Inter conpensationem autem quae argentario opponitur, et deductionem quae obicitur bonorum emptori, illa differentia est, quod in conpensationem hoc solum uocatur, quod eiusdem generis et naturae est: ueluti pecunia cum pecunia conpensatur, triticum cum tritico, uinum cum uino; adeo ut quibusdam placeat non omni modo uinum cum uino aut triticum cum tritico conpensandum, sed ita si eiusdem naturae qualitatisque sit. in deductionem autem uocatur et quod non est eiusdem generis. itaque 〈si —〉 si uero pecuniam petat bonorum emptor et inuicem frumentum aut uinum is debeat, deducto quanti id erit in reliquum experitur.

[194479] § 67. Item uocatur in deductionem et id quod in diem debetur; conpensatur autem hoc solum quod praesenti die debetur.

[194598] § 68. Praeterea conpensationis quidem ratio in intentione ponitur; quo fit, ut si facta conpensatione plus nummo uno intendat argentarius, causa cadat et ob id rem perdat. deductio uero ad condemnationem ponitur, quo loco plus petenti periculum non interuenit; utique bonorum emptore agente, qui licet de certa pecunia agat, incerti tamen condemnationem concipit.

[194963] In bonae fidei actions the judex has full power to assess on good and equitable grounds the amount due to the plaintiff, and can take into account the cross demand in the same transaction of the defendant, and condemn the defendant in the remainder.

[195214] § 62. Bonae fidei actions are those of Purchase and Sale, Letting and Hiring, Unauthorized Agency, Agency, Deposit, Fiduciary conveyance, Partnership, Guardianship, dotal property, [loan of use, Pledge, Partition of inheritance, Partition of property held in common].

[195483] § 63. The judex may, if he pleases, refuse to take any account of a set off, since he is not expressly instructed by the terms of the formula to do so, but as it seems suitable to the nature of a bonae fidei action, the power is assumed to be contained in his commission.

[195756] § 64. It is otherwise in the action instituted by a banker for the balance of an account, for the banker is compelled to include a set off in his action and make express recognition of it in his formula, so much so that he must allow for any set off from the first, his Intentio only claiming the balance. Thus if he owes ten thousand sesterces to Titius, and Titius owes him twenty thousand, his Intentio runs as follows: ‘If it be proved that Titius owes him ten thousand sesterces more than he owes Titius.’

[196268] § 65. Likewise the purchaser of an insolvent debtor’s estate must when he sues do so with a deduction in his formula, that is in the condemnatio only require the defendant to pay what he owes after deduction of what is due to him in turn from the purchaser as representing the debtor who has failed.

[196569] Between the set off which is made against the claim of the banker and the deduction from the claim of the purchaser of an insolvent’s estate there is this difference, that set off is confined to claims of the same genus and nature; money, for instance, is set off against money, wheat against wheat, or wine against wine; and some even hold that not every kind of wine or every kind of wheat may be set off against wine and wheat, but only wine and wheat of the same nature and quality. Deduction, on the contrary, is made of a debt of a different genus. Thus, if a purchaser of an insolvent’s estate sues for money owed to the insolvent a person to whom he himself, as the insolvent’s successor, owes corn or wine, he has to deduct the value of the corn or wine and bring the action only for the residue.

[197376] § 67. Again, deduction is made of debts not yet due, set off only of debts already due.

[197465] Again, set off is inserted in the Intentio, and if the Intentio of the banker is one sesterce more than the balance, he loses his present cause and on this account also his future claim; whereas the deduction is introduced in the Condemnatio, where an excessive claim is not hazardous; especially as the purchaser of an insolvent’s estate, though the debt he claims is certain, draws up the condemnatio for an uncertain amount.

[197894] Compensatio or cancelling of cross claims by setting off one against another (compensatio est debiti et crediti inter se contributio, Dig. 16, 2, 1) was originally limited to claims of the parties growing out of the same ground (ex eadem causa, § 61), hence there could be no set-off in an action for enforcing a unilateral obligation; but the transaction must be one that generated either a bilateral obligation and gave to both parties an actio directa, e. g. emptio venditio,—or a semi-bilateral obligation, giving to one party actio directa and to the other actio contraria, e.g. commodatum. In other words, Compensatio was not possible in actions stricti juris, such as condictio, but confined to actions bonae fidei. The emperor Marcus Aurelius allowed Compensatio to be urged against claims based on transactions that could only generate unilateral obligations, and so made the identity of title (eadem causa) unnecessary: in other words, he admitted Compensatio in Condictiones or stricti juris actiones. (It was merely by inadvertence that Justinian in compiling his own Institutions out of those of Gaius retained the words ex eadem causa in the definition of Compensation, Inst. 4, 6, 39. Savigny, § 45.)

[199111] In an actio bonae fidei, to which it had been previously limited, Compensation of the defendant’s counterclaim ex eadem causa would not require to be commanded by an exceptio doli, but would be included in the officium judicis; i. e. could be made by the judex if it seemed good to him (cf. § 63 as newly deciphered by Studemund, liberum est tamen judici nullam omnino invicem compensationis rationem habere) in virtue of the terms ex bona fide contained in the formula which gave him his commission. In an actio stricti juris, after the rescript of Marcus Aurelius, the judex could be obliged to make compensation by the Exceptio Doli mali, but only if the exception was expressly inserted in the formula: Sed et in strictis judiciis ex rescripto divi Marci, opposita doli mali exceptione, compensatio inducebatur, Inst. 4, 6, 30. The effect of this change seems to have been to establish Compensatio for the first time as a definite right of the defendant, which the judex must allow him to make use of, and this may possibly be the meaning of the much controverted phrase ‘ipso jure compensari,’ Inst. 4, 6, 30; Dig. 16, 2, 21; Cod. 4, 31, 14. Cf. Dernburg, Geschichte und Theorie der Kompensation, p. 310; Pandekten, § 62, notes 13, 14.

[200353] The exception was of the form: Si in ea re nihil dolo malo Auli Agerii factum sit neque fiat, § 119: and we find in the Digest a definition of Dolus that seems intended to apply to a claim for Compensation: Dolo facit qui petit quod redditurus est, Dig. 44, 4, 8.

[200618] Some writers hold that this exceptio empowered the judex, not to make compensation but simply to give judgment against the plaintiff on the ground of his making what according to the principles of bona fides amounted to Plus petitio; and they explain that this was not so iniquitous as at first sight it may appear, as the loss of the action would only be a penalty to the plaintiff for refusing to employ a formula containing a Compensatio or Deductio, the usage of these formulae being in effect generalized by the rescript of Marcus Aurelius.

[201165] Vangerow, on the other hand, § 607, observes that we have no evidence that an intentio modified by a Compensatio or Deductio was ever employed by any plaintiff but the Argentarius and Bonorum emptor: while we are expressly informed by Theophilus 4, 6, 30, that the effect of Exceptio doli might be to diminish the condemnatio, instead of the usual one of entirely absolving the defendant; which again is consistent with what the jurist Paulus says of the general nature of exceptio: Exceptio est conditio quae modo eximit reum condemnationi, modo minuit damnationem, Dig. 44, 1, 22. Probably before the law of Marcus Aurelius the exceptio doli mali, when used in this case, had not the effect of diminishing the condemnation, and so did not admit the principle of set-off, but absolved the defendant entirely. Cf. Sohm, § 89.

[201992] As Gaius flourished under Marcus Aurelius, and makes no mention of his rescript, we must infer that it was issued after the publication of his Institutes. To be capable of set-off against one another the claims must be of the same kind—money against money, wheat against wheat—and so especially of res fungibiles—and these claims must be now due. But the defendant might set off obligatio naturalis, which was not enforceable by action against obligatio civilis of the plaintiff. Etiam quod natura debetur venit in compensationem, Dig. 16, 2, 6. But claims originally different in kind may be set off against one another, if they are reduced to a money value. And this principle enabled Justinian to extend Compensation to Real actions, Cod. 4, 31, 14; Inst. 4, 6, 30.

[202762] The balance for which the banker sued was not the balance (deductio) of a Personal account, but the balance of one of the Real accounts for corn, wine, oil, &c., into which the debtor’s total personal account was subdivided. The law courts, that is, took notice of the customary practice of the book-keepers, and a question naturally arose as to the extent to which a personal account could be subdivided. Deductio of argentarius and bonorum emptor, as is seen by the text, differs in principle from compensatio, and between the deductio of the two kinds of plaintiff, who had thus to sue, there are important differences, especially in regard to the effect of not complying with the requirement. The argentarius, as we are told, is bound to make the deduction in the intentio of the formula, and so, if he claims more than the correct balance, makes a plus petitio, thereby forfeiting his whole claim. But the deduction, by the bonorum emptor of the claims of the debtors of the estate against the insolvent, is only referred to in the condemnatio of the formula, and so as Gaius tells us here, and also in § 57, is not attended with the same danger.

[203915] It was the duty of the Argentarius to keep the accounts of his customers: whereas the Bonorum emptor might well be ignorant of the transactions of the insolvent. This explains the greater rigour with which the Argentarius was treated.

[204151] A defendant was allowed to deduct his cross demand or independent debt from the demand of the plaintiff by the English courts of Equity, but not by the courts of Common law, until the Statutes 2 Geo. II, c. 22; 8 Geo. II, c. 24, introduced the plea of set-off into the courts of Common law.

[204443] § 69. Quia tamen superius mentionem habuimus de actione, qua in peculium filiorum familias seruorumque agitur, opus est, ut de hac actione et de ceteris, quae eorundem nomine in parentes dominosue dari solent, diligentius admoneamus.

[204678] Inst. 4, 7, pr.

[204695] § 70. Inprimis itaque si iussu patris dominiue negotium gestum erit, in solidum praetor actionem in patrem dominumue conparauit; et recte, quia qui ita negotium gerit, magis patris dominiue quam filii seruiue fidem sequitur.

[204921] Inst. 4, 7, 1.

[204937] § 71. Eadem ratione conparauit duas alias actiones, exercitoriam et institoriam. tunc autem exercitoria locum habet, cum pater dominusue filium seruumue magistrum naui praeposuerit, et quid cum eo eius rei gratia cui praepositus fuerit [negotium] gestum erit. cum enim ea quoque res ex uoluntate patris dominiue contrahi uideatur, aequissimum esse uisum est in solidum actionem 〈in eum〉 dari. qui etiam, licet extraneum quisque magistrum naui praeposuerit siue seruum siue liberum, tamen ea praetoria actio in eum redditur. ideo autem exercitoria actio appellatur, quia exercitor uocatur is, ad quem cottidianus nauis quaestus peruenit. institoria uero formula tum locum habet, cum quis tabernae aut cuilibet negotiationi filium seruumue aut quemlibet extraneum siue seruum siue liberum praeposuerit, et quid cum eo eius rei gratia cui praepositus est contractum fuerit. ideo autem institoria uocatur, quia qui tabernae praeponitur institor appellatur. quae et ipsa formula in solidum est.

[205928] Inst. 4, 7, 2.

[205944] § 72. Praeterea tributoria quoque actio in patrem dominumue constituta est, cum filius seruusue in peculiari merce sciente patre dominoue negotietur. nam si quid eius rei gratia cum eo contractum fuerit, ita praetor ius dicit, ut quidquid in his mercibus erit quodque inde receptum erit, id inter 〈patrem〉 dominum〈ue〉, si quid ei debebitur, et ceteros creditores pro rata portione distribuatur.

[206340] Inst. 4, 7, 3. (fere 21 uersus in C legi nequeunt)

[206392] § 72 a. Praeterea introducta est actio de peculio deque eo, quod in rem domini uersum erit, ut, quamuis sine uoluntate domini negotium gestum erit, tamen siue quid in rem eius uersum fuerit, id totum praestare debeat, siue quid non sit in rem eius uersum, id eatenus praestare debeat, quatenus peculium patitur. In rem autem domini uersum intellegitur, quidquid necessario in rem eius impenderit seruus, ueluti si mutuatus pecuniam creditoribus eius soluerit aut aedificia ruentia fulserit aut familiae frumentum emerit uel etiam fundum aut quamlibet aliam rem necessariam mercatus erit. Itaque si ex decem ut puta aureis, quos seruus tuus a Titio mutuos accepit, creditori tuo quinque aureos soluerit, reliquos uero quinque quolibet modo consumpserit, pro quinque quidem in solidum damnari debes, pro ceteris uero quinque eatenus, quatenus in peculio sit: ex quo scilicet apparet, si toti decem aurei in rem tuam uersi fuerint, totos decem aureos Titium consequi posse. licet enim una est actio, qua de peculio deque eo quod in rem domini uersum sit agitur, tamen duas habet condemnationes. itaque iudex, apud quem de ea actione agitur, ante dispicere solet, an in rem domini uersum sit, nec aliter ad peculii aestimationem transit, quam si aut nihil in rem domini uersum intellegatur aut non totum.

[207694] Inst. 4, 7, 4.

[207710] § 73. Cum autem quaeritur, quantum in peculio sit, ante deducitur, quod patri dominoue quique in eius potestate sit a filio seruoue debetur, et quod superest, hoc solum peculium esse intellegitur. aliquando tamen id, quod ei debet filius seruusue qui in potestate patris dominiue sit, non deducitur ex peculio, uelut si is cui debet in huius ipsius peculio sit.

[208073] Inst. l. c.

[208086] § 74. Ceterum dubium non est, quin et si, qui iussu patris dominiue contraxit cuique exercitoria uel institoria formula conpetit, de peculio aut de in rem uerso agere possit. sed nemo tam stultus erit, ut qui aliqua illarum actionum sine dubio solidum consequi possit, in difficultatem se deducat probandi habere peculium eum cum quo contraxerit, exque eo peculio posse sibi satisfieri, uel id quod persequitur in rem patris dominiue uersum esse.

[208534] Inst. 4, 7, 5.

[208550] § 74 a. Is quoque, cui tributoria actio conpetit, de peculio uel de in rem uerso agere potest. sed huic sane plerumque expedit hac potius actione uti quam tributoria. nam in tributoria eius solius peculii ratio habetur, quod in his mercibus est quibus negotiatur filius seruusue quodque inde receptum erit; at in actione 〈de peculio〉 peculii totius. et potest quisque tertia forte aut quarta uel etiam minore parte peculii negotiari, maximam uero partem peculii in aliis rebus habere; longe magis si potest adprobari, id quod 〈dederit is qui cum filio seruoue〉 contraxit in rem patris dominiue uersum esse, ad hanc actionem transire debet; nam, ut supra diximus, eadem formula et de peculio et de in rem uerso agitur.

[209269] Inst. l. c.

[209282] § 69. As we have mentioned [§ 61, Inst. 4, 6, 36] the action brought against the Peculium of filiusfamilias and of slaves, we must explain more fully this and the other actions by which fathers and masters are sued on account of their sons or slaves.

[209534] § 70. Firstly, if it was at the bidding of the father or master that the plaintiff contracted with the son or slave, the father or master may be sued for the whole amount of the debt contracted, and rightly so, for in this case the person with whom the contract is made looks rather to the credit of the father or master than to that of the son or slave.

[209890] On the same principle the praetor grants two other actions, the actio exercitoria and institoria, one on account of a debt contracted by a ship-captain (magister), the other on account of a debt contracted by a manager of a shop or business (institor). The actio exercitoria lies against a father or master who has appointed a son or slave to be captain of a ship, to recover a debt incurred by the son or slave on account of the ship. As such a contract seems also to be made with the consent of the father or master, it has appeared most equitable that an action should be given to make him liable for the whole debt. But still further even if a man appoint another person’s slave or a freeman over his ship, he may nevertheless be sued by this praetorian action. The action is called Exercitoria because exercitor signifies a person who takes the daily profits of a ship. The formula Institoria is applicable in the case of a man appointing his son or slave or another person’s slave or a freeman to manage a shop or any business for him, should any debt be contracted by such person on account of that business. It is called Institoria because a person set over to manage a shop is called Institor, and the action is also brought to recover the whole amount of the debt.

[211166] § 72. Besides the above, an action has also been established called Tributoria, against a father or a master of a slave, when their son or slave carries on some business with his Peculium with the knowledge of his father or master. For if any contracts are made with them on account of that business the praetor orders that whatever capital belongs to this business and any profits made in it shall be distributed between the father or master and the other creditors in proportion to their respective claims against the son or slave, and since the praetor permits the father or master to effect the distribution, this actio tributoria is provided to meet the case of a creditor complaining that he has received less than his share.

[211899] § 72 a. There has also been instituted the action in respect of Peculium (de peculio) and of what has been converted to the profit of the father or master (de in rem verso), since notwithstanding the fact that a contract has been made without the consent of the father or master, yet if any portion has been converted to his profit, he ought to be altogether liable to that amount; or if no portion has been converted to his profit, he ought to be liable to the extent of the peculium. Conversion to his profit is understood to mean any necessary expenditure by his son or slave on his account, as borrowing money with which the son or slave pays his creditors, repair of his falling house, purchase of corn for his household of slaves (familia), purchase of an estate for him, or any other necessary. So if out of ten thousand sesterces which your slave borrowed of Titius he paid your creditor five thousand, and spent the remainder in some other way, you are liable for the whole of the five thousand, and for the remainder to the extent of the peculium. If the whole ten thousand was applied to your profit you are liable for the whole. And although the action in respect of Peculium and of conversion to profit is only one action, nevertheless it has two separate condemnations. Thus the judex first looks to see whether there has been a conversion to the profit of the father or master, and does not proceed to estimate the value of the peculium unless there was no such conversion or only a partial conversion.

[213418] § 73. In ascertaining the amount of the peculium, deduction first is made of what the son or slave owes to the father or master or to a person in their power, and the residue only is regarded as peculium. Sometimes, however, what the son or slave owes to a person in the power of their superior is not deducted, for instance, if it is owed to a vicarius, that is to a slave belonging to the peculium of the son or slave.

[213840] § 74. There is no doubt that both a creditor who has contracted at the bidding (jussu) of the father or master with a son or slave, and one who might sue, by exercitoria or institoria, may bring the action in respect of the peculium or of conversion to profit; but no one would be so foolish, who could recover the whole by one of the former actions, as to undertake the trouble of proving the existence of a peculium and that it was sufficient in amount to satisfy his claim, or that the transaction had been for the benefit of the father or master.

[214392] § 74 a. A plaintiff who has the actio Tributoria may bring actio de peculio et in rem verso, and will generally find it expedient to do so; for actio Tributoria only relates to that portion of the peculium which consists of the trading capital and the profits of the business with which the son or slave traded, but other actions extend to the whole peculium; and a man may trade with only a third or fourth or less part of his peculium and have the greatest part of it invested in other concerns. A fortiori, if the plaintiff can prove that what he gave the son or slave in fulfilment of the contract was converted to the profit of the father or master, he should use this action, viz. de peculio et in rem verso, instead of the actio Tributoria; for, as I said above, the same formula lies both in respect of peculium and of what has been converted to uses.

[215253] The term Institor includes any one set over a business—cuicumque negotio praepositus sit institor recte appellabitur—and so a banker (mensae praepositus), bailiff (agris colendis), foreman of a trade (mercaturis), bagman (sed etiam eos institores dicendos placuit, quibus vestiarii vel lintearii dant vestem circumferendam et distrahendam, quos vulgo circitores appellamus, Dig. 14, 3, 5), and any similar agent, of whatever age or sex (nam et plerique pueros puellasque tabernis praeponunt, Dig. 14, 3, 8).

[215762] It seems probable that the actio exercitoria and institoria were first granted by the praetor in the common case of the magister or institor being a son or slave of his employer, when a third party contracting with them would either have no remedy at all, or in respect of the filius familias one which would often be ineffective, and that they were afterwards extended to cases where the magister or institor were free persons and slaves, extraneous to the family of the employer.

[216245] The liability of the shipowner (exercitor) and of the master (dominus) on account of the contracts of the free captain (magister), and of the free manager, overseer, factor (institor) made within the scope of their employment, was the germ or first manifestation of the institution of contractual Agency, an institution that did not reach its complete development in Roman jurisprudence. For in this system an agent could not be a mere instrument of acquiring a contractual obligation for his employer, but was regarded as being himself a party to any contract he concluded on account of another. Thus the liability of the exercitor or dominus existed alongside or in addition to that of the magister or institor.

[216960] The term actiones adjecticiae qualitatis is used by modern commentators on Roman law to denote action by which this kind of liability was enforced, because of the Adjectio or additional clause which was introduced in their formula. By the civil law, as we have noticed, the inferior could not bind the superior, i.e. deteriorate his condition even with the consent of the superior, Savigny, § 113. But the Praetor besides the actio directa (empti, locati, &c.), which lay against the inferior, granted similar actions with a modified formula (actio empti de peculio, &c.) against the superior. They are six in number: Quod jussu, Exercitoria, Institoria, De peculio, De in rem verso, Tributoria. In the formula for De peculio, and De in rem verso (one formula with a double condemnatio), the adjectio was annexed to the condemnatio with a taxatio clause limiting the damages either to the peculium or to the amount of benefit which the defendant had derived from the transaction in question. Keller. Litis Contestatio, § 50 (cf. Lenel, p. 225), supposes that the following may have been its simplest form: Maevius judex esto. Quod Titius Seio filiofamilias mensam argenteam commodavit, qua de re agitur, quidquid ob eam rem Seium Titio dare facere oportet ex fide bona, ejus judex Gaium patrem, dumtaxat De peculio aut Quod in rem Gaii patris versum est, condemnato. In Quod jussu, Exercitoria, and Institoria, the Adjectio was apparently a part of the demonstratio, something corresponding to a demonstratio being required even where the action was one de certa pecunia or de certa re. Keller suggests the following formula: Quod jussu Gaii patris Seius filiusfamilias a Titio hominem emit, quidquid ob eam rem Seium Titio dare facere oportet ex fide bona, id Gaium patrem condemna. In all of them the agent alone was mentioned in the intentio, § 34 comm., the condemnation being directed against the person of the principal. Cf. Lenel, § 206. We have not sufficient data for determining the nature of the formula in Tributoria. The knowledge of the father, the inadequate distribution, the limitation of liability to the merx peculiaris, would seem to require an Adjectio to all three parts of the formula.

[219170] By the combination in one formula of the actions De peculio and De in rem verso, the superior could be successively sued on two grounds. If the actions had been distinct, then, as their intentio must have been identical, Litis Consumptio would have hindered their successive institution.

[219459] The agent and principal were correal debtors, at least when the agent was a free person, 3 § 110 comm., and against whichever an action was brought, the intentio averred the debt of the agent, so that on Litis Contestatio against either, the other was discharged by Res in judicium deducta. To remedy the injustice in such cases Justinian enacted that bringing an action against one correal debtor did not consume the right of action against the other. Cod. 8, 40, 28.