WORK: Institutes of Roman Law  (slug: gaius-institutes-of-roman-law-09683f)

CHAPTER: 116-de-legitima-agnatorvm-svccessione-2



[110032] Conversely, the debts of the person who gives himself in adoption or of the woman who becomes subjected to hand (manus), do not pass to the fictitious purchaser (coemptionator) or adoptive father, unless they are hereditary debts, for in this case as the adoptive father or coemptionator are heredes instead of the persons made subject to them, they become directly liable, while the person adopted and woman sold into subjection are released from liability by ceasing to be heredes; but if the debt was owed in their own name, their adoptive father or fictitious purchaser incurs no liability, nor do the person adopted and woman subject to hand remain even themselves liable at civil law, their liability being extinguished by their capitis deminutio: a praetorian action, however, based on a feigned rescission of their capitis deminutio (4 § 38), is granted to the creditors against them, and if the action is not defended the property which would have belonged to them but for their capitis deminutio is allowed by the praetor to be all sold by the creditors.

[111098] See 1 §§ 97-107, comm., 1 §§ 159-164. By arrogation a man passed from the status of paterfamilias to that of filiusfamilias, from domestic independence to domestic dependence. Thus it operated, a capitis minutio minima. Capitis minutio minima had various effects on a man’s rights and obligations:—

[111398] (a) As it implied a change of family, it entailed a loss of rights founded on agnation, including the sworn services of a freedman, for the patron was treated in certain circumstances as a quasi agnate.

[111602] (b) It had further effects, which perhaps we must be contented at the present day to regard as merely positive and inexplicable. Thus it extinguished any ususfructus or usus vested in the arrogatus. This effect was abrogated by Justinian, Cod. 3, 33, 16.

[111858] (c) It extinguished debts owed by the arrogatus. As a filiusfamilias was just as capable at civil law of incurring debts as a paterfamilias (apart from the change in the law made by S. C. Macedonianum), it is hard to say why the passage from one condition to the other should operate an extinction of debt. Ihering suggests that when the lex curiata required in Adrogatio was a reality, it was not enacted until all proved debts of Adrogatus were discharged; and that the publicity of the proceeding made uninjurious to the creditors what the protection of Adrogator required—the ipso facto extinction of all debts not proved before the enactment of the law. But when the people were merely represented by thirty lictors, and Adrogatio became comparatively a private proceeding, the old rule had ceased to be just, and was practically abolished by the Praetor’s Restitutio in integrum.

[112745] Adrogatio in the legislation of Justinian only conveyed to the adrogator a usufruct in the property of the adrogatus. The ownership subject to the usufruct (proprietas) remained in the adrogatus, Inst. 3, 10, 2; but the rights of the creditors of adrogatus were not allowed to be injured by this change, Inst. 3, 10, 3.

[113066] Coemptio is not noticed by Justinian, as the in manum conventio of the wife was obsolete long before his time.

[113178] § 85. Item si legitimam hereditatem heres, antequam cer|nat aut pro herede gerat, alii in iure cedat, pleno iure fit ille heres, cui cessa est hereditas, proinde ac si ipse per legem ad hereditatem uocaretur. quodsi posteaquam heres extiterit, cesserit, adhuc heres manet et ob id creditoribus ipse tenebitur; sed res corporales transferet proinde ac si singulas in iure cessisset, debita uero pereunt, eoque modo debitores hereditarii lucrum faciunt

[113630] § 86. Idem iuris est, si testamento scriptus heres, posteaquam heres extiterit, in iure cesserit hereditatem; ante aditam uero hereditatem cedendo nihil agit.

[113790] § 87. Suus autem et necessarius heres an aliquid agant in iure cedendo, quaeritur. nostri praeceptores nihil eos agere existimant; diuersae scholae auctores idem eos agere putant, quod ceteri post aditam hereditatem; nihil enim interest, utrum aliquis cernendo aut pro herede gerendo heres fiat, an iuris necessitate hereditati adstringatur.

[114133] If a person who is entitled to succeed as agnate to an intestate, before declaring his formal acceptance or informally acting as heir, surrender the inheritance by in jure cessio, the inheritance (hereditas) passes to the surrenderee exactly as if he were called to it by the law of the Twelve Tables itself. But if the agnate first accepts and then surrenders, he nevertheless continues to be heir, and remains liable to the creditors for the debts of the deceased: in this case the corporeal objects of the inheritance pass to the surrenderee just as if they had been separately surrendered (res singulae), but the debts of the inheritance are thereby extinguished, the debtors gaining the advantage of being discharged of liability.

[114870] § 86. The same happens when an heir instituted in a will accepts and then surrenders, but before acceptance his surrender is inoperative.

[115009] § 87. Whether a self- and necessary successor passes the succession by such a surrender is a question. According to my school the surrender is in this case inoperative: the other school think that the effect is the same as when the voluntary heirs surrender after acceptance, and that it makes no difference whether a man is heir by legal necessity on the one hand or by formal acceptance or informal acts of heirship on the other.

[115442] Gaius now proceeds to another mode of conveying a juris universitas, the conveyance by an agnate of a delated but not accepted inheritance. Cf. 2 §§ 34, 35. We must bear in mind the distinction between heres and vocatus ad hereditatem, the offer (delatio) of an inheritance by the law or by a testator, and its final acquisition (aditio, acquisitio) by the delatee (2 §§ 152, 153, 162). In the case of the heres necessarius, the self-successor and the testator’s manumitted slave, delatio and acquisitio coincide; but in the case of the voluntarius heres, the agnate or the extraneus scriptus, they are two distinct events. An explanation of the causes of the different effects of an in jure cessio by these different classes might have thrown some light on this branch of early Roman law, but the reasons are not given by Gaius, and perhaps we must now be content to regard these distinctions as merely positive and inexplicable rules. Perhaps, as Ihering suggests, it was held, that to permit an heir appointed by will to part with the inheritance—in other words, to convert it into money—would have been in direct opposition to the testator’s intention; who, if he approved of such a step, might have adopted the mode of testation explained in 2 § 189, comm., i. e. might have instituted not the beneficiary but his slave.

[116769] Successio per universitatem, as already mentioned, was an institution only recognized by the legislator in a limited number of cases: one individual could not make another as he chose, in pursuance of private disposition, his universal successor. In respect of the voluntary transfer, inter vivos, of an inheritance, universal succession was only admitted in two cases: transfer by an agnate of delata hereditas (of his right to acquire an intestate succession) in the interval between delatio and aditio, and transfer (restitutio) by an heir to a fideicommissaria hereditas under the Sc. Trebellianum, 2 §§ 246, 259, comm.

[117394] The sale of an inheritance after acceptance was carried out in later law not by in jure cessio, but informally by emptio venditio accompanied with tradition and stipulations or cession of actions respecting the debts to or from the inheritance, 2 § 252; cf. Roby, 2, p. 162.

[117670] § 88. Nunc transeamus ad obligationes. quarum summa diuisio in duas species diducitur: omnis enim obligatio uel ex contractu nascitur uel ex delicto.

[117821] Inst. 3, 13; Gaius in Dig. 44, 7, 1. 1.

[117862] § 89. Et prius uideamus de his quae ex contractu nascuntur. harum autem quattuor genera sunt: aut enim re contrahitur obligatio aut uerbis aut litteris aut consensu.

[118029] Inst. l. c.

[118042] § 88. We proceed to treat of obligations, which fall into two principal classes, obligations created by contract and obligations created by delict.

[118191] § 89. We first treat of those which we founded on contract, which are of four orders, for contract is concluded by delivery of a thing, by words, by writing, or by consent.

[118365] Having examined Unequal primary real rights (status) and a portion of Equal primary real rights, namely, ownership and servitudes (jura in re), and omitting the detailed examination of another portion of Equal primary real rights, namely, Primordial rights, we quit the subject of real rights, or rights to forbearances binding indifferently all the world, and proceed to Obligations, jura in personam; that is to say, rights to certain acts or forbearances binding exclusively certain individuals.

[118865] The law of contract differs from other branches of law in that its function is rather auxiliary to human freedom than restrictive or coercive. While the law of Status and the law of Ownership are imperious and peremptory and felt by the fetters they impose on human volition, the law of Contract is ministerial to manifestations of will, and fosters and protects the most diversified activity and enterprise. The law of Contract is the most plastic part of the code and the part most susceptible of adaptation to the necessities of commerce: it is the portion of Roman jurisprudence which has survived with least alteration in modern Europe; and of all departments of modern codes it is the portion whose relative importance is already the greatest and is continually increasing.

[119646] But though to contract is a matter of free choice, Obligation, to be a subject of jurisprudence, implies compulsion: Debitor intelligitur is a quo invito pecunia exigi potest, Dig. 50, 16, 108. ‘Debtor denotes a person from whom money may be extorted against his will:’ i. e. it excludes merely moral duties (officia) because the state applies no coercion to enforce their performance.

[120033] Obligation, in the narrower sense in which we proceed to use the term, also excludes those duties which the legislator imposes on all the world alike towards a person invested with a Real right, whether a Primordial right, a right of Status, or a right of Dominion. Duties correlative to jus in rem, which are invariably negative in character, have scarcely received a distinctive appellation in the Latin language: for the sake of distinction from moral duties they may be called Necessitas, and for the sake of distinction from Positive duties, Necessitas abstinendi.

[120604] Justinian defines Obligation as follows: Obligatio est juris vinculum quo necessitate astringimur alicujus solvendae rei secundum nostrae civitatis jura, Inst. 3, 13. ‘Obligation is a legal bond, by which we are compelled to some performance (solutio) in accordance with the law of the state.’

[120899] The performance (solutio) which it is the object of the law to enforce when it imposes an obligation is sometimes decomposed into three elements, expressed by three terms, dare, facere, praestare. In personam actio est quotiens cum aliquo agimus qui nobis ex contractu vel ex delicto obligatus est, id est, cum intendimus dare, facere, praestare oportere, 4 § 2. ‘A personal action pursues an obligation arising from contract or delict, and declares that the defendant is bound to convey, perform, or make some render for a wrong.’ Obligationum substantia non in eo consistit ut aliquod corpus nostrum aut servitutem nostram faciat, sed ut alium nobis obstringat ad dandum aliquid vel faciendum vel praestandum, Dig. 44, 7, 3, pr. ‘An obligation has not the effect of making a person owner of a corporeal thing or of giving him a right of servitude, but its object is to compel him to convey the ownership of something, or to oblige him to render some service, or make some other restitution. Dare denotes the transfer of ownership in a certain thing or sum of money: Facere, the render of any service other than the transfer of ownership in a certain thing: and Praestare may possibly signify the discharge of any obligation engendered by maleficium.

[122152] However diversified may be the Object of an obligation, it is always transformable, in the eye of the law, into the payment of a certain sum of money. Ea enim in obligatione consistere quae pecunia lui praestarique possunt, Dig. 40, 7, 9, 2. ‘Obligation can only have for its Object something redeemable and replaceable by money.’ Hence if it is desired to bind to the performance of some act not in its nature susceptible of pecuniary appreciation, it is necessary to make the direct Object of stipulation the payment of a certain penal sum, stipulatio poenae nomine, and the non-performance of the act desired the title or condition whereupon the penal sum shall be forfeited, as by a bond in English law; for then the obligation, having a pecuniary value, is a civil obligation enforceable by the tribunals. The performance of the act desired is thus practically enforced, although nominally it is removed from the position of Object of the stipulation to that of Condition.

[123131] In speaking of the right of Dominium or Ownership, we have already noticed (2 § 1, comm.) that besides the primary object of the right (abstention from molestation), there is always a secondary object, land, house, slave, or the like, to which such molestation relates. So, in view of this transformability of all Objects of obligation into money payments, we may say that the ultimate object of every obligation is an Alienation, or transfer of property; and is always a certain amount of Pecuniary value.

[123639] The primary and most comprehensive division of Obligatio is one that has already been noticed, 1 § 1, into (A) civilis obligatio, and (B) naturalis obligatio.

[123799] (A) Civilis obligatio is obligation enforceable by action, whether it derives its origin from Jus civile, as the obligation engendered by formal contracts or the obligation enforceable by penalty in a delictal action, or from that portion of Roman law which belonged to Jus gentium; such as the obligation engendered by Formless contracts, and obligation to indemnify engendered by delict.

[124190] (B) Obligatio naturalis is obligation not immediately enforceable by action, or obligation imposed by that portion of Jus gentium which is only imperfectly recognized by law; obligation, however, which is recognized by positive law in various operations, e. g. as founding a defence called Exceptio, i. e. a contention that the right of the plaintiff, though not nullified, is counteracted by an opposing right of the defendant, 4 §§ 115-137, comm.; as giving a right of Retention (barring condictio indebiti soluti) and of being used as a good set-off against the claim of the plaintiff (compensatio), 4 § 61; and as capable of forming a basis of various Accessory institutes of Civil law, such as Novatio, Pignus, Fidejussio, Constitutum.

[124932] Naturalis obligatio, with its partial and occasional protection, may seem a singular and anomalous institute of Roman law, but it is paralleled by the recognition, though to a very minor extent, of Imperfect obligations in English jurisprudence. Imperfect obligations are so called, not because they are less binding in the forum of conscience than those which are perfect, but because they are not directly enforced by political sanctions, because various motives induce the state to exempt the debtor from positive coercion. Instances of imperfect obligation are debts barred by a statute of limitations, and debts discharged by adjudication of bankruptcy. A written promise to pay by the bankrupt or debtor discharged by limitation, perfects and revives the imperfect obligation, and makes it ground to support an action. As in English law a merely moral duty is an inadequate consideration to support and validate a promise to pay, the validity of such ratificatory promises shows conclusively that the obligation of the insolvent, and of the debtor discharged by limitation, is regarded in English jurisprudence as something more than a moral obligation, as, to a certain extent, a legal obligation; that is, is viewed by English tribunals in the light in which naturalis obligatio was viewed by Roman tribunals. Cf. Anson on Contract, p. 116, 10th ed.

[126291] Civil obligations fall under two principal classes: (1) those to which the title or investitive fact is a contract; and (2) those to which the title or investitive fact is a delict. In obligation created by contract there are two stages: there is first a primary or sanctioned Personal right antecedent to wrong, and afterwards a secondary or sanctioning Personal right consequent on a wrong. In obligation founded on delict there is the second stage, a secondary or sanctioning Personal right consequent on a wrong, but the first stage is not a Personal right (jus in personam), but a Real right (jus in rem), whether a Primordial right, right of Status, or of Property.

[126964] These two typical classes, however, fail to comprehend all the obligations enforceable by action, and two supplementary classes have to be added: (3) obligations similar to those founded on contract (obligationes quasi ex contractu); and (4) obligations similar to those founded on delict (obligationes quasi ex delicto). It will be noticed that Gaius does not give this fourfold classification of the sources of obligation, which is found in the Institutes of Justinian, but derives all obligations either from Contract or Delict. In a passage of the Digest (44, 7, 1, pr.) excerpted from a work of Gaius, those not arising in the two principal ways are put in one miscellaneous group, ‘obligationes aut ex contractu nascuntur aut ex maleficio aut proprio quodam jure ex variis causarum figuris.’

[127763] A Contract is a convention or agreement (conventio, pactio, pactum) enforceable by appeal to a court of law. Et est pactio duorum pluriumve in idem placitum et consensus, Dig. 2, 14, 1, 2. ‘A pact exists when two or more persons come to an identical resolution, and agreement on a particular subject.’

[128066] Consensus, the essence of contract, will be found on close examination to consist not, as might at first sight appear, of two precisely similar elements contributed by the two consenting parties, but of two dissimilar elements, an intention signified by a promisor, and a corresponding expectation signified by a promisee. The promisor promises that he will do or perform some given act or acts, or that he will forbear or abstain from some given act or acts; that is, he signifies to the promisee that he intends to do the acts or to observe the forbearances which form the object of his promise: and the promisee accepts the promise; that is, signifies to the promisor his belief or expectation that the latter will do or forbear agreeably to the intention which he has expressed. Every agreement, then, consists of a promise proffered and accepted or of reciprocal promises proffered and accepted by each party; that is, (1) of a signification by the promising party of his intention to do the acts or to observe the forbearances which he promises to do or observe, and (2) a signification by the promisee that he expects that the promising party will fulfil the proffered promise. Without signification of the intention there is no promise; without signification of the expectation there is no reason for enforcing the promise. The consensus of the parties is the chiming or going together of this intention with this expectation; their direction to a common object, the acts or forbearances contemplated by the convention. Pollicitation is the offer of the one party before it is accepted by the other. Pactum est duorum consensus atque conventio; pollicitatio vero offerentis solius promissum, Dig. 50, 12, 3, pr.

[129787] A leading division of contracts or agreements enforceable by action is into formal contracts and formless contracts. Formal contracts are Nexum (in early law), Verbal contract or Stipulatio, and Literal contract or Expensilatio. Formless contracts are Real (Mutuum, Commodatum, Depositum, Pignus), Innominate contract (do ut des, &c.), or Consensual (Emptio, Locatio, Societas, Mandatum). Formal contracts derive their validity from the observance of a form prescribed by positive law, and calculated to inspire by its solemnity serious reflection in the negotiators, and to distinguish definitive resolution from preparatory negotiation and debate. In Real contract the earnestness and definitiveness of the resolution is proved by one contractor parting with ownership, as in mutuum or with physical control of the thing, as in commodatum, depositum, pignus. The obligation, too, contracted by the other party is perfectly plain, being in most cases simply restitution. In Exchange (permutatio), an Innominate contract, the duty of the promisor is not quite so simple; it is not restitution, but the transfer of an equivalent; and, accordingly, the validity of the contract of Exchange was not established till a comparatively late period of Roman jurisprudence. The daily and hourly employment of the Consensual contracts of Purchase and Hiring, while it would make the requirement of any formality intolerably inconvenient, also renders the nature of these contracts perfectly familiar to all the world, so that the mere mention of their names awakens as vivid a picture of their consequences as could the observance of the most ceremonious form. In the remaining Consensual contracts, Agency and Partnership, the position of the Agent or Partner who is called to account for property that has passed into his hands or that has been lost by his negligence is so similar to that of a party to a Real contract that there could be no hesitation in extending to these contracts the protection of the public tribunals.

[131806] An agreement that was neither valid by its Form, as was the the stipulation, nor was one of the four Consensual contracts with their familiar names, nor was a Real or innominate contract, that is, an agreement where on one side the consideration (causa praeter conventionem, Dig. 2, 14, 7, 4) was executed, nor, though outside the classification of contract, was made valid by the edict or some special statute, was not directly enforceable at law, and was called a Nudum pactum. A Nude pact, though ineffectual to produce civilis obligatio, may produce naturalis obligatio. Igitur nuda pactio obligationem non parit, sed parit exceptionem, Dig. 2, 14, 7, 4. ‘A nude pact creates no (civil) obligation, but creates a defence.’ Interest on a loan could only be secured by the Formal contract of Stipulatio: but a nude pact to pay interest could be secured by pignus, Dig. 13, 7, 11, 3, and could be pleaded in bar to a suit for recovering back the interest when actually paid (condictio indebiti soluti): and we have seen that exceptio, pignus, solutum non repeti, are some of the criteria which indicate the existence of naturalis obligatio, Dig. 46, 3, 5, 2.

[132967] Another important division of contracts is into unilateral and bilateral. Wherever mutual promises are proffered and accepted there are in strictness two or more obligations; but where one of the promises is thus made to depend on the other, the several obligations are cross or implicated, and therefore are commonly deemed to arise from one agreement. Where one only of the agreeing parties gives a promise, the proffered and accepted promise is called a Unilateral agreement; where each gives a promise, and the promise of one is made to depend on the promise of the other, the several proffered and accepted promises are called a Bilateral or Synallagmatic agreement. Under a unilateral agreement only one party can sue or be sued, under a bilateral agreement each party may sue or be sued in turn. The sole Unilateral agreements or contracts mentioned by Gaius are Expensilatio, Stipulatio, Mutuum. Emptio-Venditio, Locatio-Conductio, Societas, are examples of Bilateral agreements. Depositum, Commodatum, Pignus, Mandatum, are called imperfectly Bilateral agreements, because they do not necessarily and originally produce any reciprocal obligation, but only ex postfacto, i. e. in consequence of some circumstance incidental to the agreement, as a claim of depositarius to be indemnified on account of some necessary expense he had been put to in respect of the thing deposited with him. The action founded on the original and principal obligation of a semibilateral agreement, i. e. the action of the depositor, lender for use, pawnor, or person giving the mandate, is called judicium directum or actio directa: the action founded on the incidental or ex postfacto obligation, i. e. the action of the depositary, borrower for use, pawnee, agent, is called judicium contrarium or actio contraria. The Unilateral agreements above mentioned, even though, like Mutuum, institutions of Jus gentium, give rise to condictiones or actions of strict law (stricti juris actiones); bilateral and semi-bilateral agreements give rise to equitable actions (bonae fidei actiones).

[135042] The classification of contracts by Gaius does not include the Nexum, which seems to have been a form of contracting in early law. No precise information concerning its characteristics have come down to us, and hence modern writers frequently differ in their explanation of it. (See Muirhead’s Roman Law, p. 151; Roby, Roman Private Law, Bk. V. App. B; Sohm, pp. 52, 392.) Nexum is sometimes used in a general sense to include all proceedings carried out per aes et libram, while it is elsewhere distinguished from mancipation. Nexum Manilius scribit omne quod per libram et aes geritur, in quo sint mancipia. Mucius quae per aes et libram fiant ut obligentur, praeterquam mancipio detur. Hoc verius esse ipsum verbum ostendit, de quo quaeritur; nam id est, quod obligatur per libram neque suum fit, inde nexum dictum. Varro, L. L. 7, 105.—Nexum est, ut ait Gallus Aelius, quodcumque per aes et libram geritur, id quod necti dicitur, quo in genere sunt haec, testamenti factio, nexi datio, nexi liberatio, Festus.

[136056] The nexi liberatio seems to be referred to by Gaius, § 173. Est autem alia species imaginariae solutionis per aes et libram. Quod et ipsum genus certis in causis receptum est; veluti si quid eo nomine debeat quod per aes et libram gestum sit sive quid ex judicati causa debeat. Nexum and mancipium are clearly distinguished in the following well-known citation of Festus from the Twelve Tables—cum nexum faciet mancipiumque, uti lingua nuncupassit, ita jus esto.

[136520] From these and other passages we may gather that Nexum in a specific sense was, according to the law of the Twelve Tables, a form of obligation entered into per aes et libram.

[136697] As a form giving rise to an obligation Nexum was apparently a contract for a money loan (certa pecunia credita); not a fictitious money loan, as has sometimes been supposed, but a real one, just as mancipium was originally not a fictitious, but a real sale. Debtors who bound themselves to their creditors in this solemn way were the nexi, whose harsh treatment in early times is dwelt on by Livy; if they made default on the day of payment, they were immediately treated as judgment debtors, being without further process liable to manus injectio; i. e. to be seized by the creditor and taken into court in order that the praetor might award personal execution; in other words, deliver him as a quasi-slave to the creditor (addicere, duci jubere).

[137447] Nexum as a solemn form of contracting a loan was abolished, or at least deprived of its sanction, by the lex Poetelia, Livy, 8, 28: as a form of extinction of obligation in certain cases, Nexum continued to exist in the time of Gaius, § 173.

[137690] In the Twelve Tables the law of contract is still in a rudimentary stage. The formal obligation of Nexum is confined to money loans. Stipulation belongs to later law. No informal contract is recognized. Such contracts, as deposit, loan for use and pledge, could only be made, if at all, by the tortuous process of mancipatio cum fiducia.

[138029] The arrangement adopted by Gaius is not without significance. He begins with a Real, that is, a Formless contract, found in jus gentium; and from these Real contracts he selects Mutuum, the contract which took the place of the old formal contract of Nexum, the source of Roman contract law. He then proceeds to Formal contracts, Verbal and Literal, which appear to have been subsequent to the Twelve Tables; and concludes with the remaining and comparatively modern class of Formless contracts, namely the Consensual.

[138548] § 90. Re contrahitur obligatio uelut mutui datione. 〈mutui autem datio〉 proprie in his [fere] rebus contingit quae pondere numero mensura constant, qualis est pecunia numerata uinum oleum frumentum aes argentum aurum. quas res aut numerando aut metiendo aut pendendo in hoc damus, ut accipientium fiant et quandoque nobis non eaedem, sed aliae eiusdem naturae reddantur. unde etiam mutuum appellatum est, quia quod ita tibi a me datum est, ex meo tuum fit.

[139006] Inst. 3, 14, pr.; Gaius in Dig. 44, 7, 1, 2.

[139052] § 91. Is quoque qui non debitum accepit ab eo qui per errorem soluit re obligatur. nam proinde ei condici potest si paret evm dare oportere, ac si mutuum accepisset. unde quidam putant pupillum aut mulierem, cui sine tutoris auctoritate non debitum per errorem datum est, non teneri condictione, non magis quam mutui datione. sed haec species obligationis non uidetur ex contractu consistere, quia is qui soluendi animo dat magis distrahere uult negotium quam contrahere.

[139525] Inst. 3, 14, 1.

[139542] Of real contracts, or contracts created by delivery of a thing, we have an example in loan for consumption, or loan whereby ownership of the thing lent is transferred. This relates to things which are estimated by weight, number, or measure, such as money, wine, oil, corn, bronze, silver, gold. We transfer ownership of our property in these on condition that the receiver shall transfer back to us at a future time, not the same things, but other things of the same nature: and this contract is called Mutuum, because thereby meum becomes tuum.

[140090] The receiver of what was not owed from a person who pays in error is also under a real obligation, for he may be sued by Condictio with the formula: ‘If it be proved that he ought to convey.’ just as if he had received the property in pursuance of a loan. And, accordingly, some have held that a ward or female, if their guardian has not authorized them to receive a payment, are not liable to be sued for money paid in error any more than they are for money received as a loan. This, however, is a mistake, as the obligation in this case seems to be of a kind not arising from contract, as a payment in order to discharge a debt is intended to extinguish an obligation, not to establish one.

[140784] The thing to be restored by the borrower in a loan for consumption (money being consumed by spending it) was not the specific thing that was borrowed, but some other thing of the same genus. Such members of a genus as are naturally capable of mutual substitution (quae vice mutua funguntur) received from modern civilians the barbarous name of res fungibiles. A more significant barbarism, if any was necessary, would have been res vicariae, from the principal word of the definition. The classical name was neither res fungibilis, nor res vicaria, but Quantitas, Dig. 44, 2, 7, pr.

[141368] The auctoritas of the guardian was only wanted to supply the want of capacity in the ward to take care of his own interests. As Condictio indebiti, the action brought for recovering money paid by mistake, was not founded on disposition or contract, but on the fact that a defendant had been without cause enriched at the expense of the plaintiff, there seems to be no reason why it should not be brought against a ward who receives without his guardian’s sanction money to which he is not entitled, except that the ward might in the meantime have improvidently spent the money he had received. Justinian decides that the ward is not under the circumstances liable to condictio indebiti, Inst. 3, 14, 1.

[142072] The obligation arising by a contract of mutuum is only an obligation to repay the principal of the debt. The loan is regarded as gratuitous; if any interest is intended to be paid, it requires to be secured by an accompanying verbal contract, or stipulation. The repayment of the principal was enforced by the general personal action of condictio.

[142421] Connected with the contract of mutuum was the senatusconsultum Macedonianum, named, according to Theophilus, after a parricide, according to some commentators, after a money-lender. This decree passed, according to Tacitus, under Claudius (Annales, 11, 13), according to Suetonius, under Vespasian (Suet. Vesp. 11), made a loan of money to a son under power (filiusfamilias) without the consent of the father irrecoverable by action though binding naturaliter (naturalis obligatio). Neither the age nor the rank of a filiusfamilias affected his incapacity to contract a pecuniary loan. The disability of the filiusfamilias did not extend to any contract other than a pecuniary loan.

[143105] By the English law bargains made with expectant heirs and remaindermen, during the lifetime and without the knowledge of the parent, may be set aside by a court of equity on the ground of unfairness or inadequacy. See Pollock on Contracts, p. 622, 7th ed.

[143362] Besides Mutuum there are three other Real contracts, Commodatum, Depositum, Pignus; there are also the Innominate contracts, which resemble the Real, in that they are concluded by an act being executed on one side, such act consisting in their case either in the conveyance of a thing for a promise to convey something else or to perform some service in return, or in the performance of a service for a promise to convey a thing or to render a service in return; where a thing is thus conveyed in the first instance the obligation of the transferee is not in the innominate, as in the real contract, to return the same specific thing or thing of the same kind (genus), but something different. Each of these modes of contracting requires a brief notice.

[144117] Commodatum, a loan for use, is the gratuitous lending of an article to be used by the borrower. It must be gratuitous, for, if any compensation is to be paid, the transaction ceases to be a commodatum, and becomes a letting and hiring (locatio conductio). A loan for use differs from a mutuum, or loan for consumption, in that it passes no property to the borrower. Accordingly, in a loan for use the specific thing that was lent is to be returned, whereas in a loan for consumption it is only to be returned in kind. Again, in case of destruction by an inevitable accident, as fire, shipwreck, or invasion, in a mutuum the loss falls on the borrower (genus et quantitas nunquam pereunt), in a commodatum on the lender. The commentators have expressed the owner’s risk in such cases by the formula, res perit domino, ‘the loss from accidental destruction falls on the owner’; and this proposition holds good of contracts of mutuum and commodatum and most others; but in a consensual contract of sale of a specific thing (emptio venditio), as soon as the obligation is complete, before the property has passed by delivery (traditio) to the buyer, if the thing is destroyed without the fault of the vendor, the loss falls on the buyer (res perit emptori), and he can be compelled to pay the purchase-money, although the object of sale has never been in his possession, Inst. 3, 23, 3. We must not identify the borrower’s right to use the thing lent to him (commodata), which is a contractual one, with the personal servitude (jus in re) called Usus, which is created by other methods and governed by different rules. (For the law relating to the liability of commodatarius and on account of negligence, see comm. at the end of this book.)

[145855] Depositum is the delivery of a thing for custody, to be redelivered on demand, without compensation. It is properly gratuitous, for if a compensation is to be given it is a contract of hiring and letting, and not a deposit. The ownership remains in the depositor; the depositary has sometimes interdict Possession, as in the case of the Sequester, but as a rule, merely Detention, 4 § 170, comm. The identical thing that was deposited is to be returned, not an equivalent of the same kind or quality, as in mutuum. An involuntary depositor, that is, one under stress of shipwreck, fire, civil commotion, the fall of a house, can sue in penal damages for twice the value of the deposit. Sequestration is the deposit of a subject of litigation by consent of parties or order of the court in the hands of a stakeholder (sequester) to abide the result of the trial. When a depositary is bound to restore not a specific thing (idem) but its equivalent, and by a pactum adjectum pays interest for the privilege of using it in the interim; e. g. when a banker pays interest to his depositors; the contract is called Depositum irregulare, and ownership in the thing deposited, as well as possession, contrary to the general rule passes to the depositary. Dig. 16, 3, 24. The passages in the Digest relating to this show that Banking in the modern sense of the word, i. e. the payment of a small interest to depositors and receipt of a larger interest from borrowers of the deposit, was practised by Roman Mensularii, Vangerow, § 630.

[147382] Pignus, pledge, pawn, or mortgage, is the creation of a real right (jus in re aliena) in a thing, movable or immovable, to be held as a security for a debt, and to be retransferred when the debt is satisfied. But this conception of pignus was only reached by gradual steps.

[147657] There are three forms of giving real security to a creditor, corresponding to three eras in the development of Roman law, which must be separately examined.

[147815] (1) The earliest is not in the regular form of a pledge, being effected by a mancipatio or in jure cessio of property, accompanied with a fiducia, or fiduciary agreement for reconveyance, cf. 2 § 60. As a form of security, it is analogous in principle to the English common law mortgage, the ownership in the thing pledged being conveyed to the creditor on the understanding that he is to reconvey it when the debt is paid. The security which this gives to the creditor is that he can recover the thing by vindicatio from any possessor of it, and can sell it as he pleases, though he is liable to the debtor in the actio fiduciae, if he exercises his right improperly. This personal action is the only remedy which the debtor has in respect of the property which he has made over as security for his debt, as having parted with the ownership he has no actio in rem for recovery of it from third parties. But in course of time it seems to have become a common practice for the creditor to allow the debtor to keep possession of the pledge, the latter holding it of him by leave and licence (precario) and having interdict possession of it. The unsatisfactory character of this way of securing a creditor, considered from the point of view of the debtor, is obvious. Yet in a tablet found at the mouth of the Guadalquivir, which probably belongs to the first century after Christ, we see that it was still in use not long before the time when Gaius wrote (Bruns, Fontes, ed. 6, no. 110).

[149302] (2) Pignus, in the strict sense, was effected simply by delivery of possession without in jure cessio or mancipatio. The debtor continued to be owner of the thing pledged, the creditor or pledgee only acquiring interdict-possession of it. But a condition was sometimes inserted in the agreement, by which it was agreed that the thing given in security should become the property of the creditor in case of default (lex commissoria), though by later law such a condition was made void.

[149788] The effect of Pignus was to put the debtor in a much more satisfactory position than in the previous case; but on the other hand the security of the creditor was thereby rendered thus weaker, since he was deprived of his actio in rem to recover the thing from third parties, having only a possessory interdict. Nor apart from special agreement (pactum de vendendo) had he any right of sale.

[150180] (3) The law of pledge was established on a satisfactory footing, when the praetor gave the creditor or pledgee the actio quasi-Serviana in rem or hypothecaria, by which he acquired a real right in the thing (jus in re aliena), while the debtor remained owner of it; a right of sale, in case of default, being implied in the transaction. By these changes both the interests of the debtor and creditor were fully regarded. Under this system there was the further advantage, that property of any kind might be given as security to a creditor by Hypothecation, i. e. by mere agreement without delivery of possession. In this case it was simply the creation of a jus in re, imposing no Obligation on the creditor thus secured. If, however, a pignus was created by delivery of the thing pledged, the legal position of the pledgee would be of a twofold kind: (1) he would have a jus in re aliena, which he could enforce by actio quasi-Serviana in rem; (2) there would be a contractual relation between him and the debtor, they being bound to one another by the real contract of pignus, which was enforced by the actio pigneraticia directa and contraria in personam.

[151340] The action of the creditor to recover the thing pledged, called quasi-Serviana, hypothecaria, or pigneraticia, was as we have seen a real action (in rem). It was originally, as actio Serviana, only given to a farmer (colonus), whose invecta et illata were hypothecated to his landlord for rent. It was probably an actio arbitraria with a formula in factum concepta (these terms will be explained in 4 § 47, comm.) to something like the following effect: Si paret inter Aulum Agerium et L. Titium convenisse, ut ea res, qua de agitur, Aulo Agerio pignori hypothecaeve esset propter pecuniam debitam, eamque rem tunc cum conveniebat, in bonis L. Titii fuisse eamque pecuniam neque solutam neque eo nomine satisfactum esse, neque per Aulum Agerium stare quo minus solvatur, nisi ea res arbitratu tuo restituetur, quanti ea res erit, tantam pecuniam judex Numerium Negerium Aulo Agerio condemna, &c., Lenel, § 267.

[152252] Besides this actio Hypothecaria, whereby the rights of the mortgagee were definitively decided, there was an Interdictum Salvianum, 4 § 147, to enable the landlord to recover the goods of the farmer pledged to him for his rent. It is most probable that this remedy was not like the actio Serviana, which was of later origin, maintainable against third parties in possession of the goods. Its formula was probably something like the following: ‘If such and such a slave is one of the things respecting which you agreed with the plaintiff that whatever was inducted, illated, imported into such and such land, or was thereon born or produced, should be pledged to the plaintiff to secure the payment of the rent of such land; in that case I prohibit your employment of force to hinder the plaintiff from abducting the slave.’ Thus the relation of actio Hypothecaria to interdictum Salvianum would resemble that of Vindicatio to the interdict Utrubi or Uti possidetis, 4 § 148, or that of Hereditatis petitio to the interdict Quorum bonorum, 4 § 144.

[153301] Innominate or unnamed contract is an agreement not falling under any of the classes of named contract, which becomes binding by execution on the part of one of the contractors. Such contracts, which are of a miscellaneous character, are similar to the real in the principle of their formation, but differ from them in the ways we have previously pointed out. Bilateral conventions, Real or Consensual, fall into four classes: Aut enim do tibi ut des, aut do ut facias, aut facio ut des, aut facio ut facias, Dig. 19, 5, 5, pr. ‘There may be a transfer of property to you on my part in consideration of your having to transfer property to me in exchange, or transfer of property on my part in consideration of your having to make some other kind of performance to me, or some other act of performance in consideration of your having to transfer something to me, or performance of some other kind than transfer in consideration of your having to make performance of some such other kind in exchange.’ Some agreements, before execution on either side, would give rise to Named consensual contracts, sale, letting, partnership, or mandate; and these would be at once enforceable by action: while those agreements unaccompanied by execution, whose nature excluded them from these appellations, would have no legal validity. Those agreements which to consensus add execution, but fail to satisfy the definitions of the Named Real contracts, are thrown into the miscellaneous class called Innominate. We have thus the following classification. Contracts are (1) formal (verbis) and (litteris) or (2) informal, and in the latter case they are either (a) consensual, i. e. one of the four contracts established by simple agreement, or (b) real (mutuum, commodatum, depositum, pignus), or (c) nameless (innominate). Agreements known to us as pacta vestita, § 135, comm. should have been added to class (a). To whatever category innominate contracts belonged, do ut des, do ut facias, facio ut des, facio ut facias, they were enforceable by a civil, as opposed to a praetorian, action, called actio in factum praescriptis verbis. Dig. 19, 5, De Praescriptis verbis et in factum actionibus.

[155481] The actio in factum praescriptis verbis was so denominated because, in the absence of a generic name for the contract, the fact begetting the obligation was detailed at length in the beginning of the formula; Actio quae praescriptis verbis rem gestam demonstrat, Cod. 2, 4, 6. Hence it is called actio in factum praescriptis verbis. But at the time when Gaius wrote and till a much later period, this term was not in use, the expression used by the classical jurists for this remedy being not actio, but agere praescriptis verbis. There was indeed no one action in such cases, but a special one was adapted to provide for supplementary cases, which required one, as they arose, where none of the common forms of action were exactly applicable (Sohm, p. 399, n. 4). The action is said to be in factum, because, as it did not belong to any regular class of action, the facts giving rise to it had to be specifically set out, we must not, however, be misled by this to think that it is a kind of action which belongs to the class of actiones in factum, as opposed to actiones in jus conceptae; the actio in factum, we are concerned with, being in jus, not in factum, concepta. This, however, is a misleading name, the formula of the action containing the word ‘oportet’ (quidquid ob eam rem illum illi dare facere oportet), that is to say, having an intentio in jus, cf. 4 §§ 45, 46. The name of this Roman action ex contractu may be illustrated by a comparison with the name of the old English form of procedure, trespass on the case, so named from the comparative particularity with which the circumstances of the plaintiff’s case are detailed in the written allegations. It is sometimes called actio civilis incerti because it is brought to recover whatever damages (quanti interest) the plaintiff had suffered by reason of the defendant’s default. It was an action belonging to the class of actiones bonae fidei. Cf. 4 §§ 18-20, comm.

[157418] Examples of Innominate contract are Exchange (permutatio), as if I have conveyed my land to you on the understanding that you are to convey your land to me in return. Sale or hire not coming under the named contracts because the price or hire money have not been definitely fixed, as if I buy and take away a thing from a shop on credit without settling the price, or hire a servant who works for me before the exact amount of his wages has been determined.

[157877] When the executed part of an innominate contract was a transfer of property, the plaintiff had alternative remedies, he might either sue the other party for the loss of the thing, which he had conveyed, by condictio causâ datâ, causâ non secutâ, i. e. by a suit to recover property conveyed for a consideration which has failed, or he might bring an action on the contract—praescriptis verbis—claiming damages for the loss arising from its breach. Dig. 19, 5, 5, 1.

[158344] It may illustrate the Roman conception of Innominate contract if we indicate the change that has supervened in this matter from the greater force that is conceded to mere agreement (nuda voluntas) in modern jurisprudence.

[158567] With the Romans the execution by one of the parties of his part of an Innominate contract was essential to its efficacy. This execution differentiated the agreement from a nudum pactum and gave it validity, but, naturally, only against the party who had failed to make the return promised. The party who had executed was not similarly bound: he had a right of abandoning the contract and recovering back what he had delivered, not merely when the counter-execution was not made at the time appointed, or had become impossible by the culpa of the other party, or had been always impossible (condictio ob causam non secutam); but when the party who had delivered simply changed his inclination (condictio ex mera poenitentia).

[159293] This was due to the exclusive character of the Roman contract system. We find on the contrary in modern Roman law, as it was in force in parts of Germany before the new civil code was enacted, pactum treated as if it had been accompanied by Stipulation, that is, as having the validity given by Form—in other words, no pacta are nuda, all are vestita—and so agreements are enforceable irrespectively of their part-execution: enforceable irrespectively of execution against both parties alike, who herein stand on precisely the same footing: that is to say, the party who has delivered what he had to deliver has no right to recover it back either ex mera poenitentia, or ob causam non secutam, but merely the power to compel the other party to a corresponding performance. Vangerow, § 599.

[160084] § 92. Verbis obligatio fit ex interrogatione et responsione, ueluti dari spondes? spondeo: dabis? dabo: promittis? promitto: fidepromittis? fidepromitto: fideivbes? fideivbeo: facies? faciam.

[160277] Inst. 3, 15, pr.

[160295] § 93. Sed haec quidem uerborum obligatio dari spondes? spondeo propria ciuium Romanorum est; ceterae uero iuris gentium sunt, itaque inter omnes homines siue ciues Romanos siue peregrinos ualent. et quamuis ad Graecam uocem expressae fuerint, ueluti hoc modo 〈Δώσεις Δώσω· Ὁμολογεɩ̂ς; Ὁμολογω̂· Πίστει κελεύεις; Πίστει κελεύω· Ποιήσεις; Ποιήσω〉, [etiam haec] tamen inter ciues Romanos ualent, si modo Graeci sermonis intellectum habeant. et e contraiio quamuis Latine enuntientur, tamen etiam inter peregrinos ualent, si modo Latini sermonis intellectum habeant. at illa uerborum obligatio dari spondes? spondeo adeo propria ciuium Romanorum est, ut ne quidem in Graecum sermonem per interpretationem proprie transferri possit, quamuis dicatur a Graeca uoce figurata esse.

[161069] Inst. 3, 15, 1; Theoph. 3, 15, 1.

[161104] § 94. Vnde dicitur uno casu hoc uerbo peregrinum quoque obligari posse, ueluti si imperator noster principem alicuius peregrini populi de pace ita interroget pacem fvtvram spondes? uel ipse eodem modo interrogetur. quod nimium subtiliter dictum est, quia si quid aduersus pactionem fiat, non ex stipulatu agitur, sed iure belli res uindicatur.

[161449] § 95. Illud dubitari potest, si quis | —|—.

[161494] Dig. 45, 1, 2, and 6.

[161517] § 95 a. Sunt et aliae obligationes —|—

[161557] (7 uersus in C legi nequeunt) —|— corporal —|—|—|— item | si debitor mulieris iussu eius, dum —, | doti dicat quod debet; alius autem obligari hoc modo | non potest. | et ideo si quis alius — com|muni iure obliga —|—.

[161776] Epit. 2, 9, 3. See Appendix.

[161806] (Cf. Ulp. 6, 2.

[161823] Dotem dicere potest mulier quae nuptura est, et debitor mulieris si iussu eius dicat; item parens mulieris virilis sexus per virilem sexum cognatione iunctus, velut pater avus paternus.)

[162011] § 96. Item uno loquente —|—

[162040] (3 uersus in C legi nequeunt) —|— haec sola causa est, ex qua iureiurando contrahitur | obligatio. sane ex alia nulla causa iureiurando homines obligantur, utique cum quaeritur de iure Romanorum. nam apud peregrinos quid iuris sit, singularum ciuitatium iura requirentes aliud intellegere poterimus —.

[162343] Epit. 2, 9, 4. See Appendix.

[162373] A verbal contract is formed by question and answer, thus: ‘Dost thou solemnly promise that a thing shall be conveyed to me?’ ‘I do solemnly promise.’ ‘Wilt thou convey?’ ‘I will convey.’ ‘Dost thou pledge thy credit?’ ‘I pledge my credit.’ ‘Dost thou bid me trust thee as guarantor?’ ‘I bid thee trust me as guarantor.’ ‘Wilt thou perform?’ ‘I will perform.’

[162733] The formula, ‘Wilt thou solemnly promise?’ ‘I will solemnly promise,’ is only valid between Roman citizens; the others belong to gentile law, and bind all parties, whether Romans or aliens, and, if understood, bind Romans when expressed in Greek, and aliens when expressed in Latin. The formula, ‘Wilt thou solemnly promise (dare spondes)?’ is so peculiarly Roman that it cannot be expressed in Greek, though the word ‘spondes’ is said to have a Greek origin.

[163194] According to some, there is one case in which an alien may be bound by this word, namely, when a Roman emperor in concluding a treaty thus interrogates a foreign sovereign: ‘Art thou sponsor for peace?’ and the Roman emperor is interrogated in the same way in his turn. But this is a refinement on the law, for the violation of a treaty is not redressed by an action ex stipulatu but by the law of war.

[163598] § 95. (It may be questioned whether if the question is in the form ‘Dost thou solemnly promise?’ and the answer to it is simply, ‘I promise,’ or ‘I will give,’ any legal obligation is created.)

[163793] § 95 a. (There are also other obligations which can be contracted without any antecedent question, as when a woman makes a solemn declaration settling dotal property, movable or immovable, on her betrothed or her husband. And not only can the woman herself be bound in this form, but also her father and her debtor, the latter having to declare that he owes the debt to her future husband as dower. It is only by these three persons that a woman can be legally bound by such a formal promise of dower without any antecedent form of question. Other persons who promise a man dower for a woman can only be made liable in the ordinary legal way, that is, by responding to a question and promising what has been put to them in the form of a stipulation.

[164544] § 96. There is another case in which an obligation is contracted by a declaration of one of the parties without any previous interrogation, which is when a freedman takes an oath to his patron promising some payment or performance of some function or service, the obligation being created in this case not so much by the form of words as by the sanctity attaching to the oath. This is the only instance in Roman law of an obligation being contracted by means of an oath, though if we searched the particular laws of foreign communities, other instances might be found.)

[165115] Before we proceed to examine Formal, that is to say, Verbal and Literal contracts, it is desirable to explain the difference between a formal and informal contract.

[165281] A Formal Disposition is one for which, under pain of nullification, the necessary or exclusively valid form of expression or manifestation of intention is prescribed by the law. A Formless Disposition is one where the individual is free to choose the form of expressing, or mode of manifesting, his intention.

[165592] These accessory formalities and solemnities are ancillary to the essential purpose of the transaction, being destined partly to prevent rash and inconsiderate engagements, partly to furnish evidence and proof of the agreement or principal part of the transaction.

[165857] The peculiar characteristic of Formal, that is to say, Verbal and Literal contracts, is this: evidentiary solemnities compose in these contracts an indispensable part of the title to a jus in personam. The Formless contracts, namely, the Real contracts, of which we have already treated, and the Consensual contracts, of which we shall treat hereafter, cannot, of course, be enforced in a court of law unless they are proved to have been concluded, unless, that is, evidence be given of their existence. But the contract and the evidence of the contract are distinct and independent. In Formal contracts a preappointed evidence of the essential portion of the contract, that is, of the intention of the promisor and expectation of the promisee, is made by the law a constituent accessory element of the contract or title itself. It is not perfect or complete without this evidence. If the transaction did not include certain preappointed evidentiary formalities, the Verbal or Literal contract has never been formed and does not exist.

[166894] It was the formal contract entered into by question and corresponding answer, called stipulatio, which became the general mode of contracting obligations in Roman law. The time of its introduction into Roman law cannot be ascertained with any exactness. There is no allusion to it in the fragments of the Twelve Tables, or in the references to that law, which have come down to us from Roman times, and as a binding form of contract it was probably not in existence till a somewhat later period. The earliest definite trace of it is in the Lex Aquilia 287 b. c., which contains a special provision concerning additional parties to a stipulation, called adstipulatores, § 115. Various suggestions have been made by modern writers to explain the origin of the stipulation. (See, for these and for the literature on the subject, Muirhead’s Roman Law, § 39.) The idea that the stipulation developed in some way out of nexum is now abandoned. It seems more likely that in the form spondes? spondeo, question and answer were first used for religious purposes, and subsequently adopted by law as a means of entering into a legal obligation (cf. Sohm, p. 66, n. 14). The action for enforcing a stipulation was at first confined to cases in which certa pecunia or certa res was thus promised, though afterwards it was applicable also to uncertain claims, the action being condictio, which was stricti juris. But the characteristic of the stipulation, which made it in course of time a form for creating any kind of obligation, was that the promise contained in it, though unilateral, might be conditional. A condition was not annexable to all dispositions.

[168543] It was annexable to all Testamentary dispositions; but among formal dispositions inter vivos the only one to which it could be annexed was formation of contract by Stipulation.

[168721] We have seen that conditions were excluded from Expensilatio or Literal Contract: it was their admissibility in Stipulatio that made the latter, unlike Expensilatio, a generic or universal form of contract: a contract equally applicable whatever the object that the contractors desired to secure. Primitive jurisprudence, as we have noticed, only recognized stipulations, whose object was a dare or conveyance of property; not stipulations whose object was a facere or non-facere, some other kind of performance or forbearance. But when facere or non-facere was allowed to form the condition of an obligation, whose object was a dare, and so, when the payment of a penalty could be made contingent on the performance or non-performance of a certain act, it became possible to stipulate, virtually or indirectly at least, for facere or non-facere as well as for dare. Inst. 3, 15, 7. Non solum res in stipulatum deduci possunt, sed etiam facta: ut si stipulemur fieri aliquid vel non fieri. Et in hujusmodi stipulationibus optimum erit poenam subicere, ne quantitas stipulationis in incerto sit ac necesse sit actori probare, quid ejus intersit; itaque si quis ut fiat aliquid stipuletur, ita adici poena debet: ‘si ita factum non erit, tum poenae nomine decem aureos dare spondes?’ sed si quaedam fieri, quaedam non fieri una eademque conceptione stipuletur, clausula erit hujusmodi adicienda: ‘is adversus ea factum erit sive quid ita factum non erit, tunc poenae nomine decem aureos dare spondes?’

[170222] The form of the stipulation, not being in writing or attested by witnesses, must have been often found imperfect for evidentiary purposes. Accordingly we find that it was not uncommon in the time of the classical jurists for the parties to a stipulation to draw up a written memorandum of its contents, called cautio, and in later times, under the Byzantine Emperors, there was an increasing tendency to lay stress on the cautio of the stipulation rather than on the stipulation itself, to which the eastern part of the empire may not have been well accustomed. Hence we find the law on this subject laid down by Justinian to be, that if a written memorandum embodying the terms of a stipulation is proved by the plaintiff, the parties are presumed to have actually entered into a stipulation, unless the defendant can show that he was absent on the day from the place where the stipulation is said to have been entered into, Inst. 3, 19, 12.

[171166] The principal peculiarity that results from the nature of formal contract, and so of that of the verbal and literal contracts of Roman law, which distinguishes them from informal contracts is, that informal contracts are not legally valid unless the ground on account of which the promise is made is shown; whereas verbal and literal contracts, securing by the solemnity of their formalities due deliberation on the part of the contractors, are valid in favour of the promisee apart from their object. See Appendix to this Book.

[171696] Although, however, a mere abstract promise in a stipulation apart from its object was binding, as e. g. do you promise to pay 10 aurei? I do promise,—yet in course of time, a defendant who had been induced to enter into a stipulation by fraud, or who had not received the consideration, on account of which his promise was made, was allowed to plead the exceptio doli or plea of fraud, an equitable defence, probably introduced by Aquilius Gallus (cf. Moyle’s Inst. App. 8, Bk. 3). By this means the circumstances which gave rise to the promise would be brought into consideration in the action. The practice of giving a written acknowledgment or cautio for loans of money grew common, and, as has been mentioned, great evidentiary importance came to be attached to such written documents, especially in the eastern part of the empire.

[172533] If, instead of generally alleging fraud (Si in ea re nihil dolo malo Auli Agerii factum est neque fit), the plea of the defendant who was sued on such an acknowledgment alleged the particular fact of his never having received the alleged loan (exceptio in factum composita), it was called, in later imperial times, exceptio non numeratae pecuniae. Cod. 4, 30, 1, 3. Compare 4 § 116 Si stipulatus sim a te pecuniam, tanquam credendi causa numeratus, nec numeraverim . . . placet per exceptionem doli mali te defendi jubere with Inst. 4, 13, 2 Si quis, quasi credendi causa, pecuniam stipulatus fuerit, neque numeraverit . . . placet per exceptionem pecuniae non numeratae te defendi jubere.

[173224] An important peculiarity of the exceptio non numeratae pecuniae was that the burden of proof was not, as in other exceptions, on the defendant, but on the plaintiff, who would have to prove in the first place the payment of the money to the defendant for which he was suing. This plea might therefore have the practical effect of transforming a loan of money due on a formal contract into a real contract, but this was confined to contracts contemplating a loan of money. But by a constitution of the Emperor Diocletian (Hermogen. Cod. 1; Cod. Theod. 2, 27, 1; Cod. Just. 4, 30), if a written acknowledgment of a debt was thus sued on, the exceptio non numeratae pecuniae could only be pleaded within five years from the date of the contract, which delay was reduced to two years by Justinian, after which interval the cautio was accepted, if we are to follow the statement of the law made in the Institutes, as incontrovertible, and not merely presumptive, proof that the money had been advanced. After this interval, accordingly, Justinian regards the written document as a formal contract and not simply as evidentiary.

[174348] If no written document accompanied a promise by stipulation to repay a debt, no length of time barred the defendant from pleading the exceptio doli. If the plaintiff, instead of suing on the Stipulatio, sued simply on a loan by the informal real contract of mutuum, the defence of the defendant, though substantially the same, viz. that he had never received the money, being a mere contradiction of the intentio, would not appear in the formula in the shape of an exceptio. In this case the burden of proof that the money had been actually lent would naturally fall on the plaintiff. (For the circumstances under which a defence took the form of exceptio see 4 § 115.)

[175019] It may assist us in understanding the distinction of Formless and Formal contracts, that is Verbal and Literal, if, before we quit this subject, we cast a hasty glance at the corresponding institutions of English law.

[175238] In the eye of the English law, contracts are either Simple (parol), that is, enforceable only on proof of consideration, or Special, that is, binding by the solemnity of their form. Special contracts are either contracts under Seal or contracts of Record. A common species of Deed, or written contract under seal, is the Bond or Obligation, which, like Stipulatio, is used to secure the payment of money or performance of any other act, and, like Stipulatio, either binds the debtor alone or the debtor and sureties. It consists of an obligatory part or penal clause binding the obligor to pay a sum of money, and a condition added, that if he does some particular act the obligation shall be void, but else shall remain in full force.

[175975] Contracts of Record are either recognizances or Judgment debts.

[176040] A Recognizance is an acknowledgment before a court or magistrate that a man owes the King or a private plaintiff (as the case may be) a certain sum of money, with a condition avoiding the obligation to pay if he shall do some particular act, as, if he shall appear at the assizes, keep the peace, pay a certain debt, or the like. A Recognizance resembles Stipulation in its form, being entered into by oral interrogation and answer, but differs in that it can only be taken before a court or magistrate duly authorized, whereas stipulatio was transacted between private parties.

[176620] A Judgment debt, or debt due by the judgment of a court of record, is sometimes the result of a judgment in an adverse suit, but sometimes it is merely a form of written contract, and may be entered into in various ways. A fictitious action is brought, and the party to be bound either makes no reply, or fails to instruct his attorney, or confesses the action and suffers judgment to be at once entered up; or the party to be bound consents to a judge’s order authorizing the plaintiff to enter up judgment and issue execution against him, either at once and unconditionally, or on a future day conditionally on non-payment of whatever amount may be agreed upon; or the party to be bound gives a warrant of attorney, that is, authority to an attorney to confess an action of debt or suffer judgment to go by default, the warrant being accompanied by a defeasance declaring it to be merely a security for payment of a certain sum and interest, and providing that no execution shall issue unless default in the payment shall have been made.

[177661] The conjunction of a penal clause and a condition avoiding it is common to the judgment debt, recognisance, bond, and stipulatio poenae nomine. The Roman Nexum, as we have stated, had apparently the effect of a Judgment debt; being a transaction per aes et libram it could not itself be conditional.

[177962] Why was Sponsio binding on Romans and not on strangers? Possibly because originally it was an oath or adjuration of the tutelary gods of Rome, who would not be an object of reverence to a stranger.

[178161] The obligation of an independent sovereign state to another independent sovereign state does not exactly resemble the obligation of one subject to another subject of the same sovereign or political superior. If a contract between two subjects is broken, it is enforced by the power of the common sovereign. But if a treaty between two sovereigns is violated, there is, by hypothesis, no common superior by whom it may be enforced. The treaties of sovereign states give rise to moral obligations similar to those of individuals. They may be binding in the forum of conscience or of heaven, but, if these are disregarded, are not enforced by any earthly tribunal. The moral obligation is not secured by any strictly legal sanction; and the sovereign whose treaty rights are violated can obtain no redress except from the force of international opinion and his own power of inflicting evil on the violator.

[179066] Or we may compare the relation of sovereign states to the relation of individuals before the complete establishment of political society. There is then sufficient intercourse to form a public opinion and certain conceptions of rights and wrongs; but not sufficient organization to dispense with the necessity of self-vindication or self-defence. In such a state the redress of the individual for the harms he suffered was by feud or private war. That such a state once existed we know from the early history of our ancestors and their Teutonic kinsmen. So the redress of sovereigns is war or public feud. In the controversies of individuals the system of private war was abolished in this country by the proclamation of ‘the king’s peace,’ renewed at every coronation—the symbol of the consolidation of central authority. For the controversies of peoples no such abrogation of warlike process seems possible.

[179976] Jus in the expression jus belli may perhaps signify not so much right or law in the ordinary sense as sanction, or executive power, or means of compulsion. That this was one of the many meanings of the word appears from Ovid, who uses the following terms to express a want of self-control: Nam desunt vires ad me mihi jusque regendum. Amores, 2, 4.

[180326] The necessity of employing any consecrated terms in a stipulation was abrogated by a constitution of Leo, dated the calends of January, a. d. 469. Omnes stipulationes, etiamsi non sollemnibus vel directis, sed quibuscunque verbis pro consensu contrahentium compositae sint, legibus cognitae suam habeant firmitatem, Cod. 8, 37, 10. ‘Stipulations, though not in solemn formulas or direct terms, in whatever words the agreement of the parties is expressed, if otherwise legal, shall have binding force.’

[180829] Dotis dictio is not a contract, being simply a solemn binding promise of dos made by a woman, who is betrothed or married, or by some person on her behalf, who is under an obligation to provide her with dos. It is distinguished from dotis promissio, a promise by stipulation to give dos, which any one might undertake. In later law dotis dictio was obsolete, but by a constitution of the Emperor Theodosius II any third person was made capable of binding himself by a simple promise of dower without a stipulation, and this law was adopted by the Emperor Justinian. 1 Cod. 5, 11, 6.

[181413] Jurata promissio liberti was the sworn promise of a freedman, immediately after his manumission, to render certain services (operae) to his patron. It was usual to bind the conscience of the slave by a similar promise before manumission; but such a promise had no legal operation. The right of a patron to the operae of his freedman was put an end to by the capitis diminutio of either patron or freedman, § 83, patronatus being assimilated to agnatio.

[181867] § 97. Si id quod dari stipulamur tale sit, ut dari non possit, inutilis est stipulatio, uelut si quis hominem liberum quem seruum esse credebat, aut mortuum quem uiuum esse credebat, aut locum sacrum uel religiosum quem putabat humani iuris esse, dari 〈stipuletur.

[182133] Inst. 3, 19, 1.

[182150] § 97 a. Item si quis rem quae in rerum natura esse non potest, uelut hippocentaurum,〉 stipuletur, aeque inutilis est stipulatio.

[182280] Inst. l. c.

[182293] § 98. Item si quis sub ea condicione stipuletur quae existere non potest, ueluti si digito caelum tetigerit, inutilis est stipulatio. sed legatum sub inpossibili condicione relictum nostri praeceptores proinde deberi putant, ac si sine condicione relictum esset; diuersae scholae auctores nihilo minus legatum inutile existimant quam stipulationem. et sane uix idonea diuersitatis ratio reddi potest.

[182695] Inst. 3, 19, 11.

[182713] § 99. Praeterea inutilis est stipulatio, si quis ignorans rem suam esse dari sibi eam stipuletur; quippe quod alicuius est, id ei dari non potest.

[182861] § 100. Denique inutilis est talis stipulatio, si quis ita dari stipuletur post mortem meam dari spondes; uel ita 〈post mortem tvam dari spondes?; ualet autem, si quis ita dari stipuletur cvm moriar dari spondes? uel ita〉 cvm morieris dari spondes? id est ut in nouissimum uitae tempus stipulatoris aut promissoris obligatio conferatur. nam inelegans esse uisum est ab heredis persona incipere obligationem. rursum ita stipulari non possumus pridie qvam moriar, aut pridie qvam morieris dari spondes? quia non potest aliter intellegi ‘pridie quam aliquis morietur,’ quam si mors secuta sit; rursus morte secuta in praeteritum reducitur stipulatio et quodammodo talis est heredi meo dari spondes? quae sane inutilis est.

[183581] Inst. 3, 19, 13.

[183599] § 101. Quaecumque de morte diximus, eadem et de capitis deminutione dicta intellegemus.

[183688] § 102. Adhuc inutilis est stipulatio, si quis ad id quod interrogatus erit, non responderit, ueluti si sestertia x a te dari stipuler et tu sestertia v promittas, aut si ego pure stipuler, tu sub condicione promittas.

[183907] Inst. 3, 19, 5.

[183924] § 103. Praeterea inutilis est stipulatio, si ei dari stipulemur, cuius iuri subiecti non sumus. unde illud quaesitum est, si quis sibi et ei cuius iuri subiectus non est dari stipuletur, in quantum ualeat stipulatio. nostri praeceptores putant in uniuersum ualere et proinde ei soli qui stipulatus sit solidum deberi, atque si extranei nomen non adiecisset. sed diuersae scholae auctores dimidium ei deberi existimant, pro altera uero parte inutilem esse stipulationem.

[184395] Inst. 3, 19, 4.

[184412] 103 a. Alia causa est |—dari spondes? | — solidum deberi et me | solum — etiam Titi|o —.

[184502] § 104. Praeterea inutilis est stipulatio, si ab e|o stipuler qui iuri meo subiectus est, item si is a me stipuletur. 〈sed〉 seruus quidem et qui in mancipio est et filia familias et quae in manu est non solum ipsi, cuius iuri subiecti subiectaeue sunt, obligari non possunt, sed ne alii quidem ulli.

[184802] Inst. 3, 19, 6.

[184819] § 105. Mutum neque stipulari neque promittere posse palam est. idem etiam in surdo receptum est; quia et is qui stipulatur uerba promittentis, et qui promittit uerba stipulantis exaudire debet.

[185014] Inst. 3, 19, 7.

[185031] § 106. Furiosus nullum negotium gerere potest, quia non intellegit quid agat.

[185110] Inst. 3, 19, 8.

[185127] § 107. Pupillus omne negotium recte gerit, ut tamen, sicubi tutoris auctoritas necessaria sit, adhibeatur 〈tutor〉, ueluti si ipse obligetur; nam alium sibi obligare etiam sine tutoris auctoritate potest.

[185332] Inst. 3, 19, 9.

[185349] § 108. Idem iuris est in feminis quae in tutela sunt.

[185404] § 109. Sed quod diximus de pupillo, utique de eo uerum est qui iam aliquem intellectum habet. nam infans et qui infanti proximus est non multum a furioso differt, quia huius aetatis pupilli nullum intellectum habent; sed in his pupillis propter utilitatem benignior iuris interpretatio facta est.

[185702] Inst. 3, 19, 10.

[185720] § 97. If we stipulate that something is to be conveyed to us which cannot be, the stipulation is void; for instance, if a man stipulates for the conveyance of a freeman whom he supposes to be a slave, or of a dead slave whom he supposes to be alive, or of ground devoted to the celestial or infernal gods which he supposes to be subject to human law.

[186072] § 97 a. Or again if a man stipulates for a thing incapable of existing, such as a hippocentaur, the stipulation is void.

[186194] An impossible condition, that the promisee, for instance, should touch the sky, makes the stipulation void, although a legacy with an impossible condition, according to the authorities of my school, has the same effect as if no condition were annexed. According to the other school it is as null and void as if it were a stipulation, and in truth no satisfactory reason can be alleged for making a distinction.

[186606] § 99. So when a person stipulates by mistake that his own property shall be conveyed to himself, the stipulation is null and void, for what already belongs to a man, cannot be conveyed to him.

[186800] A stipulation to convey after the death of the promisee or promisor is invalid, but a stipulation to convey at the death, that is, at the last moment of the life of the promisee or promisor, is valid. For it has been held anomalous to make the heir of either of the contracting parties the first subject of the obligation. Again, a stipulation to convey on the day before the death of the promisee or promisor is invalid, for the day before the death cannot be ascertained till after death, and after death the stipulation has a retrospective effect, and amounts to a promise to convey to the promisee’s heir, which is void.

[187426] § 101. What is said of death must also be understood of capitis deminutio.

[187502] § 102. Another cause of nullity is the want of correspondence between the question and answer; if I stipulate, for instance, for ten sestertia and you promise five, or if you meet my absolute stipulation by a conditional promise.

[187733] § 103. No valid stipulation can be made to convey a thing to a third person to whose power the stipulator is not subject, whence the question has been mooted to what extent a stipulation in favour of the stipulator and such a stranger to the contract is valid. My school hold that it is valid for the whole amount stipulated, and that the stipulator is entitled to the whole, just as if the stranger had not been mentioned. The other school hold that he is only entitled to one moiety, and that the stipulation is of no effect as to the other.

[188278] § 103 a. It is a different case if you promise to convey something to me or Titius, for then the whole is due to me, and I alone can sue on the stipulation, though the debt may be discharged by payment to Titius.

[188492] § 104. No valid stipulation can be made between a person under power and the person to whom he is subject. In fact a slave, a person in domestic bondage (mancipium), a daughter of the family and a wife subjected to the hand of a husband, can incur an obligation neither to the person in whose power or mancipium they are, nor to any other person.

[188840] The dumb cannot stipulate or promise, nor can the deaf, for the promisee in a stipulation must hear the answer, and the promisor must hear the question.

[188994] § 106. A lunatic cannot enter into any transaction because he does not understand what he is doing.

[189095] § 107. A ward can enter into any transaction provided that he has his guardian’s sanction when necessary, as it is for his incurring an obligation for himself, although not for his imposing an obligation on another.

[189312] § 108. The same rule applies to women who are wards.

[189366] But what we have said about a pupil is of course only true of one who has some understanding: for infants and those who are bordering on infancy do not differ much from insane persons, not being capable of judging for themselves; nevertheless, when they will benefit by the transaction, a more accommodating interpretation is put on the law.

[189709] Among the objects that could not be secured by stipulation, and still less by any Formless contract, are Dispositions under the code of Family law (the laws governing domestic relations) or the code of Succession. E. g. no promise of marriage (sponsalia) was legally binding—a striking contrast to the rule of English law. Nor do we hear of any binding agreement to a future Emancipation, Adoption, or Arrogation; or for the principal acts relating to the law of Succession, to the execution of a Will or to the aditio of an inheritance. In all these solemn Dispositions the Roman legislator deemed it expedient that the disposer should have an entire freedom of choice at the moment of making the Disposition.

[190421] This seems an appropriate place for the following remarks on the general nature of conditions. A Condition is an element of Title; it is a certain contingent occurrence or non-occurrence, performance or non-performance, by arbitrary appointment conferring on a certain person a certain right, or imposing on him a certain duty. It may be defined as the middle term (B) of a syllogism of which the minor term (C) represents a person, and the major term (A) a right or duty, and of which both the premisses are contingent. It is the last feature that we shall first proceed to consider.

[191007] The major premiss must be contingent; it must be an arbitrary determination that makes the right or duty (A) depend on the given title (B); the nexus between the middle and major terms must be solely the will of the testator or contractors, not the will of the legislator; the title must not be in its own nature the Necessary presupposition of the right. E. g. in the following cases: the institution of a person as heir, if he survive the testator, if he accept the inheritance; the bequest of a legacy, if the heir accept the inheritance; the promise of a dower, if the marriage is celebrated; the seeming condition is required by the law, and its expression is superfluous: such an event, therefore, is not a genuine condition. Again, the nexus between the minor and middle terms may be either the will of the person entitled (conditio potestativa), Cod. 6, 51, 7, or chance (conditio casualis); but one way or other the minor premiss must be contingent; the fulfilment of the condition must be neither Necessary nor Impossible: it must be a future and uncertain contingency whether the title (B) shall be realized or fulfilled in respect of a given person (C). The condition, accordingly, must not be a past or present event, e. g. if Titius was consul last year, if Titius is now consul; such a fact is now certain and Necessary, and any disposition contingent thereon is really unconditional.

[192408] The effect of an Impossible condition is different in Contracts and Testamentary dispositions; it invalidates contract; whereas in a testament it is deemed unwritten (pro non scripto habetur), and the disposition is regarded as unconditional. This was the rule that finally prevailed, Dig. 35, 1, 3. ‘It has been finally decided that impossible conditions to testamentary dispositions are mere surplusage.’ This was the doctrine of the Sabinians, and was confirmed by Justinian, Inst. 2, 14, 10. Illegal and immoral conditions followed the same rule as impossible conditions. The question why Contracts and Wills were governed by different rules, which Gaius admits to be obscure, may receive some light from the following considerations. Testamentary dispositions in their nature are acts of liberality on the part of the testator. Even when he employs them as inducements to an illegal or immoral act, it is not quite certain that the refusal to perform the act would have caused him to deprive the person to whom the bequest is given of his liberality. At all events, this person is himself innocent of unlawful intention, and the same cannot be said of the contractor who is guilty of an agreement to violate the law. Accordingly, the law aids the one but not the other; and the rule, once established for immoral conditions, was extended to impossible conditions.

[193778] On this point the French code agrees with the Roman law. In the Austrian code the Proculian doctrine is followed: i. e. testamentary dispositions as well as contracts are invalidated by immoral or impossible conditions. The Prussian code, till it was superseded by the German civil code, followed a middle course: impossible conditions invalidated a testamentary disposition; immoral conditions were deemed unwritten and the disposition construed as unconditional. The German civil code does not lay down any special rules as to the effect of impossible or immoral conditions attached to testamentary dispositions, treating testamentary dispositions in the same way in this respect as other dispositions. A disposition to which an immoral or unlawful disposition is attached is void, whether it be a condition precedent or subsequent. A disposition to which an impossible condition precedent is attached is void: a disposition to which an impossible condition subsequent is attached is looked upon as if no condition were attached to it.

[194817] A Condition was not annexable to all dispositions. It was annexable to all Testamentary dispositions: but among formal dispositions inter vivos the only ones to which it could be annexed were Stipulations. A Condition could not be annexed to an In jure cessio or surrender before the magistrate: Nulla legis actio prodita est de futuro, Frag. Vat. 49. Nor to Mancipatio, nor to Acceptilatio, nor to Expensilatio (Literal Obligation), nor to Cognitoris datio. Sub conditione cognitor non recte datur, non magis quam mancipatur, aut acceptum vel expensum fertur, Frag. Vat. 329. Nor could it be annexed to magisterial Tutoris datio: Sub conditione a praesidibus provinciarum non posse dari tutorem placet, et si datus sit nullius esse momenti dationem, Dig. 26, 1, 6, 1: nor to Tutoris auctoritas, Dig. 26, 8, 8: nor to hereditatis aditio, nor to servi optio: Actus legitimi qui non recipiunt diem vel conditionem, veluti mancipatio, acceptilatio, hereditatis aditio, servi optio, datio tutoris, in totum vitiantur per temporis vel conditionis adjectionem, Dig. 50, 17, 77.

[195890] Later jurisprudence admitted the annexation of conditions to the alienation of property by means of Tradition. Conditions are Suspensive or Resolutive. Tradition coupled with a Suspensive condition operates an immediate transfer of possession and a future transfer of ownership contingent on, and contemporaneous with, the fulfilment of the condition. Tradition, coupled with a Resolutory condition, operates two transfers of ownership: an immediate transfer of ownership and a subsequent retransfer of ownership, contingent on, and contemporaneous with, the fulfilment of the condition. The retransfer of ownership follows without any retradition or reconveyance by the interim proprietor; and the remedy of the original proprietor is not condictio, implying the necessity of reconveyance, but vindicatio, implying that he is already reinvested with ownership. The justa causa or disposition which accompanies the tradition and determines the transfer of ownership (2 § 20) also limits the duration of the ownership so transferred. Such at least is the doctrine of the majority of jurists: others hold that the fulfilment of the resolutive condition only imposes on the transferree a personal obligation of reconveyance.

[197113] Conditions annexed to contracts have the following difference from conditions annexed to testamentary dispositions and dispositions translative of dominion. Conditions annexed to contract are retroactive: the obligation determined by their fulfilment relates backward and dates from the date of the contract. Conditions annexed to legacy or to alienation are not retroactive: the obligation or ownership thereby conferred only dates from the fulfilment of the condition.

[197585] As to the rights conferred or obligations imposed by a contract on third persons not parties to the contract Paulus lays down the following principle: Quaecunque gerimus, cum ex nostro contractu originem trahunt, nisi ex nostra persona obligationis initium sumant, inanem actum nostrum efficiunt: et ideo neque stipulari neque emere vendere contrahere, ut alter suo nomine recte agat, possumus, Dig. 44, 7, 11, i. e. in every contract the right created by the contract must primarily vest, if the contract is to be valid, in the promisee himself; and the obligation in the promisor himself, for Roman law did not, it must be remembered, admit the principle of contractual agency. This rule is evidently not violated if the promisee associates to himself his heir, i. e. contracts for some right to himself and heir: Suae personae adjungere quis heredis personam potest, Dig. 45, 1, 38, 14: but it is violated if the promisee contracts for some right to vest exclusively in his heir, or, as expressed in this paragraph, for some performance post mortem suam. Such contracts accordingly were void, whether they belonged to jus civile or the jus gentium, § 158. This led to the introduction of an Adstipulator when a person wished to stipulate something exclusively for the benefit of his heir, § 117. When Justinian abrogated the rule and ordained that an act could be contracted to be performed either before or after the death of either of the contractors, Cod. 4, 11, 1, the Adstipulator became unnecessary.

[199095] The rule of Paulus would make a promise of payment to the promisee and a stranger, § 103, void as to the latter, so that the promisee would only take a moiety, the law being thus stated in the corresponding passage of the Institutes, Inst. 3, 19, 4. But in a formless contract of sale the Sabinian doctrine still prevailed. Dig. 18, 1, 64.

[199436] The same rule applied to the passive obligation a contract imposed: the debtor created by a contract could not be in the first instance the heir of the promisor, § 158. One intelligible motive for prohibiting obligations from taking effect on the death of the promisor would be to prevent evasions of the testamentary laws restricting the powers of testation. A testator who wished to leave a legacy to a person who could not take under a will from want either of Capacitas or of passive Testamentifactio, or a legacy beyond the amount permitted by the lex Falcidia or some other law, would enter into a Stipulation, binding his heir to pay a certain sum after the death of the promisor The promisee then could recover this sum not as legatee but as creditor under the stipulation. That such evasions were in fact attempted appears from Dig. 22, 3, 27. But this opening of a door to fraudulent evasions is not what Gaius, § 100, intends to express by ‘Inelegance,’ which means something not in accordance or in harmony with legal principle, the principle in this case being that a contract is confined in its operation to the parties to it, and that the heir can only be entitled to the rights and liable to the obligations of the deceased by way of succession. Justinian, however, abolished the distinctions recorded in this paragraph, and allowed the stipulation of an act to be performed either for the heir of the promisee, or by the heir of the promisor, Inst. 3, 19, 13. (§ 102. According to Dig 45, 1, 1, 4 and 83, 3 the stipulation in this case is not void, but good for the smaller amount. The Institutes of Justinian (3, 19, 5), on the other hand, adopt the view of the law taken by Gaius, perhaps inadvertently.)

[201161] A slave or filiusfamilias who stipulated a payment to himself acquired a right for the master or paterfamilias. Except in these relations, it was the rule that a man could not stipulate for a third person. Payment, however, to a third party might be stipulated for, so as to entitle the third party to receive it, Inst. 3, 19, 4, and such payment might be secured by a penal clause, stipulating, in default of performance, payment of a penal sum to the promisee, Inst. l. c. 19.

[201641] The rule of the Civil law that a Formal contract by Stipulatio could only be concluded between principals—between persons covenanting in their own names, was an impediment in the way of commerce which was met, as we have already stated, by a double use of a Consensual contract, which will presently be examined, the contract of Agency (mandatum). An Agent or mandatary stipulated in his own name with a third person, and then assigned his right of action to his principal; that is, gave his principal a mandate to sue in his name, but on his own account (in rem suam), 2 § 38: the principal then sued and recovered on the stipulation as assignee of the action, that is, as mandatary of his mandatary. In the latest period the actual mandate of the action was unnecessary if an intention to assign was shown: the praetor allowing the principal in such cases to sue in his own name by an actio Utilis, i. e. by a formula perhaps containing some kind of Fiction, Dig. 2, 14, 16 pr, Cod. 4, 10, 1, cf. Sohm, p. 443, n. 2. Nor in respect of Formless contracts, or contracts governed by Jus Gentium, was the principle of contractual Agency more completely recognized, as has sometimes been supposed. But if an Agent merely acted as emissary (nuncius) and instrument (minister) of his principal, that is, communicated the intention of an absent principal, the principal was himself a party to the obligation and acquired an immediate right against the other contractor and incurred a direct obligation to him: he could sue him or be sued by him in an actio Directa. See § 162, comm.

[203219] If it was desired to give a third person the right of suing on the contract, it was necessary that the contractor should contract as principal, and then assign his right of action to the third party, but the latter was subject to the same defences, as could have been used against the assignor, who was the contracting party. If he neglected the precaution of making such assignment it followed that the third party could not recover on such contract. Paulus, Dig. 44, 7, 11, lays down this principle which we have already, § 100, noticed: ‘Every disposition in which a person contracts as principal but attempts to entitle a third person to sue as principal (i. e. attempts to invest a third person with the rights of an immediate creditor) is invalid: and neither by formal contract of stipulation, nor by formless contract of purchase and sale, nor by any other contract in which I am principal can I invest a third person with a right to sue in his own name.’ But by binding the promisor to pay a penalty to the stipulator, if something was not rendered to the third party, the object of the parties might be secured. Cf. Inst. 3, 19, 19. Alteri stipulari, ut supra dictum est, nemo potest: inventae sunt enim hujusmodi obligationes ad hoc, ut unusquisque adquirat quod sua interest; ceterum si alii detur, nihil interest stipulatoris. Plane si quis velit hoc facere, poenam stipulari conveniet, ut, nisi ita factum sit, ut comprehensum esset, committetur poenae stipulatio etiam ei cujus nihil interest.

[204729] It is to be remembered too that the want of contractual agency was to a great extent supplied by the rule that contractual rights acquired by slaves or filiifamilias were acquired for their superior. We have already mentioned, § 100, that in Justinian’s legislation a contractor could contract for a payment to or by a third person, when that person was his own heir.

[205098] For the same reasons as those given in the text, neither deaf nor dumb persons could make, or be witnesses to, a mancipatory will. Persons thus physically incapable, as well as lunatics, might be represented for some purposes by curators. The contract of a lunatic, it is to be noticed, is not voidable, as in English law, but void, ‘quia non intellegit quid agat.’

[205465] The age of puberty, as we have seen, came to be fixed at 14 for males, 12 for females. Before this period the child was called impubes: but the capacity of the impubes varied with his age. Up to the age of 7 he was infans; in the interval between 7 and 14 he was described either as infantiae proximus or as pubertati proximus. According to some commentators the interval was equally divided between these appellations, so that from 7 to 10½ a boy was infantiae proximus, and from 10½ to 14 pubertati proximus. According to Savigny these names only covered the space of a year measured from each limit, so that from 7 to 8 a child was infanti proximus, from 13 to 14 puberi proximus, and from 8 to 13 without any distinctive appellation. Cf. 1, 142, comm.

[206222] § 110. Possumus tamen ad id quod stipulamur alium adhibere, qui idem stipuletur; quem uulgo adstipulatorem uocamus.

[206339] § 111. Et huic proinde actio conpetit proindeque ei recte soluitur ac nobis; sed quidquid consecutus erit, mandati iudicio nobis restituere cogetur.

[206489] § 112. Ceterum potest etiam aliis uerbis uti adstipulator, quam quibus nos usi sumus. itaque si uerbi gratia ego ita stipulatus sim dari spondes?, ille sic adstipulari potest idem fide tva promittis? uel idem fideivbes? uel contra.

[206722] § 113. Item minus adstipulari potest. plus non potest. itaque si ego sestertia x stipulatus sim, ille sestertia v stipulari potest; contra uero plus non potest. item si ego pure stipulatus sim, ille sub condicione stipulari potest; contra uero non potest. non solum autem in quantitate, sed etiam in tempore minus et plus intellegitur; plus est enim statim aliquid dare, minus est post tempus dare.

[207122] § 114. In hoc autem iure quaedam singulari iure obseruantur. nam adstipulatoris heres non habet actionem. item seruus adstipulando nihil agit, quamuis ex ceteris omnibus causis stipulatione domino adquirat. idem de eo qui in mancipio est magis placuit; nam et is serui loco est. is autem qui in potestate patris est agit aliquid, sed parenti non adquirit, quamuis ex omnibus ceteris causis stipulando ei adquirat. ac ne ipsi quidem aliter actio conpetit, quam si sine capitis deminutione exierit de potestate parentis, ueluti morte eius aut quod ipse flamen Dialis inauguratus est. eadem de filia familias et quae in manu est dicta intellegemus.

[207769] § 115. Pro eo quoque qui promittit solent alii obligari; quorum alios sponsores, alios fidepromissores, alios fideiussores appellamus.

[207905] Inst. 3. 20 pr.

[207922] § 116. Sponsor ita interrogatur idem dari spondes? fidepromissor 〈ita〉 idem fidepromittis? fideiussor ita idem fide tva esse ivbes? uidebimus [de his] autem, quo nomine possint proprie appellari, qui ita interrogantur idem dabis? idem promittis? idem facies?

[208182] § 117. Sponsores quidem et fidepromissores et fideiussores saepe solemus accipere, dum curamus, ut diligentius nobis cautum sit; adstipulatorem uero fere tunc solum adhibemus, cum ita stipulamur, ut aliquid post mortem nostram detur. 〈—〉 stipulando nihil agimus, adhibetur adstipulator, ut is post mortem nostram agat; qui si quid fuerit consecutus, de restituendo eo mandati iudicio heredi [meo] tenetur.

[208589] § 118. Sponsoris uero et fidepromissoris similis condicio 〈est〉, fideiussoris ualde dissimilis.

[208686] § 119. Nam illi quidem nullis obligationibus accedere possunt nisi uerborum, (quamuis interdum ipse qui promiserit non fuerit obligatus, uelut si mulier aut pupillus sine tutoris auctoritate aut quilibet post mortem suam dari promiserit. at illud quaeritur, si seruus aut peregrinus spoponderit, an pro eo sponsor aut fidepromissor obligetur).

[209031] Inst. 3, 20, 1.

[209048] § 119 a. Fideiussor uero omnibus obligationibus, id est siue re siue uerbis siue litteris siue consensu contractae fuerint obligationes, adici potest. ac ne illud quidem interest, utrum ciuilis an naturalis obligatio sit cui adiciatur; adeo quidem, ut pro seruo quoque obligetur, siue extraneus sit qui a seruo fideiussorem accipiat, siue ipse dominus in id quod sibi debeatur.

[209427] § 120. Praeterea sponsoris et fidepromissoris heres non tenetur, nisi si de peregrino fidepromissore quaeramus, et alio iure ciuitas eius utatur. fideiussoris autem etiam heres tenetur.

[209614] Inst. 3, 20, 2.

[209631] § 121. Item sponsor et fidepromissor lege Furia biennio liberantur, et quotquot erunt numero eo tempore, quo pecunia peti potest, in tot partes diducitur inter eos obligatio et singuli 〈in〉 uiriles partes obligantur. fideiussores uero perpetuo tenentur, et quotquot erunt numero, singuli in solidum obligantur. itaque liberum est creditori a quo uelit solidum petere. sed nunc ex epistula diui Hadriani conpellitur creditor a singulis qui modo soluendo sint partes petere. eo igitur distat haec epistula a lege Furia, quod si quis ex sponsoribus aut fidepromissoribus soluendo non sit, hoc onus ad 〈ceteros non pertinet; sed ex fideiussoribus etsi unus tantum soluendo sit, ad hunc onus〉 ceterorum quoque pertinet.

[210347] Inst. 3, 20, 4.

[210364] § 121 a. Sed cum lex Furia tantum in Italia locum habeat, euenit ut in ceteris prouinciis sponsores quoque et fidepromissores proinde ac fideiussores perpetuo teneantur et singuli in solidum obligentur, nisi ex epistula diui Hadriani hi quoque adiuuentur in parte.

[210630] § 122. Praeterea inter sponsores et fidepromissores lex Appuleia quandam societatem introduxit. nam si quis horum plus sua portione soluerit, de eo quod amplius dederit aduersus ceteros actiones constituit. quae lex ante legem Furiam lata est, quo tempore in solidum obligabantur. unde quaeritur, an post legem Furiam adhuc legis Appuleiae beneficium supersit. et utique extra Italiam superest. nam lex quidem Furia tantum in Italia ualet, Appuleia uero etiam in ceteris prouinciis. sed an etiam 〈in〉 Italia beneficium legis Appuleiae supersit, ualde quaeritur. ad fideiussores autem lex Appuleia non pertinet. itaque si creditor ab uno totum consecutus fuerit, huius solius detrimentum erit, scilicet si is pro quo fideiussit soluendo non sit. sed ut ex supra dictis apparet, is a quo creditor totum petit poterit ex epistula diui Hadriani desiderare, ut pro parte in se detur actio.

[211516] Inst 3, 20, 4.

[211532] § 123. Praeterea lege Cicereia cautum est, ut is, qui sponsores aut fidepromissores accipiat, praedicat palam et declaret, et de qua re satis accipiat et quot sponsores aut fidepromissores in eam obligationem accepturus sit; et nisi praedixerit, permittitur sponsoribus et fidepromissoribus intra diem xxx praeiudicium postulare, quo quaeratur, an ex ea lege praedictum sit; et si iudicatum fuerit praedictum non esse, liberantur. qua lege fideiussorum mentio nulla fit. sed in usu est, etiam si fideiussores accipiamus, praedicere.

[212066] § 124. Sed beneficium legis Corneliae omnibus commune est. qua lege idem pro eodem apud eundem eodem anno uetatur in ampliorem summam obligari creditae pecuniae quam in xx milia. et quamuis sponsores uel fidepromissores in amplam pecuniam, ueluti si sestertium c milium 〈se obligauerint, tamen dumtaxat xx tenentur〉. pecuniam autem creditam dicimus non solum eam, quam credendi causa damus, sed omnem, quam tum cum contrahitur obligatio certum est debitum iri, id est 〈quae〉 sine ulla condicione deducitur in obligationem. itaque et ea pecunia, quam in diem certum dari stipulamur, eodem numero est, quia certum est eam debitum iri, licet post tempus petatur. appellatione autem pecuniae omnes res in ea lege significantur. itaque si uinum uel frumentum aut si fundum uel hominem stipulemur, haec lex obseruanda est.

[212884] § 125. Ex quibusdam tamen causis permittit ea lex in infinitum satis accipere, ueluti si dotis nomine, uel eius quod ex testamento tibi debeatur, aut iussu iudicis satis accipiatur. et adhuc lege 〈Iulia de〉 uicesima hereditatium cauetur, ut ad eas satisdationes, quae ex ea lege proponuntur, lex Cornelia non pertineat.

[213205] § 126. In eo quoque iure par condicio est omnium, sponsorum fidepromissorum fideiussorum, quod ita obligari non possunt, ut plus debeant, quam debet is pro quo obligantur. at ex diuerso ut minus debeant, obligari possunt, sicut in adstipulatoris persona diximus. nam ut adstipulatoris, ita et horum obligatio accessio est principalis obligationis, nec plus in accessione esse potest quam in principali re.

[213612] Inst. 3, 20, 5.

[213629] § 127. In eo quoque par omnium causa est, quod si quid pro reo soluerint, eius reciperandi causa habent cum eo mandati iudicium. et hoc amplius sponsores ex lege Publilia propriam habent actionem in duplum, quae appellatur depensi.

[213862] Inst. 3, 20, 6.

[213879] Although another person cannot stipulate for us, yet in our stipulations we can associate with ourselves another person who stipulates for the same performance, and is called an adstipulator.

[214072] § 111. He can sue as well as the stipulator, and payment to him discharges the debtor as well as payment to the stipulator, but whatever he recovers, the action of mandate compels him to hand over to the stipulator.

[214289] § 112. The adstipulator need not employ the same terms as the stipulator; if the one says, ‘Art thou sponsor for the conveyance?’ the adstipulator may say, ‘Dost thou for the same pledge thy credit?’ or, ‘Dost thou for the same bid me trust thee?’ or vice versa

[214552] § 113. He may contract for less than the stipulator, but not for more. Thus, if I stipulate for ten sestertia he may stipulate for five, or if I stipulate absolutely he may stipulate conditionally, but not vice versa. More and less is to be understood of time as well as of quantity, immediate payment being more, and future payment being less.

[214898] In this institution there are some exceptional rules. The heir of the adstipulator cannot sue; a slave cannot be adstipulator, though in any other circumstance his stipulation acquires a right for his master; moreover it is the prevalent opinion that a person in domestic bondage cannot be adstipulator, because he is likened to a slave; a son in the power of his father can be adstipulator, but does not acquire a right for his father, as in all other stipulations, and he himself has no right of action until, without capitis diminutio, he ceases to be subject to his father, as by his father’s death, or by being inaugurated priest of Jupiter. The same is true of a filiafamilias and a wife in the manus of her husband.

[215622] For the promisor, similarly, other persons are bound, who are called sponsors or fidepromissors or fidejussors.

[215735] § 116. A sponsor is thus interrogated: ‘Art thou for the same payment sponsor?’ a fidepromissor thus: ‘Dost thou for the same pledge thy credit (fidei-promittis)?’ a fidejussor thus: ‘Dost thou the same guarantee (fide tua jubes)?’ We shall have to consider the question what is the proper name for those who are thus interrogated: ‘Wilt thou convey the same? Dost thou promise the same? Wilt thou do the same?’

[216148] § 117. Sponsors and fidepromissors and fidejussors are often employed to provide additional security for a debt; an adstipulator is generally only employed by us to secure payment after our death. Our own stipulation for this purpose is void, and therefore we associate with ourselves an adstipulator, in order that he may sue on the contract after our death, but he is compelled by an action of mandate to hand over to our heir whatever he recovers.

[216600] § 118. The rules which govern the sponsor and fidepromissor are similar, and very unlike those which govern the fidejussor.

[216725] § 119. For the former are accessory to none but verbal contracts, and are sometimes even liable when the principal promisor himself is not so, as, for instance, when a woman or ward contracts without her guardian’s sanction, or when a person promises a payment after his own death. But it is a moot question when a slave or alien promises by the term spondeo, whether his sponsor or fidepromissor is effectively bound.

[217145] § 119 a. A fidejussor, on the other hand, may be accessory to any obligations, whether real, verbal, literal, or consensual, and whether civil or natural. So that he may even be bound for the obligation of a slave either to a stranger or to his own master; and this is the case whether it is a stranger who accepts a fidejussor for the slave, or whether it is the master himself who does so for a debt due from his slave to him.

[217575] § 120. Again, the heir of the sponsor or fidepromissor is not bound by the guaranty, unless it is the heir of an alien fidepromissor in whose city (civitas) such a rule prevails; but the fidejussor’s heir is always bound.

[217798] Again, a sponsor and fidepromissor, by the lex Furia, at the end of two years are discharged of obligation, and whatever is the number of these kinds of sureties at the time when payment of the debt is due, the total obligation is divided into as many parts; and each surety is only liable for a single part. Fidejussors, on the other hand, are liable for ever, and, however many of them there are, each is liable for the whole amount of the debt, the creditor being thus entitled to sue whichever he chooses for the whole. But now by the letter of Hadrian of sacred memory he can only recover from each of the fidejussors, who are solvent at the time an aliquot part of the debt. Thus the letter of Hadrian of sacred memory differs from the lex Furia in this respect, that the insolvency of one sponsor or fidepromissor does not increase the liability of the remainder, whereas if only one of several fidejussors is solvent, he has to bear the whole burden.

[218758] § 121 a. But as the lex Furia only applies to Italy, it follows that in the provinces, sponsors and fidepromissors, like fidejussors, are liable for ever, and each would be liable for the whole amount, unless they are also partly relieved by the letter of Hadrian.

[219024] Moreover, between sponsors and fidepromissors the lex Appuleia introduced a sort of partnership, for under this law any one of them who has paid more than his share is given an action to recover the excess from the others. The lex Appuleia was passed before the lex Furia, at a time when each sponsor and fidepromissor was liable for the whole amount; and hence it is questioned whether, since the lex Furia was passed, the benefit of the lex Appuleia still exists. Outside Italy it undoubtedly does; for the lex Furia is only in force in Italy, while the lex Appuleia extends also to the remaining provinces; but whether the benefit of the lex still continues in Italy is much disputed. Fidejussors are not governed by the lex Appuleia; accordingly, if one fidejussor pay the whole amount, he alone suffers by the insolvency of the principal; however, as was said above, a fidejussor sued for the whole amount may by the letter of Hadrian, if he chooses, require the claim to be reduced to his ratable portion.