WORK: Institutes of Roman Law  (slug: gaius-institutes-of-roman-law-09683f)

CHAPTER: 120-commentarivs-qvartvs



[0] § 1. —|— quot genera actionum sint, uerius uidetur duo esse, in rem et in personam; nam qui iiii esse dixerunt ex sponsionum generibus, non animaduerterunt quasdam species actionum inter genera se rettulisse.

[210] Inst. 4, 6, 1.

[226] § 2. In personam actio est, qua agimus cum aliquo, qui nobis uel ex contractu uel ex delicto obligatus est, id est cum intendimus dare facere praestare oportere.

[389] Inst. l. c.

[402] § 3. In rem actio est, cum aut corporalem rem intendimus nostram esse, aut ius aliquod nobis conpetere, ueluti utendi aut utendi fruendi, eundi agendi aquamue ducendi uel altius tollendi prospiciendiue; 〈aut cum〉 actio ex diuerso aduersario est negatiua.

[658] Inst. l. c.

[671] § 4. Sic itaque discretis actionibus certum est non posse nos rem nostram ab alio ita petere si paret evm dare oportere. nec enim quod nostrum est nobis dari potest, cum scilicet id dari nobis intellegatur, quod 〈ita datur, ut〉 nostrum fiat; nec res quae 〈nostra iam est〉nostra amplius fieri potest. plane odio furum, quo magis pluribus actionibus teneantur, receptum est, ut extra poenam dupli aut quadrupli rei recipiendae nomine fures etiam hac actione teneantur si paret eos dare oportere, quamuis sit etiam aduersus eos haec actio, qua rem nostram esse petimus.

[1239] Inst. 4, 6, 14.

[1256] § 5. Appellantur autem in rem quidem actiones uindicationes, in personam uero actiones, quibus dari fierive oportere intendimus, condictiones.

[1400] Inst. 4, 6, 15.

[1417] § 6. Agimus autem interdum, ut rem tantum consequamur, interdum ut poenam tantum, alias ut rem et poenam.

[1524] Inst. 4, 6, 16.

[1541] § 7. Rem tantum persequimur uelut actionibus, 〈quibus〉 ex contractu agimus.

[1618] Inst. 4, 6, 17.

[1635] § 8. Poenam tantum persequimur uelut actione furti et iniuriarum et secundum quorundam opinionem actione ui bonorum raptorum; nam ipsius rei et uindicatio et condictio nobis conpetit.

[1820] Inst. 4, 6, 18.

[1837] § 9. Rem uero et poenam persequimur uelut ex his causis, ex quibus aduersus infitiantem in duplum agimus; quod accidit per actionem iudicati, depensi, damni iniuriae legis Aquiliae, aut legatorum nomine quae per damnationem certa relicta sunt.

[2082] Inst. 4, 6, 19.

[2099] We have now to treat of Actions, which according to the better view fall into two classes, being either Real or Personal: for those who count four classes, including the forms of sponsio, commit the error of co-ordinating sub-classes with classes.

[2348] § 2. A Personal action is an action which seeks to enforce an obligation imposed on the defendant by his contract or delict, that is to say, is an action by which one claims in the intentio of the formula that he is bound to convey some property to one, or to perform for one some service, or to make some other kind of performance.

[2682] A Real action is an action by which one claims as one’s own in the intentio some corporeal thing or some particular right in the thing, as a right of use or usufruct of a thing belonging to a neighbour, or a right of horseway or carriage-way through his land, or of fetching water from a source in his land, or of raising one’s house above a certain height, or of having the prospect from one’s windows unobstructed; or when the opposite party (that is the owner) brings the negative action asserting that there is no such right in the thing.

[3226] Real and Personal actions being thus distinguished, it is clear that I cannot demand my own property from another in the following form: ‘If it be proved that the defendant is bound to convey such property to me.’ For what is already my own cannot be conveyed to me, since conveyance to me makes a thing mine, and what is already mine cannot be made more mine than it is. Yet, to show the law’s detestation of thieves, in order to make them liable to a greater number of actions, it is received doctrine that besides the penalty of twice the value of the thing stolen awarded against the thief not caught in the act, and the penalty of four times the value against the thief caught in the act, damages for the thing itself may be recovered by a personal action in which the contention is thus worded: ‘If it be proved that the defendant ought to convey the thing in question,’ although they are also liable to be sued by an action with the intentio thus formulated: ‘If it be proved that the plaintiff is owner of the thing in question.’

[4265] A Real action is called vindicatio; a Personal action, whereby we contend that some property should be conveyed to us or some service performed for us, is called condictio.

[4439] We sue sometimes only to obtain property, sometimes only for a penalty, sometimes both for property and for a penalty.

[4559] We sue, for instance, only for property in actions founded on contract.

[4632] We sue, for instance, only for a penalty in the action of Theft and of Outrage, and, according to some, of Rapine; for we may obtain restitution on account of the thing itself either by vindicatio or condictio.

[4844] We sue, for instance, both for property and for a penalty in those actions where the defendant who denies his liability is condemned to pay double, as in the actions to recover a judgment debt, to recover money paid by a sponsor for his principal, to recover damages for injury to property under the lex Aquilia, and to recover legacies of a definite amount bequeathed in the form of legacy per damnationem.

[5253] From Substantive law Gaius now passes to the law of Procedure, confining himself partly with its Material as opposed to its Formal aspect: dealing with actions, that is to say, not so far as they are merely the method of realizing rights, but also as being the rights themselves which entitle a person who is wronged to obtain redress by legal process. Dig. 44, 7, 51, actio est jus, quod sibi debeatur, judicio persequendi.

[5679] If we inquire which code is the earlier in its development, the Substantive code or the code of Procedure, the answer is that they are essentially contemporaneous: a Substantive code can have no actual existence unless there is some method of giving it force; and again, a code of procedure can have no meaning unless there is a substantive law to be administered. But after recognizing that the two codes are correlative and necessarily coexistent, we find that historically the code of Procedure is prior in the chronological order: it attains to a high grade of development, while the Substantive code, which started into birth at the same time, remains in a rudimentary, undeveloped condition. Courts of law once established soon evolve strict rules to govern their proceedings, while society is in too rudimentary a condition to enable it to define the substantive law brought into existence by the legal remedies which are provided.

[6619] The following contrast of ancient and modern jurisprudence here deserves a notice. No primary rights can be conceived without sanctioning rights, or rights which arise when the primary rights are violated: and again, no sanctioning rights can be conceived without Actions or modes of evoking the interposition of the sovereign power. And, as Rights imply Actions, so reciprocally Actions imply Rights. But though, as corresponding or correlated terms, Right and Action have a necessary connexion, and the existence of one may be inferred from the existence of the other; systems of jurisprudence may differ in different stages of development as to which of these terms, the Right or the Action, they deem the more evident; which they regard as the datum and which the matter to be proved; which the logical premiss and which the conclusion.

[7461] In primitive jurisprudence, when there is little direct intervention on the part of the state with private law, the Remedy is regarded as the certainty; the Right, primary or sanctioning, as the matter of deduction. The forms of Action, emphatically so in Statute-process (legis actio) and to a great extent even in the Formulary system as crystallized by statute or laid down in the edict, were capable of enumeration and incapable or difficult of multiplication; and from the application by the courts of these forms the citizen might deduce the list of his legal rights and duties. The logic of ancient law may be expressed in the maxim: Where there is a Remedy there is a Right: There is no Right unless there is a Remedy.

[8189] The modern jurist assumes the other, the more ideal of the two correlated terms, to be the more evident, and acts upon the converse maxim: Where there is a Right there is a Remedy; or, Given the Right, the Remedy follows. The action now is the dependent term: its forms are unimportant and indefinitely variable; they are no longer crystallizations. If a Right is established and no appropriate form of action seems to exist, a new one is forthwith invented, and its fitness to enforce the established right is sufficient to procure its recognition by the judicature. Such at least, if not opposite goals at which ancient and modern jurisprudence have arrived, appear to be opposite directions in which they diverge.

[8907] Sponsio or wager between the parties to a litigation was an indirect mode of submitting questions to judicial decision, which seems to have been in use before the introduction of the formulary system. We are left to conjecture how its classification enabled any jurist to count four classes of action. Its principal division seems to be into the sponsio where the pecuniary risk was serious and the penal sum important (sponsio poenalis), and the sponsio used for the purpose of framing an issue to be tried where the penal sum was nominal and not actually exacted (sponsio praejudicialis). This division of actions into four instead of two classes may possibly have arisen from the difficulty of finding a place in the twofold division for interdicta and praejudicia. The four classes of actions which Gaius refers to would accordingly be, actio in rem, actio in personam, actio per sponsionem praejudicialem, actio per sponsionem poenalem; but as the last form of action is regarded as being in personam, and the actio per sponsionem praejudicialem as in rem, Gaius prefers the twofold division. (Cf. Keller, Civil Process, § 87, n. 82.) According to Huschke the four classes intended are (1) personalis actio, (2) petitoria formula, (3) in rem actio, per sponsionem cujus summa per formulam petitur, (4) per sponsionem cujus summa sacramenti actione petitur. (See Muirhead’s Gaius, h. l.) In either case the classification would involve a co-ordination of sub-genera and genera, or subdivisions and divisions.

[10421] A Real action, § 3, is one which asserts a jus in rem, a Personal action, § 2, one which asserts a jus in personam. A jus in rem, we may remember, is a right to certain forbearances, or freedom from molestation, corresponding to a duty imposed on all the world: a jus in personam is a right to certain performances or forbearances corresponding to a duty imposed on a determinate person. Jura in rem, which are rights of property, are Ownership, and jura in re aliena, such as Servitude, that is, some fraction of ownership, Emphyteusis, and Pignus. Jura in personam are Obligations founded on either contract or delict, or some quasi-contract or quasi-delict.

[11083] A Real action, accordingly, asserts either the ownership (hunc hominem meum esse aio) of the plaintiff or one of the jura in re aliena above mentioned; a Personal action asserts an obligation of the defendant towards the plaintiff.

[11316] In Roman law, it should be remembered, a claim of property in a movable is a Real action just as much as a claim of property in an immovable. Thus the distinction between Real and Personal actions which we meet with in the history of English law diverged widely from its Roman prototype.

[11605] A Real action or actio in rem when carried on in the form of legis actio sacramento, § 16, contained an assertion by each party of his claim to the thing not as against the other party to the suit, but absolutely.—Hunc ego fundum ex jure Quiritium meum esse aio, &c., and similarly in the formulary procedure a real action names no party but the Plaintiff in the intentio, the principal part of the formula or written instructions of the praetor to the judex, in which the plaintiff’s claim is specified; e. g. Si paret hominem quo de agitur ex jure Quiritium Auli Agerii esse; whereas a Personal action names the defendant as well as the plaintiff in the intentio, e. g. Si paret Numerium Negidium Aulo Agerio H. S. decem milia dare oportere.

[12350] A vindicatio originally in the form of legis actio sacramento in rem, in which the striking the slave with the vindicta or wand was retained, survived in the in jure cessio used for the purpose of manumission (vindicatio in libertatem), and also in the form of adoption, cf. 1 § 134—is qui adoptat vindicat apud praetorem filium suum esse, et illo contra non vindicante a praetore vindicanti filius addicitur. Trials concerning status were, we know, carried on in the decemviral court by process of legis actio till the time of Augustus. We know that in a question of libertas (liberalis causa), until the time of Justinian, the person whose freedom was in dispute could not be either plaintiff or defendant, his rights were advocated by an Adsertor, Cod. 7, 17, De adsertione tollenda. Under the formulary system questions of status might be tried by a praejudicium, § 44, which was regarded as a kind of actio in rem. We have no record of the precise form of the intentio in this case.

[13339] A vindicatio asserting ownership in land contained an intentio in these words: Si paret illum fundum ex jure Quiritium Auli Agerii (Plaintiff) esse. A vindicatio claiming not absolute property, but some fraction of ownership (jus in re aliena), for instance, a rural servitude, contained an intentio to this effect: Si paret Aulo Agerio jus esse per fundum illum ire agere, quanti ea res erit, &c., or, Si paret Aulo Agerio jus esse aedes suas altius tollere invito Numerio Negidio, quanti, &c., § 3. Cf. §§ 92, 93.

[13856] A Personal action, as we have seen, named in the intentio the defendant, who was alleged to be under an obligation to the plaintiff. E. g. if the plaintiff alleged that the defendant lay under an obligation to restore to him the thing he had lent him, the action was in this form: Si paret Aulum Agerium Numerio Negidio rem de qua agitur commodasse eamque Aulo Agerio redditam non esse, quanti ea res erit, tantam pecuniam condemna, si non paret, absolve.

[14313] The word Dare is used in the Intentio of a Condictio Certi, i. e. an action wherein the plaintiff asserts that the defendant is under an obligation to convey quiritary property in a determinate thing, whether a sum of money or any other object of property, a certain slave, certain corn, certain land. E. g. Si paret Numerium Negidium Aulo Agerio sestertium decem milia—tritici Africi optimi centum modios—dare oportere.

[14735] The word Facere never appears to stand alone in an intentio. but in its stead we have Dare facere in the Intentio of actio ex stipulatu, that is, of an action on a stipulation to enforce a claim of an uncertain amount, a claim of any service but the transfer of quiritary property in a certain thing, that is, to enforce any obligation not included under Dare as above defined. E. g. Quidquid paret Numerium Negidium Aulo Agerio dare facere oportere, § 5, comm.

[15198] Praestare is a term of wider meaning than the two preceding, and appears specifically to denote reparation for any harm, compensation for any loss, damages for breach of any obligation other than liability—dare—or dare facere. But some writers have tried to attach a more definite meaning to the term. (Cf. Muirhead’s Gaius, 4 § 2.) We find it is used in connexion with some arbitria and actions ex fide bona, where the defendant’s liability was to be determined at the discretion of the arbiter or judex. In all civil actions founded on Delict the intentio frequently contains the terms: damnum decidere oportere, § 37, for which some writers think praestare to have been an equivalent.

[15887] Negativa. An action respecting a servitude was either Confessoria or Negativa. If the plaintiff claimed a servitude over the land or house of the defendant, his action was called Confessoria; if he denied that his own land or house was subject to a servitude, his action was called Negativa (or Negatoria) in rem actio. In Confessoria the intentio was of the form, si paret Aulo Agerio jus esse eo fundo quo de agitur uti frui: in Negatoria of the form, si paret Numerio Negidio jus non esse eo fundo de quo agitur uti frui invito Aulo Agerio. In this action the plaintiff, probably, was not bound to prove a negative, but only the existence of his own ownership; it would then be incumbent on the defendant to prove affirmatively a limitation of this ownership. The actio negatoria is, it must be remembered, maintainable by the owner of property, not only when some one claims a servitude over it, but also in the case of any other interference with his rights, short of actually depriving him of possession. It is, like vindicatio, an actio in rem based on title of ownership, so that in bringing it, it is incumbent on the plaintiff to prove his ownership, which is a proverbially difficult subject of proof.

[17101] The coexistence of actio confessoria and actio negatoria with the antithesis of Positive and Negative servitudes is at first sight embarrassing: for we might suppose that an actio Confessoria of a jus altius tollendi was equivalent to an actio Negatoria of a jus altius Non tollendi; and that an actio Confessoria of a jus altius Non tollendi was equivalent to an actio Negatoria of a jus altius tollendi: so that the law would be encumbered by a redundancy of forms.

[17570] The following appears to be the explanation and to reconcile statements in our authorities which at first sight are inconsistent. The nature of the Servitude, Positive or Negative, alleged by the plaintiff and, consequentially, the character of the action, Confessoria or Negatoria, which he instituted, depended on the nature of the facts on which he relied as his title and on the nature of the allegations by which the defendant opposed his claim.

[18022] The plaintiff asserted a right of raising the height of his house by an actio Confessoria of a jus altius tollendi, consistently with the statement in § 3, if he alleged the Extinction of a former jus altius Non tollendi, i. e. the recovery of his original freedom; for we have mentioned, 2 § 31, comm., that the extinction of an Urban servitude could only be accomplished by the erection of a contrary or antagonistic servitude: whereas he asserted it by an actio Negatoria of a jus Non altius tollendi, consistently with Dig. 8, 5, 4, 7 (competit autem de servitute actio domino aedificii neganti servitutem se vicino debere), if he denied that such a jus Non altius tollendi had ever existed.

[18719] Similarly a right of prohibiting a neighbour from raising the height of his house would probably be asserted by actio Confessoria of jus Non altius tollendi if the defendant denied that such a right had ever existed: by actio Negatoria of jus altius tollendi, consistently with Inst. 4, 6, 2 (contra quoque de usufructu et de servitutibus praediorum rusticorum, item praediorum urbanorum invicem quoque proditae sunt actiones, ut quis intendat jus non esse adversario . . . altius tollendi . . . ; istae quoque actiones in rem sunt, sed Negativae. Quod genus actionis in controversiis rerum corporalium proditum non est; nam in his is agit qui non possidet: ei vero qui possidet non est actio prodita, per quam neget rem actoris esse), if the defendant contended that, though it once existed, it had been extinguished by usucapio libertatis.

[19562] Whether an action was Confessoria or Negatoria might possibly depend on the form in which the owner asserted the freedom of his property from any claim on the part of another to interfere with it. For instance, in Dig. 8, 5, 4, 7, where Ulpian is apparently speaking of actio Negativa of jus Non altius tollendi, he presently adds: hoc igitur intendo, habere me jus altius tollendi invito eo cum quo ago: terms which seem more appropriate for expressing an actio Confessoria of a jus altius tollendi; and which probably would express such an action, if the plaintiff intended to aver a reacquisition of his original freedom.

[20188] In both Confessoria and Negatoria the first proof was, according to the ordinary rule, incumbent on the plaintiff. The plaintiff Negator of jus Non altius tollendi or Assertor of jus altius tollendi had first to adduce proof in support of his contention—which in the former case would be simply to prove the fact of his ownership—before the defendant was called upon to prove his opposite contention: and the plaintiff, as asserting a right of servitude, must begin with adducing proof of its existence before the defendant is called upon to disprove its existence or to prove its extinction. Cf. § 88, comm.

[20798] The abolition in England of real actions has destroyed most of the likeness that once existed in the remedies provided by English law for the protection or impeachment of Profits and Easements (more or less identical with the rights which the Romans called Servitudes) and the remedies by which at Roman law Servitudes were protected or impeached. Before the abolition of Real actions each incorporeal hereditament was asserted or contested by some Real action corresponding either to actio Confessoria or to actio Negatoria. After their abolition the only remedy is Trespass or Trespass on the case (or their modern equivalents), personal actions which procure not restitution of a real right, but satisfaction in damages for injury sustained by its contravention, and which will lie as often as the wrong is repeated: or the Chancery or other Division of the High Court will stay the continuance or progress of a wrong by the issue of an Injunction.

[21751] As the perfect right of Ownership is supplemented by a less perfect right, the right of Possession, protected to some extent by possessory interdicts instead of by vindicatio, the remedy of Ownership; so the fraction of Ownership or perfect right which forms a Servitude is supplemented by an imperfect right, a right of Quasipossession, also protected by Interdicts, some identical in character with those which protect Possession, some varying with the nature of the Servitude, § 139.

[22239] Gaius points out that the Roman law of his day was illogical in allowing condictio on account of stolen property, cf. Inst. 4, 6, 14, no transfer of ownership being operated by theft. Roman law contained no disposition similar to that of English law, that property in stolen goods passes by sale in market overt. Even in the hands of a third person, an innocent purchaser, the thing remained the property of the original owner, exempt from the potent chemistry of usucapion. It follows that the action for obtaining restitution logically competent to the owner who still remained owner was vindicatio, and not an action based on an obligation to convey ownership to the plaintiff.

[22921] In the condictio ex causa furtiva, instead of the intentio, Si paret dare oportere, § 4, which implies that the plaintiff is not owner, we might have expected him to sue with the intentio, quidquid paret Dare facere oportere, which might be merely a form of claiming damages for the injury, and accordingly would be consistent with his ownership. The explanation why the other formula was allowed seems to be that at the time when this remedy on account of furtum was established condictio could only be brought on account of certa pecunia or certa res. The form of condictio was perhaps adopted in this case, though at the cost of an anomaly, in order to make the action transmissible against the heirs of the delinquent, a delictal action being intransmissible.

[23686] Condictio is an actio stricti juris, see §§ 18-20, comm. (For the distinction which is sometimes drawn between condictio and other kinds of actiones stricti juris see Sohm, § 80, n. 6.) It therefore excludes, besides all actions in rem, actions bonae fidei (which had an intentio Quidquid dari fieri oportet ex fide bona, § 47), and praetorian actions in personam; moreover actions ex delicto with the exception of condictio furtiva, which, as we have seen, is anomalous, § 4, belong to a different category. In its original and strict form it was always Condictio certi, with an intentio, Si paret dare oportere. It is either brought to recover a certain sum of money, Condictio certae pecuniae, or is brought to recover corn (hence its name), land or a slave or any other certain thing, and then is called Condictio triticaria, e. g. si paret Numerium Negidium Aulo Agerio tritici Africani optimi modios tot dare oportere, quanti ea res est, &c., Lenel, p. 190. Condictio then, strictly speaking, denotes the certainty and individuality of the property claimed apart from the ground on account of which it was claimed. But in later Roman law a condictio incerti, corresponding to an actio ex stipulatu for something unascertained in amount, is spoken of, perhaps with an intentio, quidquid paret dare facere oportere. Cf. Sohm, l. c.; Lenel, § 57.

[25037] In condictio certae pecuniae both the intentio (which names certa pecunia) and the condemnatio are certae. In condictio triticaria the intentio (which names some other certa res) is certa; the condemnatio (quanti ea res erit) is incerta. In condictio incerti both intentio and condemnatio are incertae, § 49, comm.

[25353] Rights may be divided into primary and secondary. Primary rights are antecedent to wrong, such as ownership. Secondary or sanctioning rights imply an antecedent wrong, and their title is a breach of some primary right, as a breach of contract or a delict.

[25610] Both these classes of rights and the corresponding duties are creations of the law: for every law is both imperative and coercive; that is, both by its command confers a primary right and imposes a corresponding primary duty, and sanctions its command by conferring a secondary right and imposing a secondary duty, that is, by conferring a remedy and employing coercion in the event of disobedience.

[26011] The sanctions of the civil law are either reparative and remedial or punitory and preventive; and in one case the object of the law is the restoration of the plaintiff by restitution or compensation, and then his primary right is the measure of his redress or sanctioning right; in the other case it is the repression of similar wrongs by inflicting a punishment on the defendant which may operate as a terror to himself in future (reformatory) and to other wrongdoers (exemplary); and then the sanctioning right may far exceed his primary right. Even restoration may embrace the mediate as well as the immediate value of the primary right, 3 § 212, comm.

[26668] The language of Roman jurisprudence makes no distinction between a primary right and a sanctioning right when the sanction is purely restorative, even though it include indireet or consequential damages, calling both by the name of the Object (Res). The redress directly given by the Roman law under the formulary procedure was always pecuniary damages, and we might have expected Roman jurists above all others to distinguish between the objects of the plaintiff’s primary and secondary right; but the indirect result of a real action might be the recovery of specific restitution, and it was in view of this type of redress that the Roman lawyers were led to speak of the objects of primary and reparative secondary rights as identical.

[27408] If we next proceed to inquire what classes of actions are brought for reparation or to recover the object of a primary right (rei persecutio), and what for the recovery of a penalty (poenae persecutio), §§ 6-9, we shall have no difficulty in perceiving that real actions and actions on contract belong to the former class (rei persecutio); and that of actions on delict, some are reparatory, as e. g. condictio furtiva, while others have for their object a penalty (poenae persecutio), such as the actio furti, while in some again both objects are combined e. g. actio vi bonorum raptorum. Inst. 4, 6, 16-19. The effect of real actions and of actions on contract is restoration: they leave the plaintiff no richer and the defendant no poorer in respect of property than he was at first; whereas the purely penal actions leave the plaintiff, in respect of property, richer, and the defendant poorer. But the remaining divisions of actions on delict, those brought to recover indemnification for damage to property, are more ambiguous in character. If we merely regard their effect on the plaintiff they seem to be purely reparative, for they leave the plaintiff no richer; but if we regard their effect on the defendant they seem to be penal, for if the wrong done by the defendant was a destruction of property, compensation to the plaintiff will leave the defendant poorer. Those actions on delict, which may be called vindictive (quae ad ultionem pertinent, quae vindictam continent), as having for their special object the satisfaction of the injured feelings of the plaintiff, such as the actio injuriarum, have the effect of penalising the defendant, and so rather resemble the purely penal actions ex delicto than such as are merely reparatory.

[29160] We have seen, 3 § 212, comm., that, even under a contract, damages could include indirect losses or the mediate value of the primary right, and might, according to the limitation made by Justinian, Cod. 7, 47, 1, amount to twice the immediate value of the subject-matter of the obligation, where this can be ascertained: and that in the case of actions, founded on delict, damages, as distinct from penalty, were not restricted to any maximum.

[29605] But delictal actions, whether they are regarded as rei persecutio, or as poenae persecutio, or as mixtae, are generally subject to the following rules: they are not passively transmissible, i. e. they are not maintainable against the heir of the defendant, except so far as the inheritance he has succeeded to was enriched by the delict, unless there has been joinder of issue (lis contestata) against the wrongdoer, in which case the delictal obligation is novated, 3 § 180, and becomes passively transmissible; moreover, they are maintainable against each one of several delinquents for the entire damages (in solidum); and they can be brought in the form of noxal actions against the paterfamilias or dominus. See Grueber, Lex Aquilia, p. 275. Moreover, Praetorian penal actions can, generally speaking, only be maintained within a year (annus utilis) from the commission of the delict.

[30496] It is to be noticed that in case of the death of the delinquent, the plaintiff had not always an adequate remedy under the Roman law, when the inheritance was not enriched by the delict, e. g. in the case of damage to property under the lex Aquilia; and English common law even went beyond the rule of Roman law in this respect, since its principle was that no action of Tort (a term which does not coincide with but is wider than that of Delict) would lie against the executor or administrator of the wrongdoer. [The maxim, actio personalis moritur cum persona, often used by expositors of English law, must have originated in a misprint of personalis for poenalis.] But now, by 3 and 4 Will. IV, c. 42, an action for injury to property, as opposed to actions for slander and the like (vindictive actions, which die with the person), is maintainable against the executors and administrators of the wrongdoer, provided the wrong was committed within six months before his death and the action is brought within a year after his death, if it was an injury to real property, or within six months after his executors or administrators have taken on themselves administration, if it was an injury to personal property. Thus within the limits of this statute the English plaintiff has an ampler remedy than the Roman. See Pollock’s Law of Torts, Ch. III. § 2.

[31852] It should be remembered respecting the extinction of delictal actions (1) that by reason of death, Vindictive suits are incapable of either active or passive transmission (transmission to the heir of the plaintiff or against the heir of the defendant), other delictal actions being capable of active but incapable of passive transmission, § 111, comm.; (2) that by prescription, Praetorian Penal suits are generally limited to a year, while Civil actions are ‘perpetuae,’ §§ 110-113, comm.; (3) that in the case of concurrence, i. e. the merger, absorption, or alternation of several coexisting suits, one penal action may not consume another on account of the same offence. (As to the interpretation of the statement in the Institutes (4, 9, 1) numquam actiones praesertim poenales de eadem re concurrentes alia aliam consumit, see Dr. Moyle’s note, and cf. Windscheid, Pandekten, 2 § 326, n. 8 & 9.) The importance of the distinction between reparatory and purely penal actions has disappeared in modern times in consequence of the desuetude of purely penal actions.

[32922] Damages in English law is a general term for the pecuniary sum awarded to the plaintiff in a civil action; i. e. a claim for damages includes not only compensation for loss of property, but also what is recovered in such actions, as those for assault or libel.

[33184] One action upon contract, namely, the action against a depositary, was brought for double the value of the deposit, i. e. was partly penal, if the deposit was necessitated by fire, shipwreck, tumult, or similar distress.

[33406] In Justinian’s time it was fully established that the penalty of Rapine was only thrice the value of the thing taken with violence, that is, the quadruple damages were partly penal and partly reparatory; accordingly the actions vi bonorum raptorum and the real or personal action to recover the thing taken or damages could not also be brought, that is they were not concurrent or cumulative, Inst. 4, 6, 19. For a case of quadruple damages, of which ¼ was restorative and ¾ penal, under 9 Anne, c. 14, against Gaming, see Stephen’s Blackstone, Introduction.

[33966] The actio judicati was brought against a defendant to enforce the condemnation of the judex. If he defended this action he was liable to be condemned to pay twice the amount of the judgment debt, and was required to give security judicatum solvi. This security was the modern representative of the interposition of a Vindex in the old proceeding of manus injectio. In manus injectio pro judicato it seems the Vindex who lost the suit was condemned, as a penalty for his unwarranted interference, to pay a sum equal to the original judgment debt; in other words, to discharge the debtor he had to pay twice the amount of the debt. In manus injectio pura the defendant was so to say his own Vindex, and, if he lost, was condemned in double the debt. See §§ 21-25.

[34729] The actio depensi [see above, 3 § 127] was introduced by a lex Publilia of uncertain date, and as it was only given to the sponsor, would become obsolete when the sponsor was superseded by the fidejussor.

[34935] Legatum per damnationem no longer existed in the time of Justinian, who confined the action of the legatee against the heres for twice the value of the legacy to the case of bequests to churches and religious institutions. Inst. 3, 27, 7.

[35175] § 10. Quaedam praeterea sunt actiones quae ad legis actionem exprimuntur, quaedam sua ui ac potestate constant. quod ut manifestum fiat, opus est ut prius de legis actionibus loquamur.

[35361] § 11. Actiones quas in usu ueteres habuerunt legis actiones appellabantur uel ideo, quod legibus proditae erant (quippe tunc edicta praetoris, quibus conplures actiones introductae sunt, nondum in usu habebantur), uel ideo, quia ipsarum legum uerbis accommodatae erant et ideo inmutabiles proinde atque leges obseruabantur. unde eum, qui de uitibus succisis ita egisset, ut in actione uites nominaret, responsum est rem perdidisse, cum debuisset arbores nominare eo, quod lex xii tabularum, ex qua de uitibus succisis actio conpeteret, generaliter de arboribus succisis loqueretur.

[35944] § 12. Lege autem agebatur modis quinque: sacramento, per iudicis postulationem, per condictionem, per manus iniectionem, per pignoris capionem.

[36089] § 13. Sacramenti actio generalis erat; de quibus enim rebus ut aliter ageretur lege cautum non erat, de his sacramento agebatur. eaque actio proinde periculosa erat | falsi—, atque hoc tempore periculosa est actio cer|tae creditae pecuniae propter sponsionem qua periclitaturreus, si temere neget, 〈et〉 restipulationem qua periclitatur actor, si non debitum petat; nam qui uictus erat summam sacramenti praestabat poenae nomine, eaque in publicum cedebat praedesque eo nomine praetori dabantur, non ut nunc sponsionis et restipulationis poena lucro cedit aduersario qui uicerit.

[36669] § 14. Poena autem sacramenti aut quingenaria erat aut quinquagenaria. nam de rebus mille aeris plurisue quingentis assibus, de minoris uero quinquaginta assibus sacramento contendebatur; nam ita lege xii tabularum cautum erat. 〈at〉 si de libertate hominis controuersia erat, etiamsi pretiosissimus homo esset, tamen ut l assibus sacramento contenderetur, eadem lege cautum est fauore scilicet libertatis, ne onerarentur adsertores. —

[37104] (11 uersus in C legi nequeunt)—|—

[37139] § 15. omnes actiones—

[37162] (5 uersus in C legi nequeunt)—|—captus—|

[37204] (5 uersus in C legi nequeunt)—|—ad iudicem accipiendum uenirent; postea uero reuersis dabatur. ut autem 〈die〉 xxx iudex daretur, per legem Pinariam factum est; ante eam autem legem statim dabatur iudex. illud ex superioribus intellegimus, si de re minoris quam 〈m〉 aeris agebatur, quinquagenario sacramento, non quingenario eos contendere solitos fuisse. postea tamen quam iudex datus esset, conperendinum diem, ut ad iudicem uenirent, denuntiabant. deinde cum ad iudicem uenerant, antequam apud eum causam perorarent, solebant breuiter ei et quasi per indicem rem exponere; quae dicebatur causae coniectio, quasi causae suae in breue coactio.

[37849] § 16. Si in rem agebatur, mobilia quidem et mouentia, quae modo in ius adferri adduciue possent, in iure uindicabantur ad hunc modum: qui uindicabat festucam tenebat; deinde ipsam rem adprehendebat, ueluti hominem, et ita dicebat hvnc ego hominem ex ivre qviritivm mevm esse aio secvndvm svam cavsam. sicvt dixi, ecce tibi, vindictam inposvi, et simul homini festucam inponebat; aduersarius eadem similiter dicebat et faciebat; cum uterque uindicasset, praetor dicebat mittite ambo hominem; illi mittebant; qui prior uindica〈uerat, ita alterum interroga〉 bat postvlo anne dicas, qva ex cavsa vindicaveris; ille respondebat ivs feci sicvt vindictam inposvi; deinde qui prior uindicauerat, dicebat qvando tv inivria vindicavisti, d aeris sacramento te provoco; aduersarius quoque dicebat similiter et ego te; scilicet 〈si de re m aeris plurisque agebatur, d, si de minoris,〉 l asses sacramenti nominabant; deinde eadem sequebantur quae cum in personam ageretur; postea praetor secundum alterum eorum uindicias dicebat, id est interim aliquem possessorem constituebat, eumque iubebat praedes aduersario dare litis et uindiciarum, id est rei et fructuum; alios autem praedes ipse praetor ab utroque accipiebat sacramenti, quod id in publicum cedebat. festuca autem utebantur quasi hastae loco, signo quodam iusti dominii, quod maxime sua esse credebant quae ex hostibus cepissent; unde in centumuiralibus iudiciis hasta praeponitur.

[39279] § 17. Si qua res talis erat, ut sine incommodo non posset in ius adferri uel adduci, ueluti si columna aut grex alicuius pecoris esset, pars aliqua inde sumebatur; deinde in eam partem quasi in totam rem praesentem fiebat uindicatio. itaque ex grege uel una ouis aut capra in ius adducebatur, uel etiam pilus inde sumebatur et in ius adferebatur, ex naue uero et columna aliqua pars defringebatur. similiter si de fundo uel de aedibus siue de hereditate controuersia erat, pars aliqua inde sumebatur et in ius adferebatur et in eam partem perinde atque in totam rem praesentem fiebat uindicatio, ueluti ex fundo gleba sumebatur et ex aedibus tegula, et si de hereditate controuersia erat, aeque—

[39976] (48 uersus in C perierunt)— qualem — capiendum iudicio | —die xxx ad iudicem capiendum praesto esse de|bebant.

[40088] § 18. Condicere autem denuntiare est prisca lingua. itaque haec quidem actio proprie condictio uocabatur; nam actor aduersario denuntiabat, ut ad iudicem capiendum die xxx adesset. nunc uero non proprie condictionem dicimus actionem in personam 〈esse, qua〉 intendimus dari nobis oportere; nulla enim hoc tempore eo nomine denuntiatio fit.

[40428] § 19. Haec autem legis actio constituta est per legem Siliam et Calpurniam, lege quidem Silia certae pecuniae, lege uero Calpurnia de omni certa re.

[40578] § 20. Quare autem haec actio desiderata sit, cum de eo quod nobis dari oportet, potuerimus aut sacramento aut per iudicis postulationem agere, ualde quaeritur.

[40739] Some actions are moulded upon, and contain a reference to, the forms of statute-process; others are unrelated and independent. This makes some explanation of the statute-process system necessary.

[40936] § 11. These actions, which our old jurisprudence employed, are called statute-process, either because they were appointed by statute before the edict of the praetor, the source of many new actions, began to be published, or because they followed the statute itself and therefore were as immutable as the statute. Thus, it was held that a man who sued another for cutting his vines, and in his action called them vines, irreparably lost his right because he ought to have called them trees, as the enactment of the Twelve Tables, which confers the action concerning the cutting of vines, speaks generally of trees and not particularly of vines.

[41581] § 12. There were five forms of statute-process, Sacramentum, Judicis postulatio, Condictio, Manus injectio, and Pignoris capio.

[41710] § 13. The actio sacramenti was the general form of action, for wherever no other mode was appointed by statute, the procedure was by sacramentum. It was a form of action attended with risk to the parties, like the modern action to recover money lent, wherein the defendant and plaintiff by the sponsio and restipulatio respectively forfeit a penal sum, if unsuccessful. Accordingly the party who was beaten had to pay the amount of the stake (summa sacramenti) by way of penalty; but it went to the public treasury, sureties on this account having to be given to the Praetor, instead of going as it does now by sponsio and restipulatio to the profit of the winning side.

[42382] § 14. The penal sum of the sacramentum was either five hundred asses or fifty asses; five hundred when the object of dispute was valued at a thousand or upwards, fifty when at less than a thousand. This was provided by the law of the Twelve Tables When, however, personal freedom was the subject of dispute, however valuable a slave the man whose status was litigated might be, the penal sum was only fifty asses. This was enacted by the Twelve Tables in favour of liberty, in order that the vindex or assertor of liberty might never be deterred by the magnitude of the risk.

[42959] § 15. [When the sacramentum was a personal action, that is to say, instituted to enforce an obligation, after giving securities for the stake, the parties left the praetor’s court, having arranged to reappear on the thirtieth day] to receive a judex. When they appeared again the Praetor nominated a judex. This was in pursuance of the lex Pinaria, before which the judex was named at once. If the object of dispute was worth less than a thousand asses, the stake, as before mentioned, was only fifty. After the judex was named, they gave mutual notice to appear before him on the next day but one. At the appearance before the judex, before the case was fully developed, it was stated in a concise and summary form, and this summary statement was called causae conjectio.

[43733] When the sacramentum was a real action, movables and animals that could be brought or led into the presence of the magistrate were claimed before him in the following fashion. The vindicant held a wand, and then grasping the object itself, as for instance a slave, said: ‘This man I claim as mine by due acquisition, by the law of the Quirites. See! as I have said, I have put my spear (vindicta) on him,’ whereupon he laid his wand upon the man. The adversary then said the same words and performed the same acts. After both had vindicated him, the praetor said: ‘Both claimants quit your hold,’ and both quitted hold. Then the first claimant said, interrogating the other: ‘Answer me, will you state on what title you found your claim?’ and he replied: ‘My putting my spear over him was an act of ownership.’ Then the first vindicant said: ‘Since you have vindicated him in defiance of law, I challenge you to stake as sacramentum five hundred asses’: the opposite party in turn used the same words, ‘I too challenge you.’ That is to say, if the thing was worth more than a thousand asses, they staked five hundred asses or else it was only fifty. Then ensued the same ceremonies as in a personal action. The praetor then awarded to one or other of the claimants possession of the thing pending the suit, and made him bind himself with sureties to his adversary to restore both the object of dispute and the mesne profits or value of the interim possession, in the event of losing the cause. The praetor also took sureties from both parties for the stake (summa sacramenti) which the loser was to forfeit. Now the wand which they used represented a lance, the symbol of absolute dominion, for what a man had captured from the enemy was held to be most distinctly his own. Accordingly in Centumviral trials (where questions of inheritance are decided) a lance is set up in front as an ensign or symbol.

[45638] § 17. If the object of dispute was such as could not conveniently be carried or led before the praetor, as for instance a column, or a herd of cattle, a portion was brought into court, and the formalities were enacted over it as if it were the whole. Thus if it was a flock of sheep or herd of goats, a single sheep or goat, or even a single tuft of hair was taken before the magistrate; if it was a ship or column, a fragment was broken off and brought similarly; if it was land, a clod; or if it was a house, a tile; and if it was a dispute about an inheritance, then in the same way . . . . . . . . . . . . . on the thirtieth day when they were bound to appear in court to receive a judge.

[46332] § 18. Condicere in old Latin was equivalent to denuntiare, to give notice. Hence this action was appropriately called condictio (notice), for the plaintiff used to give notice to the defendant to appear before the praetor on the thirtieth day to receive a judge. The name is now applied with less propriety to a personal action by which we sue for a transfer of property, for notice forms no part of the procedure.

[46748] § 19. This form of statute-process was created by the lex Silia and lex Calpurnia, being prescribed by the lex Silia for the recovery of a certain sum, and extended by the lex Calpurnia to the recovery of any other certain thing.

[46979] § 20. Why a new action was needed, when an obligation to transfer property to a person could be enforced either by Sacramentum or by Judicis postulatio, is a question much discussed.

[47163] The discovery of the MS. of Gaius by Niebuhr threw a flood of light on the history of Roman Civil Procedure, and not least on the early process by legis actio. Although the forms of legis actio had only an historical interest at the time when Gaius wrote, he begins his account of procedure by noticing them, because, as he tells us, § 10, the actions which were then in use had been to some extent founded on them. (For the literature concerning the legis actiones see Muirhead, § 13.)

[47651] The term legis actio is correlative to lege agere, and thus means action determined by lex, i. e. the Twelve Tables and other leges, § 11, agere signifying the observance of the formal acts prescribed by law for prosecuting legal claims. (Cf. Nettleship, Contr. to Latin Lexicog., s. v. actio.) The legis actiones were either legal forms preparatory to bringing a case to trial, or prescribed forms for obtaining execution, rather than actions in the strict sense. To the first class belong the actio sacramenti, per judicis postulationem, and per condictionem; to the latter per manus injectionem and per pignoris capionem. The deposit of a sacramentum by the two parties to a dispute to bring the matter to an issue was the basis of what seems to be the earliest legis actio. In contrast with the other legis actiones the actio sacramenti was a general one, § 13, de quibus enim rebus ut aliter ageretur lege cautum non erat, de his sacramento ageretur.

[48608] The forms of action per judicis postulationem and per condictionem seem to have been introduced subsequently with a more limited object. Thus the legis actio sacramenti is both in rem and in personam. But of the procedure in personam we have no information on account of the lacuna in the MS. § 15, which can only be filled up in a general sense. Instead of the assertion of ownership, as in vindicatio, the creditor would claim from the debtor his debt—aio to mihi x milia aeris dare oportere. Instead of a contra-vindicatio there would be a denial on the part of the debtor of the obligation, and on this denial the summa sacramenti would be staked in a manner corresponding to that which was followed in the actio in rem. The proceedings would be simpler and less archaic in character than in the real action. Whether, as has been suggested, the actio sacramenti was at first always a claim to a thing, which in the case of a debt would be the body of the debtor, we do not know, but the conception of obligation is so rudimentary in early times, as to make it not improbable. (Cf. Brinz, Grünhut’s Zeitschr. 1, 23; Muirhead, § 34.)

[49745] The sacramentum or money solemnly staked was, it would seem, originally deposited with the Pontifex and applied, when forfeited, to meet the expenses of the public sacrifices; whence its name. (According to Varro de L. L. 5, 180, it was deposited ad Pontem; for different interpretations of this passage see Muirhead, Appendix, N. E.) Afterwards, instead of an actual deposit, security [praeves, praevides, Lex Agr. C. I. L. 1, 200, 46, manceps, praevides, praediaque. According to Nettleship (op. cit. Praes), Praes was originally in all probability an adjective, meaning ready, praes and vas being thus distinguished: Praes is the security for a payment or performance of a contract, while Vas is the security for a person’s appearance in court. Cf. Varro 6, 74, ‘Sponsor’ et ‘Praes’ et ‘Vas’ neque idem . . . . Itaque Praes qui a magistratu interrogatus in publicum ut praestet . . . dicit ‘Praes.’ Vas appellatur qui pro altero vadimonium promittit] for the penal sum was given by both parties to the praetor. Sohm (§ 48, n. 2) supposes that a sacramentum was originally not merely a stake of money against money, but of oath against oath (i. e. sacramentum in its ordinary sense), and hence on account of the force attaching to oaths was binding on the magistrate, but this is only conjectural.

[51046] In the ceremony as described by Gaius we may distinguish three stages: first, an oral pleading or altercation, alluded to in the subsequent words ‘sicut dixi’; secondly, a trial by battle, the original method of deciding disputed rights; and thirdly, the reference to peaceful adjudication. We may suppose that on a memorable day in the progress of civilization, before the combat had terminated fatally to one of the combatants, some one like Numa Pompilius, of sufficient authority to make so great an innovation, interposed and induced the parties to refer the dispute to arbitration. The case would afterwards serve as a model and precedent to future litigants; but, from a superstitious fear of losing the sanction of immemorial custom, the earlier stages of the process would still continue to be mimicked in solemn pantomime. So, in English law, trial by Wager of battle, introduced by William the Conqueror, was first partially superseded by the Grand assize, or trial by jury, an alternative substituted by Henry II, and was finally abolished in the reign of George III. ‘The tenant [defendant] shall not be received to wage battle, nor shall issue be joined, nor trial had, by battle, in any writ of right,’ 59 Geo. III, ch. 46.

[52286] The use of the rod or wand as representative of the spear, the symbol of dominion, may be paralleled in English law by the delivery of a staff as the symbol of power and possession in the conveyance of copyholds. ‘The conveyance of copyhold estates is usually made from the seller to the lord or his steward by delivery of a rod or verge, and then from the lord to the purchaser by redelivery of the same in the presence of a jury of tenants,’ Blackstone, 2, 20.

[52750] The specification of the title or ground of claim (expressio causae) in a real action (secundum suam causam, sicut dixi) may have been, as Bethmann-Hollweg supposes (R. C. P. 1, 139), limited to actions where the object claimed was a person, and was then designed to distinguish whether the person was claimed as a son, wife, bondsman (mancipium), or slave. See 1 § 134, comm. More probably, however, it was universally required in statute-process, though not in the formulary system, for the purpose of ascertaining in all cases the ground on which each party claimed, as whether it was on account of a mancipation, a surrender before the magistrate, or usucapion, 2 § 43, comm.

[53431] After completing his account of Sacramentum, Gaius probably proceeded to explain the nature of Judicis postulatio in the 48 lines of the MS., § 17 a, which are wanting, though in the latter part of them he had gone on to treat of the condictio. Of its process we have a fragment in the formula derived from Valerius Probus, the first two letters of which, however, are very doubtful: Te, Praetor, judicem arbitrumve postulo uti des, ‘I pray you, Praetor, to appoint an arbiter or judge.’ It seems to be distinguished from actio sacramenti in personam and from condictio not only in respect of its form, but by the greater freedom allowed to the judex or arbiter, appointed by the Praetor, at the request of one of the parties, to try the suit. Thus it was apparently the prototype of actions bonae fidei, as opposed to actions stricti juris, that is of actions for enforcing obligations which might require an equitable balancing by the judex or arbiter of opposite claims, and an assessment by him of such damages as good faith required to be paid to the plaintiff. It would thus be suitable in cases for which the actio sacramenti in personam would supply an insufficient remedy. A party taking advantage of this procedure would have to show that his case came under the provisions of the Twelve Tables. or of some other lex, and that it was suitable to an arbitrium. The actions Finium regundorum, Familiae herciscundae, Aquae pluviae arcendae, de arboribus succisis, which are mentioned in or derived from the Twelve Tables, appear to have been tried by an arbiter or arbiters, that is, to have been forms of Judicis postulatio. For an account of views of different writers respecting the origin and nature of judicis postulatio see Muirhead, Roman Law, § 35.

[55196] The phrase manum conserere is sometimes used, though not by Gaius, in reference to the actio sacramenti (Cic. pro Mur. 12, 26; Gell. 20, 10; Varro, L. L. 6, 64), meaning, perhaps, the act of the parties in laying hold at the same time of the object in dispute or engaging in a conflict about it. This mimic conflict originally took place on the land itself, which was vindicated, in the presence of the magistrate (in jure manum conserere), but later a practice grew up, which is referred to by Cicero, for the parties, by order of the magistrate, going by themselves attended by witnesses to the place, and after duly observing the ceremonial returning to the Court. Finally this was discontinued, and as we see by the text, § 17, a part of the thing was brought in the first place before the magistrate to represent the whole.

[56026] After the vindication and counter-vindication had taken place, the praetor had to assign interim possession of the vindiciae, or object which was claimed, to one of the parties, and to take security from him that he would be ready to produce this object of litigation (called here lis, cf. Cic. Mur. 12, 27) and the mesne profits, which are denoted by the term vindiciae (praedes litis et vindiciarum). Gaius gives no indication of the principle on which the praetor acted in making this assignment, simply saying secundum alterum eorum vindicias dicebat. In later process the possessor, who was the defendant in the action, would be allowed to remain in possession, on giving security that he would satisfy the judgment, and it would be for the vindicant to prove his title. The difference here is that the two parties stand on an equal footing, each of them in turn vindicating the thing, and so neither of them being in the position of defendant. It seems reasonable, however, to suppose that the praetor would be governed by the same motives in making his award as influenced him in granting the possessory interdicts, so that the party seeking to evict the other would not as a rule obtain possession till he had proved his title.

[57263] The Condictio was unknown to the Twelve Tables, having been created by the lex Silia of a somewhat later but uncertain date, and extended by the lex Calpurnia, the date of which is also uncertain. We see by the text, § 20, that the reason for instituting another actio in personam, when the actio sacramenti and per judicis postulationem were already available, was not clear to the jurists at the time when Gaius wrote. But the object of the Lex Silia in instituting the condictio may have been to supply a more prompt and efficient remedy for the recovery of money debts than previously existed, a reform in procedure which would be required when summary execution on account of nexum was abolished. By this new form of action a creditor could forthwith give notice to his debtor, called condictio, from which the proceeding derives its name, to appear before the magistrate in thirty days to have a judex appointed. If, as there is some reason for thinking, the serving of this notice was an extra-judicial act, it would be easily executed by the party interested. And should the debt not have been satisfied within the thirty days, the creditor was entitled to a judicium, depending on a simple and clearly defined issue. Thus the proceedings in jure would be much curtailed. Moreover, condictio had the advantage that it could be accompanied by the sponsio and restipulatio, § 13, a wager entered into by mutual stipulations of the parties conditioned for the forfeiture by the vanquished to the successful party instead of to the treasury of one third of the sum in dispute, in addition, on the part of the defendant, to the original debt, § 171. The stake or penalty is called by Cicero legitima pars, ‘statutable sum’: Pecunia petita est certa; cum tertia parte sponsio facta est. . . . Pecunia tibi debebatur certa quae nunc petitur per judicem, in qua legitimae partis sponsio facta est, Pro Roscio, 4, 5: whence we may suppose that this stake or penalty was fixed by the lex Silia, the statute which created the procedure by condictio.

[59311] At this period then, on account of the advantages of judicis postulatio and condictio, the Sacramentum would be practically confined to Real actions before the Centumviral Court: Condictio would be the appropriate Personal action for recovering a certain sum or thing due upon a mutuum, which had taken the place of nexum, and also for enforcing a promise made by stipulation to pay certa pecunia or certa res, such promise by stipulation being perhaps first made actionable by the lex Silia, while the same process would be applicable to a transcripticium nomen; and Judicis postulatio was possibly the appropriate action in the case of arbitria, and for enforcing obligations to reconvey property which had been mancipated subject to a fiducia. But it must be remembered that the law of contract was at this time confined within narrow limits.

[60158] § 21. Per manus iniectionem aeque 〈de〉 his rebus agebatur, de quibus ut ita ageretur, lege aliqua cautum est, ueluti iudicati lege xii tabularum. quae actio talis erat: qui agebat, sic dicebat qvod tv mihi indicatvs (siue damnatvs) es sestertivm x milia, qvandoc non solvisti, ob eam rem ego tibi sestertivm x milivm ivdicati manvminicio, et simul aliquam partem corporis eius prehendebat. neclicebat iudicato manum sibi depellere et pro se lege agere; sed uindicem dabat, qui pro se causam agere solebat; qui uindicem non dabat, domum ducebatur ab actore et uinciebatur.

[60731] § 22. Postea quaedam leges ex aliis quibusdam causis pro iudicato manus iniectionem in quosdam dederunt: sicut lex Publilia in eum, pro quo sponsor dependisset, si in sex mensibus proximis, quam pro eo depensum esset, non soluisset sponsori pecuniam; item lex Furia de sponsu aduersus eum, qui a sponsore plus quam uirilem partem exegisset; et denique conplures aliae leges in multis causis talem actionem dederunt.

[61148] § 23. Sed aliae leges ex quibusdam causis constituerunt quasdam actiones per manus iniectionem, sed puram, id est non pro iudicato: ueluti lex 〈Furia〉 testamentaria aduersus eum, qui legatorum nomine mortisue causa plus m assibus cepisset, cum ea lege non esset exceptus, ut ei plus capere liceret; item lex Marcia aduersus faeneratores, ut si usuras exegissent, de his reddendis per manus iniectionem cum eis ageretur.

[61569] § 24. Ex quibus legibus et si quae aliae similes essent, cum agebatur, 〈reo licebat〉 manum sibi depellere et pro se lege agere. nam et actor in ipsa legis actione non adiciebat hoc uerbum pro ivdicato, sed nominata causa ex qua agebat ita dicebat ob eam rem ego tibi manvm inicio; cum hi, quibus pro iudicato actio data erat, nominata causa ex qua agebant ita inferebant ob eam rem ego tibi pro ivdicato manvm inicio. nec me praeterit in forma legis Furiae testamentariae pro ivdicato uerbum inseri, cum in ipsa lege non sit; quod uidetur nulla ratione factum.

[62131] § 25. Sed postea lege Vallia, excepto iudicato et eo pro quo depensum est, ceteris omnibus, cum quibus per manus iniectionem agebatur, permissum est sibi manum depellere et pro se agere. itaque iudicatus et is pro quo depensum est etiam post hanc legem uindicem dare debebant, et nisi darent, domum ducebantur. idque quamdiu legis actiones in usu erant, semper ita obseruabatur; unde nostris temporibus is, cum quo iudicati depensiue agitur, iudicatum solui satisdare cogitur.

[62609] § 21. Manus injectio was the procedure specially prescribed by statute in certain circumstances; as, for instance, against a judgment debtor by the law of the Twelve Tables. The procedure was as follows: the plaintiff said, ‘Whereas you have been adjudged or condemned to pay me ten thousand sesterces, which sum you have failed to pay, therefore I arrest you as judgment debtor for ten thousand sesterces,’ and at the same time laid hands on him; and the debtor was not allowed to resist the arrest, or use the statute-process in his own defence, but gave a vindex to advocate his cause, or, in default, was taken prisoner to the plaintiff’s house, and put in chains.

[63279] Afterwards manus injectio was given by various laws against quasi judgment debtors, as by the lex Publilia against the principal whose debt had been paid by his sponsor, unless he indemnified his sponsor within six months from the payment of the debt; by the lex Furia de Sponsu against the creditor who had exacted from one of several sponsors more than his ratable share; and by various other statutes in a number of cases.

[63706] § 23. Other statutes established that certain actions on particular grounds should be enforced by manus injectio, but it was simple manus injectio, not that applicable to quasi judgment creditors: as the lex (Furia) testamentaria in the action against the legatee or donee in contemplation of death who received more than a thousand asses if not included in certain classes privileged by that statute; and the lex Marcia against usurers compelled those who exacted interest on a loan to refund by manus injectio.

[64220] § 24. These statutes and certain others permitted the defendant to resist arrest and use the statute-process in his own defence, for in this case the plaintiff could not in carrying on the statute-process add the term quasi judgment debtor, but, after naming his cause of action, said simply, ‘I therefore arrest you’; whereas, if he proceeded as quasi judgment creditor, after naming the cause he said, ‘Therefore I arrest you as quasi judgment debtor.’ I am aware that in proceeding under the lex Furia testamentaria the plaintiff added the words, ‘As quasi judgment debtor,’ though they are not inserted in the law; but this seems to have been done in an irrational way.

[64895] But subsequently the lex Vallia permitted all defendants sued by manus injectio, except the judgment debtor and the principal indebted to his sponsor, to resist arrest and use the statuteprocess themselves in their own defence. Hence, the judgment debtor and the principal indebted to his sponsor for payment (depensum) had even after this law was passed either to give a vindex or else were carried off to the creditor’s house; and this practice lasted as long as statute-process was in force. And thus it is that at the present day the defendant in the actio judicati and in the actio depensi must give security for the payment of the sum in which they may be condemned.

[65569] For the proceedings in Manus injectio cf. 3 § 77, comm.

[65626] Manus injectio seems to have had two meanings:

[65674] (1) Self-help, or redress of the plaintiff by his own act, when the creditor arrested the debtor privately by his own authority.

[65804] In this case the award of a magistrate (addictio) would not be a necessary preliminary to abduction (secum duci): but self-redress was, as a general remedy, only tolerated when society was very loosely consolidated; and abductio without preceding addictio must at an early period have become, except in particular cases, illegal. The final blow struck by the state at Self-help was the constitution of the three emperors, a. d. 389, 3 § 209, comm.

[66253] But a creditor was entitled to arrest his debtor of his own accord, subject to certain formalities, till a comparatively late time in case of resistance to in jus vocatio; Si calvitur pedemve struit, manum endo jacito, Fragment of the Twelve Tables, Tab. 1. ‘If the defendant on being summoned to appear before the magistrate tergiversates or attempts to flee, the plaintiff may proceed to Manus injectio.’

[66661] We may conjecture also that avoidance of in jus vocatio by latitation or keeping house rendered a defendant liable to manus injectio. Such is the probable explanation of two fragments of the Twelve Tables, Tab. 1: Si in jus vocat, ito. Ni it, antestamino, igitur em capito. . . . Tab. 2, 3: Cui testimonium defuerit, is tertiis diebus ob portum obvagulatum ito. ‘On a service of summons to appear before the magistrate, if the defendant refuse obedience, the plaintiff shall obtain attestation of the fact, and then take him by force. In default of such attestation (i. e. if the defendant avoid service by keeping out of the way) the plaintiff on three market-days shall stand before the defendant’s door and wawl (loudly summon him to appear(?), and after this the defendant shall be liable to manus injectio).’ Compare the Hindoo custom of ‘sitting dharṅa,’ i. e. fasting at the door of a debtor. See Maine’s Early History of Institutions, pp. 40, 297-298.

[67622] (2) Manus injectio ceased to be a mere act of legalized self-redress, and became the part of a statute-process (legis actio) whenever it took place before the magistrate, either a Vindex interposing, or, in manus injectio pura, in case of the alleged debtor becoming himself and not by means of a vindex defendant in a judicium for determining whether he was liable to the process, Ihering, 11, c. The vindex (the word is like vindicatio and vindiciae derived from vim dicere) was in an analogous position to the assertor libertatis, since a person who was himself the object of a suit could not himself be defendant in it. A debtor who was addicted to his creditor did not, however, thereby lose either his freedom or his citizenship, though incapable while his confinement lasted of exercising his rights.

[68431] The right of a creditor to carry off his debtor under the award (addictio) of a magistrate, might either be founded on a previous judgment against the debtor (judicatus), or be given by some special statute against other debtors who were treated as judgment debtors (pro judicato). In both these cases the debtor could only defend himself by a vindex. But in some cases where manus injectio came to be allowed, as Gaius explains, § 24, the process was made less harsh, and the defendant was allowed to defend himself without supplying a vindex (manus injectio pura). It is to be noticed that Gaius does not refer to the case of the debtor bound in early law by nexum and subject to manus injectio, cf. 3 §§ 88, 89.

[69147] The lex Furia de sponsu (3 § 121), (as to the date of this law and the question whether it is referred to by Cicero see Karlowa, Rom. Rechtsgesch. 2, 735, and Roby 2, 30, n. 2), limited the obligation of the sponsor and fidepromissor to two years, and divided it equally among all the sponsores and fidepromissores without regard to their solvency.

[69497] The word exegisset suggests that the lex Furia de sponsu was not a lex perfecta;—that the limitation of the sponsor’s liability to a proportionate part of the principal debt was only effected by a penalty being imposed on the creditor who exacted the whole obligation.

[69767] If we assume with Ihering that the lex Furia de sponsu and the lex Furia testamentaria (2 § 225) were separate clauses of the same enactment, we can understand why manus injectio pro judicato, which was expressly made the remedy in lex Furia de sponsu, was extended by interpretation to lex Furia testamentaria: although this extension, according to Gaius, § 24, violated the rules of statute-process, which ought to rest in its minutest details on the express provisions of a statute.

[70254] The lex Marcia is an early law of uncertain date, cf. Livy, 7, 21. Its poena, like that of lex Furia testamentaria, was quadruplum: Cato de Re Rustica, quoted by Gellius.

[70426] The general opinion now is that execution against an insolvent debtor in the old Roman law was always directed immediately against the person of the debtor; it is certain that execution against his entire property, under the name of Bonorum venditio, 3 § 77, was a later invention of the Praetor. Savigny, however, supposes that under the law of the Twelve Tables itself execution against the person was confined with certain exceptions to judgments on an actual loan of money, and that execution on other judgments was always against the estate: and by this view, he seeks to throw light on an obscure problem, the nature of the ancient contract of Nexum.

[71084] A case, other than a judgment debt, in which the creditor might proceed by Manus injectio seems to be, besides those mentioned in the text, Furtum manifestum, 3 § 189.

[71253] With liability to Manus injectio for a quasi judgment debt we may compare the arrest of an absconding debtor in the English law by a writ of capias ad respondendum. As the Roman debtor had to find a vindex or responsible representative, so the English debtor must either remain in custody or put in bail, that is, find sureties who will undertake that, if judgment is obtained against him, either he shall surrender into custody, or shall pay the debt and costs recovered, or that they themselves will pay them for him. The Roman Vindex apparently became responsible for twice the amount of the original debt.

[71864] Bethmann-Hollweg, 2 § 111, conjectures that under the formulary procedure actio judicati, when the judicium was legitimum (§ 103), was fictitious, and had a formula like the following: Quod Numerius Negidius Aulo Agerio sestertium decem milia condemnatus est, Si Aulus Agerius Numerio Negidio manus injecisset: tum quidquid Numerium Negidium Aulo Agerio dare facere oporteret: ejus, judex, Numerium Negidium Aulo Agerio duplum condemna. If the judicium was imperio continens, he supposes that the actio judicati was in factum with the following formula: Si paret Numerium Negidium Aulo Agerio sestertium decem milia condemnatum esse eamque pecuniam intra legitimum tempus solutam non esse: quanti ea res erit, tantae pecuniae duplum judex Numerium Negidium Aulo Agerio condemna. (But see in respect of these highly conjectural formulae Lenel’s very unfavourable remarks. Das Edictum Perpetuum, p. 354, &c.) Under the later emperors when the formulary procedure was abolished, the actio judicati as a means of execution was superseded by a more direct process generally in the form of Pignoris capio. Thirty days were allowed for payment, 3 § 78; then interest began to run at 24 per cent. per annum (duo centesimae per month) which Justinian reduced to 12 p. c.

[73127] § 26. Per pignoris capionem lege agebatur de quibusdam rebus moribus, 〈de quibusdam rebus〉 lege.

[73225] § 27. Introducta est moribus rei militaris. nam et propter stipendium licebat militi ab eo qui aes tribuebat, nisi daret, pignus capere; dicebatur autem ea pecunia, quae stipendii nomine dabatur, aes militare. item propter eam pecuniam licebat pignus capere, ex qua equus emendus erat; quae pecunia dicebatur aes equestre. item propter eam pecuniam, ex qua hordeum equis erat conparandum; quae pecunia dicebatur aes hordiarium.

[73654] § 28. Lege autem introducta est pignoris capio ueluti lege xii tabularum aduersus eum, qui hostiam emisset nec pretium redderet; item aduersus eum, qui mercedem non redderet pro eo iumento, quod quis ideo locasset, ut inde pecuniam acceptam in dapem, id est in sacrificium, inpenderet. item lege censoria data est pignoris capio publicanis uectigalium publicorum populi Romani aduersus eos qui aliqua lege uectigalia deberent.

[74082] § 29. Ex omnibus autem istis causis certis uerbis pignus capiebatur, et ob id plerisque placebat hanc quoque actionem legis actionem esse; quibusdam autem 〈contra〉 placebat, primum quod pignoris capio extra ius peragebatur, id est non apud praetorem, plerumque etiam absente aduersario, cum alioquin ceteris actionibus non aliter uti possent quam apud praetorem praesente aduersario, praeterea quod nefasto quoque die, id est quo non licebat lege agere, pignus capi poterat.

[74558] Pignoris capio (distress) was employed in some cases by virtue of custom, in others by statute.

[74655] § 27. By custom, in obligations connected with military service; for the soldier could distrain upon his paymaster for his pay, called aes militare; for money to buy a horse, called aes equestre; and for money to buy barley for his horse, called aes hordiarium.

[74918] By statute as by the law of the Twelve Tables which rendered liable to distress on default of payment the buyer of a victim and the hirer of a beast of burden lent to raise money for a sacrifice to Jupiter dapalis. So too the law of the Censors gave the power of distress to the farmers of the public revenue of the Roman people (publicani) against those in default for taxes (vectigalia) due under any statute.

[75331] § 29. As in all these cases the distrainor used a set form of words, the proceeding was generally considered a form of statuteprocess. Some, however, held otherwise, because it was performed in the absence of the praetor and generally of the debtor; whereas the other forms of statute-process could only be enacted in the presence of the praetor and the adversary; besides, it could take place on an unlawful day (dies nefastus) (2 § 279), that is, on a day when statute-process was not allowed.

[75828] Distress in English law bears a certain resemblance to Execution. Each is the application of constraint to a defendant’s will by seizure of his goods. But making a distress is a legalized act of self-redress by a private person, as of a landlord for securing his rent, and may take the place of or precede an action: execution follows after judgment obtained in an action, and is the act of the executive at the command of the sovereign. The pignoris capio of the older Roman law corresponded to distress; the pignoris capio of the formulary system generally was a mode of execution.

[76413] Perhaps pignoris capio, like manus injectio, was itself simply an act of regulated Self-redress, when there was no other legal remedy available, and did not amount to legis actio unless it led to a suit in which the legality of the distraint was brought into question. Cf. Sohm, § 48, and the literature there cited.

[76731] Pignoris capio in the older system of procedure was a remedy allowed in cases of a public character, that is, in claims relating to military service, to religion, or to the revenue. In the first case, § 27, the remedy was established by custom, that is, was anterior to the Twelve Tables; in the second case, § 28, it was given by the Twelve Tables; in the third case, § 28, it was created by law subsequent to the Twelve Tables.

[77162] We have mention of the aes equestre and hordiarium, § 27, in Livy’s account of the Servian constitution, Livy 1. 43. ‘Each soldier received ten thousand asses for the purchase of a horse, and for its maintenance a widow was assigned, who was bound to pay two thousand asses a year.’

[77446] The institution appears to have been transplanted from Greece. Cicero mentions it as in force at Corinth, De Republica, 2, 20, 36. ‘Tarquinius Priscus instituted the present organization of the cavalry. At Corinth, whence he came, there was a practice of allotting horses at the public expense and taxing the childless and widows for their maintenance.’ The private persons thus appointed military paymasters appear to have been called tribuni aerarii, Gellius 7, 10. In later times soldiers were paid by the Quaestors from the public treasury.

[77992] We have something similar in the Laws of Plato: περὶ δὲ . . . λειτουργιω̂ν, ὁπόσα περὶ θυσίας εἰρηνικη̂ς ἢ πολεμικω̂ν εἰσϕορω̂ν εἵνεκα, πάντων τω̂ν τοιούτων τὴν πρώτην ἀνάγκην ἰατὴν εἰ̂ναι τη̂ς ζημίας τοɩ̂ς [δὲ] μὴ πειθομένοις ἐνεχυρασίαν τούτοις, οἷς [Editor: illegible character]ν πόλις ἅμα καὶ νόμος εἰσπράττειν προστάττῃ, τω̂ν δὲ ἀπειθούντων ταɩ̂ς ἐνεχυρασίαις πρα̂σιν τω̂ν ἐνεχύρων ε[Editor: illegible character]ναι, τὸ δὲ νόμισμα γίγνεσθαι τῃ̂ πόλει, Laws, 12, 4. ‘If a public duty relating to religion or war is unperformed, the first stage of coercive penalty shall be defeasible by submission of the defaulter, and his goods shall be merely taken in distress by the lawfully appointed official; but if he continue contumacious, the distress shall be sold and the proceeds shall be confiscated.’

[78802] Raising money for a sacrifice by letting out a beast of burden seems to us to be an exceptional circumstance, but in primitive times it may have been a common practice, originally sanctioned by jus sacrum. (For the importance of distress in early law, before regular courts of law were established, and for instances of its exercise, see Maine’s Early History of Institutions, Lect. IX.)

[79191] A praediator is defined by Gaius, qui mercatur a populo, above, 2 § 61. A lex praediatoria which might perhaps be passed to enable things thus taken in distress for taxes to be sold, is mentioned by Suetonius: Ad eas rei familiaris angustias decidit, ut cum obligatam aerariis fidem liberare non posset, in vacuum lege praediatoria venalis pependerit sub edicto praefectorum, Claudius 9. ‘He was so impoverished, that he could not discharge his obligation to the treasury, and the prefects advertised his goods for sale without reserved price, as provided by lex praediatoria.’ On the first day of a sale the amount of the debt due to the state was announced as a reserved price, or minimum for which the goods would be sold. If no bidder appeared on these terms, the goods were offered on a subsequent day without reserve (in vacuum).

[80028] § 30. Sed istae omnes legis actiones paulatim in odium uenerunt. namque ex nimia subtilitate ueterum qui tunc iura condiderunt eo res perducta est, ut uel qui minimum errasset, litem perderet. itaque per legem Aebutiam et duas Iulias sublatae sunt istae legis actiones effectumque est, ut per concepta uerba, id est per formulas litigemus.

[80369] § 31. Tantum ex duabus causis permissum est lege agere: damni infecti et si centumuirale iudicium futurum est. sane quidem cum ad centumuiros itur, ante lege agitur sacramento apud praetorem urbanum uel peregrinum [praetorem]. damni uero infecti nemo uult lege agere, sed potius stipulatione quae in edicto proposita est obligat aduersarium suum, idque et commodius ius et plenius est. per pignoris capionem—| (23 uersus in C legi nequeunt) —apparet.

[80821] § 32. Item in ea forma, quae publicano proponitur, talis fictio est, ut quanta pecunia olim, si pignus captum esset, id pignus is a quo captum erat luere deberet, tantam pecuniam condemnetur.

[81014] § 33. Nulla autem formula ad condictionis fictionem exprimitur. siue enim pecuniam siue rem aliquam certam debitam nobis petamus, eam ipsam dari nobis oportere intendimus; nec ullam adiungimus condictionis fictionem. itaque simul intellegimus eas formulas, quibus pecuniam aut rem aliquam nobis dari oportere intendimus, sua ui ac potestate ualere. eiusdem naturae sunt actiones commodati, fiduciae, negotiorum gestorum et aliae innumerabiles.

[81459] § 34. Habemus adhuc alterius generis fictiones in quibusdam formulis, ueluti cum is, qui ex edicto bonorum possessionem petiit, ficto se herede agit. cum enim praetorio iure, non legitimo succedat in locum defuncti, non habet directas actiones, et neque id quod defuncti fuit potest intendere svvm esse neque id quod ei debebatur potest intendere 〈dari〉 sibi oportere; itaque ficto se herede intendit uelut hoc modo ivdex esto. si a | agerivs (id est si ipse actor) l. titio heres esset, tvm 〈si evm〉 fvndvm | de qvo agitvr ex ivre qviritivm eius esse oporteret; et si— de—, | praeposita simili fictione heredis ita subicitur tvm si pare|ret n. negidivm 〈a.〉 agerio sestertivm x milia dare oportere.

[82160] § 35. Similiter et bonorum emptor ficto se herede agit; sed interdum et alio modo agere solet. nam ex persona eius cuius bona emerit sumpta intentione conuertit condemnationem in suam personam, id est ut, quod illius esset uel illi dari oporteret, eo nomine aduersarius huic condemnetur; quae species actionis appellatur Rutiliana, quia a praetore P. Rutilio, qui et bonorum uenditionem introduxisse dicitur, conparata est. superior autem species actionis, qua ficto se herede bonorum emptor agit, Seruiana 〈uocatur.

[82678] § 36. Item usucapio fingitur in ea actione quae Publiciana〉 uocatur. datur autem haec actio ei qui ex iusta causa traditam sibi rem nondum usucepit eamque amissa possessione petit. nam quia non potest eam ex ivre qviritivm svam esse intendere, fingitur rem usucepisse et ita quasi ex iure Quiritium dominus factus esset intendit, ueluti hoc modo ivdex esto. si qvem hominem a. agerivs emit 〈et〉 is ei traditvs est, anno possedisset, tvm si evm hominem de qvo agitvr ex ivre quiritivm eivs esse oporteret et reliqua.

[83195] § 37. Item ciuitas Romana peregrino fingitur, si eo nomine agat aut cum eo agatur, quo nomine nostris legibus actio constituta est, si modo iustum sit eam actionem etiam ad peregrinum extendi: ueluti si furti agat peregrinus aut cum eo 〈agatur. nam si cum peregrino〉 agatur, formula ita concipitur ivdex esto. si paret 〈l. titio ope〉 consiliove dionis hermaei filii fvrtvm factvm esse paterae avreae, qvam ob rem evm, si civis romanvs esset, pro fvre damnvm decidere oporteret et reliqua. item si peregrinus furti agat, ciuitas ei Romana fingitur. similiter si ex lege Aquilia peregrinus damni iniuriae agat aut cum eo agatur, ficta ciuitate Romana iudicium datur.

[83861] § 38. Praeterea aliquando fingimus aduersarium nostrum capite deminutum non esse. nam si ex contractu nobis obligatus obligataue sit et capite deminutus deminutaue fuerit, uelut mulier per coemptionem, masculus per adrogationem, desinit iure ciuili debere nobis, nec directo intendi potest sibi dare eum eamue oportere; sed ne in potestate eius sit ius nostrum corrumpere, introducta est contra eum eamue actio utilis rescissa capitis deminutione, id est in qua fingitur capite deminutus deminutaue non esse.

[84371] But all these branches of statute-process fell gradually into great discredit because the excessive subtlety of the ancient jurists made the slightest error fatal; and accordingly they were abolished by the lex Aebutia and the two leges Juliae, which introduced in their stead the system of formulas or written instructions of the praetor to the judex.

[84725] Two cases only were reserved for statute-process, apprehended damage and centumviral causes. When there is recourse to the centumvirs, statute-process by way of sacramentum either before the praetor urbanus or peregrinus, as may happen, is the preliminary proceeding. For protection, however, against apprehended damage a plaintiff no longer resorts to statute-process, but stipulates to be indemnified by the defendant in the manner provided by the edict, whereby he is put to less trouble and obtains ampler redress . . .

[85250] So the formula provided for the farmer of the revenue contains a fiction directing that the debtor be condemned in the sum for which formerly, if his goods had been distrained on, he would have had to ransom the distress.

[85473] But no formula is moulded on a fictitious legis actio per condictionem; for when we sue for a certain thing or sum of money, our intentio names the very thing or sum for which we sue, without any reference to a fiction of condictio; so that the present formulae by which we claim that a fixed sum of money or that some particular thing is due to us are understood to depend on their own force. Similarly independent of the elder system are the actions of loan for use, fiduciary agreement, unauthorized transaction of another person’s affairs, and innumerable others.

[86042] § 34. Fictions of a different kind are employed in certain formulae, as for example when the bonorum possessor or praetorian successor sues under a fiction that he is civil heir. For being only the praetorian, not the civil heir, he has no direct action, and can neither claim in the intentio of the formula to be [Quiritary] owner of the things belonging to the deceased, nor that the debtor is bound [by civil law] to pay the debts due to him. Accordingly, the intentio feigns him to be civil heir, and runs as follows: ‘Let C D be judex. Supposing Aulus Agerius (plaintiff) were the civil heir of Lucius Titius, if in that supposition it be proved that the land in question ought to be his by the law of the Quirites;’ or, in case of a debt, after a similar fiction of his being civil heir the intentio proceeds: ‘if in that supposition it be proved that Numerius Negidius (defendant) ought [by civil law] to pay to Aulus Agerius ten thousand sesterces: then let the defendant be condemned,’ &c.

[87042] So the purchaser of a bankrupt’s estate may either feign himself to be civil heir, or may use a different form [feigning to be procurator of the insolvent]: for he may name the insolvent in the intentio and himself in the condemnatio, requiring the defendant to restore or pay to himself any property that belonged or any debt that was due to the insolvent. This form of action is called Rutilian, from the praetor Rutilius, who invented execution against the entire estate of the insolvent (bonorum venditio): the action wherein the plaintiff feigns himself civil heir is called Serviana.

[87633] So there is a fiction of usucapion in the Publician action, whereby a man claims a thing which had been delivered to him on a valid legal ground which he has lost possession of before having acquired ownership of it by usucapion. Being unable to claim it in the intentio as his property by the law of the Quirites, he is feigned to have acquired it by usucapion, and thus to have become owner by quiritary right, and his intentio runs as follows: ‘Let C D be judex. Supposing that the slave who was sold and delivered to Aulus Agerius had continued during a year in his possession, if in that case the slave would have legally belonged to Aulus Agerius by the law of the Quirites, then condemn the defendant,’ &c.

[88348] § 37. So an alien is feigned to be a Roman citizen, if he sue or be sued in an action which would be valid as between Roman citizens, and it is an action which may justly be extended to aliens. For instance, if an alien sues or is sued for theft, in the latter case the formula runs as follows: ‘Let C D be judex. If it be proved that Dio son of Hermaeus stole—or, if it be proved that Dio son of Hermaeus aided and abetted in stealing—from Lucius Titius a golden cup, for which, if he had been a Roman citizen, he would have had to make composition for theft, then condemn Dio son of Hermaeus,’ &c. So if an alien sue for theft or sue or be sued under the Aquilian law for damage to property, he is feigned to be a Roman citizen.

[89080] Again, we may feign that the defendant has not undergone a capitis deminutio: for if we make a contract with a person who afterwards undergoes a capitis deminutio, as an (independent) female by her coemption, or an independent male by his adrogation, he or she ceases by the civil law to be our debtor, and we cannot directly declare in the intentio that he or she is bound to convey something to us. To protect our rights, however, from extinction by the act of another, the praetor grants a fictitious action, rescinding or ignoring the defendant’s capitis deminutio, i. e. supposing by a fiction that the debtor had not undergone it.

[89718] The lex Aebutia, of uncertain date, was probably passed not long after the middle of the second century b. c. The leges Juliae are supposed to be leges judiciariae passed by Augustus. What were the respective shares of these different enactments in bringing about the important change of procedure Gaius mentions must remain uncertain. After the legis actiones were abolished as modes of proceeding in civil suits their forms still survived in the ceremonies of adoption, the manumission of a slave, the emancipation of a son, and conveyance by in jure cessio.

[90280] It may be questioned whether Gaius has exactly laid his finger on the deficiency of the system of Statute-process when he alleges its excessive formalism or subtlety (nimia subtilitas) as the cause of its failure. Its shortcoming was not so much its formalism (the following system was equally formalistic) as (1) its want of safeguards against errors of form and (2) its want of power of expansion.

[90681] (1) Though the Formula was perhaps as literally and rigorously interpreted as the form of Statute-process, yet the period at which the Formula was fixed in the Formulary system diminished the danger of the defeat of a righful claim by an error in the selection of the appropriate form. The formula of an action was not determined till the close of a debate before the magistrate (in jure) in which both parties were assisted by jurists and had disclosed, in part at least, their pretensions, and brought the true issue to light. Statute-process was formal at an earlier stage and from the inception of the proceedings: and the kinds of statute-process were specially characterized and denominated by their first stages even when these were extra-judicial or outside the court, as in manus injectio and pignoris capio. In Statute-process an error of form at any of the stages preceding litis contestatio was fatal to the party by whom it was committed. In the Formulary system no litigant could commit a suicidal error—no form was fixed whereby his claim could be defeated—before the litis contestatio.

[91784] (2) A plaintiff had no remedy unless he could show that his case had been contemplated by the legislator: but the legislator had been too much occupied with foreign war and domestic dissension to think of developing the private code. Jurisprudence had been busy in framing such actions as the system admitted; but jurisprudence had little voice and little scope. If the law was silent, if there was any hiatus or casus omissus, jurisprudence was not allowed to fill up the void. The praetor himself had his hands tied and was a mere piece of machinery. The institution of the Formulary process gave an organ to the voice of jurisprudence, and the power of issuing edicts and inventing new forms of action constituted the praetor, in fact though not in name, a second legislator. The enlarged scope given to the conscience of jurisprudence by the new powers of the praetor produced an enlargement of the scheme of remedies such as followed in England from the recognition of the royal conscience as a source of civil legislation and the erection, beside and in addition to the common law courts, of a court of Chancery presided over by the guardian of the conscience of the king. Ihering, § 47; cf. Sohm, § 49.

[92995] Conceptae feriae denoted holidays specially appointed by the magistrate, as opposed to feriae stativae: so concepta verba seems to denote the formulae accommodated by the magistrate to the various grounds of litigation, as opposed to the certa verba, § 29, or more immutable formulae prescribed to the litigants in Statute-process by the legislator. The term, then, expresses elasticity. Cf. Roby, 2, p. 347, n. 2.

[93411] We may observe by anticipation that the Formulary system, after an existence of nearly five hundred years, was brought by the ingenuity of lawyers into the same discredit and experienced the same fate as the system it had displaced. First Diocletian, a. d. 294, required provincial governors as a rule to hear and determine all causes themselves, instead of commissioning official judices to hear and determine them, Cod. 3, 3, 2; cf. Cod. 3, 3, 5. ‘Governors of provinces shall themselves determine the causes which they have been in the habit of referring to inferior (pedaneos) judges, unless prevented from doing so by pressure of business or the excessive number of causes.’ Pedaneus judex signifies in this passage not the ordinary judex of the Formulary system, who acted with an independent authority, but a subordinate official to whom the governor delegated his extraordinaria cognitio for trying cases. From the time of Diocletian it was the ordinary practice that the magistrate should not send the case to a private judex to be tried under a formula, but should judge in person by virtue of his extraordinary authority, though under certain circumstances he could, as we see by the above passage, appoint an official called judex pedaneus as his substitute. Thus cognitio extraordinaria, which in earlier times was only employed occasionally in exceptional cases, had become the rule. Afterwards the emperors Constantius and Constans, a. d. 342, entirely abolished formulae. Juris formulae, aucupatione syllabarum insidiantes, cunctorum actibus radicitus amputentur, Cod. 2, 57, 1. ‘Legal formulae, with their syllabic snares and pitfalls, are hereby abolished in every procedure.’

[95107] The proceeding under the edict in Damni infecti was as follows: If A apprehended damage to his property from the downfall of a dilapidated house (aedes vitiosae, ruinosae) belonging to B, he might apply (postulare) to the praetor and, having affirmed his case on oath, obtain an order that B should promise, with or without sureties according to circumstances, to indemnify A in the event of the accident. If B refused to promise, the praetor by a first decree put A in possession, that is, gave him detention or custody of B’s house. If B still refused, the praetor by a second decree gave A bonitary ownership, which time would convert by usucapion into quiritary ownership. This remedy, imposing the necessity of indemnifying or surrendering the cause of damage, was an imitation of noxal actions, which compelled the father of a son or owner of a slave or of a beast that had injured a neighbour’s property either to make compensation or to surrender the author of the damage. (For a detailed account of this proceeding, see Roby, Bk. 4, ch 8.)

[96157] The proceeding damni infecti nomine by statute-process, from its similarity to the proceeding in aquae pluviae arcendae, may be inferred to have been a form of judicis postulatio.

[96338] In English law there is a similar reference to an obsolete institution in the case of debtors to the sovereign. By 33 Hen. 8, c. 39, and 13 Eliz. c. 4, persons indebted to the Crown are to incur in certain cases the same liability as if they were bound in a Statute Staple, a form of solemn contract now disused.

[96652] Gaius appears to have divided Fictions into two classes, those which made a reference from the formulary system to the older system of procedure, and those which made a reference from rights protected by the praetor to rights recognized by the civil law. The former class were not an extension of the law, but only preserved to a plaintiff the remedies which he otherwise would have lost by the change of procedure when statute-process was abolished. For instance, the fiction of Pignoris capio was employed to preserve unimpaired the rights of the revenue contractor and as a measure for assessing the damages to which he was entitled against a defaulter. We see by the statement made in § 33 about condictio, that a fiction was not required in all cases for the purpose of transferring an action from the old procedure to the new. But no information has come down to us as to the precise way in which this class of fiction was employed. Cf. Keller, § 18 n., 247 a, and § 25 n., 298.

[97638] The second class of fictions was an extension or reform of the law. protecting persons whose rights had previously not been recognized, or mitigating the rigours and liberalizing the narrow-mindedness of the ancient barbarous legislation: granting to the bonitary owner by inheritance or purchase the protection enjoyed by the quiritary owner; giving to the alien the redress provided for the citizen, and preserving to the creditor the remedies extinguished by the debtor’s diminution of status. In their task of ameliorating the law the praetors proceeded as unobtrusively as possible, by tacit rather than by open legislation, and rather by innovations in the adjective code, to use Bentham’s expression, or code of procedure, than in the substantive code. The introduction of the formulary system, giving them authority to create new actions, had virtually invested them with much legislative power. The new actions introduced by the praetor were called actiones utiles. Utiles actiones were either ficticiae or in factum, or constituted by a change of parties in the intentio and condemnatio of the formula, e. g. actiones adjecticiae qualitatis, §§ 69-74 a; cf. 3 § 219, comm. Let us examine these three different forms of praetorian action in respect of the mode of their operation. The praetor proceeded in two ways, (1) with or (2) without the use of fiction.

[99008] (1) When he granted a fictitious action, that is, one whose formula was framed in exactly the same way as that of a civil action, except that a fictio was added to it, the fiction furnished an exact measure of the extent to which the old law had been abandoned. The praetor might in this way suppress some element of the title to which the remedy at civil law was annexed; and make the same consequences follow as if this element had existed. The fiction would be the false assumption that the plaintiff’s case satisfied the abrogated condition. By ruling that the fictitious proposition should not be called in question, and that the defendant should not be allowed to demur to the plaintiff’s claim on the ground that the conditions required for maintaining it were unsatisfied, the praetor would virtually abrogate the old law, and substitute for it a new one. In the cases given by Gaius the conditions which are assumed relate to inheritance, usucapion, citizenship, capitis deminutio. They might conceivably relate to any other institution of civil law. In the Actio Pauliana protecting creditors against fraudulent alienations, the fiction was an assumption of non-delivery—the formula being something like this: Si quem hominem L. Titius in hoc anno fraudationis causa Numerio Negidio, qui eam fraudem non ignoravit, mancipio dedit, L. Titius Numerio Negidio mancipio non dedisset, tum si pareret eum hominem de quo agitur ex jure Quiritium L. Titii esse, si ea res arbitrio tuo non restituetur, &c., Lenel, p. 353. Restitutio in integrum of a minor might assume the form of a fictitious action which treated the rescinded act as unperformed (rescissa alienatione).

[100683] (2) A utilis actio, e g. the formula Rutiliana, § 35, sometimes depended on a variance in the parts of a formula, the true plaintiff or defendant first appearing in the condemnatio after another person had been named in the intentio. The formula is thus shaped when one of the parties to an action is a procurator, §§ 86, 87; but the later utilis actio on account of the cession or assignment of an obligation, when there was no mandatum agendi, may perhaps be fictitious. The actiones adjecticiae qualitatis were also instituted by means of this kind of variance in the parts of the formula.

[101277] (3) Without expressly referring in any way to jus civile, or avowedly introducing a new principle of substantive law, he created new rights by directing that the defendant should be condemned if the judex found that the facts asserted by the plaintiff in the intentio were made out. He did so in granting an actio in factum, one of his most potent instruments, that is, an actio whose intentio in factum concepta, of the form, Si paret . . . fecisse, factum esse, e. g. actio doli—Si paret doli mali Numerii Negidii factum esse, ut Aulus Agerius Numerio Negidio fundum de quo agitur mancipio daret, &c., or actio quasi-Serviana—Si paret inter Aulum Agerium et L. Titium convenisse, ut ea res, de qua agitur Aulo Agerio pignori hypothecaeve esset propter pecuniam debitam, &c.; for thus he tacitly introduced or converted a rule of equity or public opinion into a principle of substantive law, without any fiction or reference to previous rules. Utilis actio in factum, Dig. 11, 7, 7, 1, was an action that really had an affinity or analogy to some actio directa, but did not in its formula accentuate this affinity by means of any Fictio, e. g. actio Depositi, § 47.

[102445] Of the above forms of actio utilis the actio ficticia was probably the first to be established, and the actio in factum concepta the most recent.

[102592] The purchaser of a bankrupt’s estate (bonorum emptor), unlike the purchaser at a sectio bonorum, or sale sub hasta of the confiscated goods of an enemy or a criminal, only had a title to the property under the praetor’s edict and not by civil law. Hence to protect his rights the praetor allowed him to sue by actio ficticia either by resort to the fiction that he was heres, or by a variance of the parts of the formula (convertit condemnationem in suam personam), and he was liable to corresponding actions. Cf. 3, §§ 77-81, comm.

[103126] The praetor Publius Rutilius is probably the P. Rutilius who was consul in 105 b. c. The formula which he introduced for the bonorum emptor was the same as that used in other cases where one person sued or was sued in the name of another, § 86.

[103372] The actio Serviana here mentioned was perhaps the action brought by the bonorum emptor when he had bought the estate of a deceased debtor and so was not the same action as the actio Serviana whereby a person letting his land on hire could recover the goods of a colonus which had been pledged as a security for the payment of rent, Inst. 4, 6, 7.

[103720] The date of the important praetorian action called actio Publiciana, after the praetor who introduced it (Inst. 4, 6, 4), is uncertain. A Quintus Publicius is mentioned by Cicero, pro Cluentio, 45, as praetor in b. c. 66 or shortly before. The actio Publiciana (vindicatio utilis) was, as we have seen, 2 §§ 40-61, comm., used by a person holding the position of an owner whether as bona fide possessor or as having a bonitary title for the purpose of obtaining or recovering possession. But the action might also be available on account of its convenience to an owner ex jure Quiritium who wished to be relieved of the necessity of proving his title. The plaintiff had to prove that he acquired possession in consequence of some disposition (titulus, causa) such as emptio. His acquisition had to be accompanied like Usucapio by bona fides, i. e. a belief that the alienor had a power to aliene; but as the proof of bona fides is impossible, whereas the proof of mala fides is often easy, bona fides was presumed; i. e. the burden of the proof of mala fides was thrown on the defendant. If the plaintiff proved his intentio the defendant would still prevail if he could show that he was himself owner (exceptio dominii), or that he had obtained usucapion possession from some third party (a diverso auctore), or that having obtained usucapion possession from the same person as the plaintiff had acquired from (ab eodem auctore), his acquisition was prior in point of time. In these cases Publiciana wore the air of a duplex judicium. Savigny, Obligationsrecht, § 67. For an account of the actio Publiciana, when maintained by (1) a bonitary owner, (2) a bona fide possessor, see 2 §§ 40-61, comm.

[105420] The form of the actio Publiciana that we have considered proceeds on the supposition of the accomplishment of a non-accomplished usucapio. Some writers, misled by Dig. 44, 7, 35, pr., have imagined the existence of another form of Publiciana, which they call contraria Publiciana or Publiciana rescissoria, proceeding on the supposition that an accomplished usucapio had not been accomplished. But Savigny has shown, § 329, that this is erroneous: that when usucapion is rescinded by in integrum restitutio on account of Absence, the action whereby the plaintiff recovers his property may be, according to circumstances, either an ordinary Publiciana or an ordinary Vindicatio, Inst. 4, 6, 5: that the rescission of usucapio, in other words, does not give birth, as supposed, to any new form of action.

[106224] By a positive rule, of which we are unable to give the rationale [1 §§ 159-164, comm.], the change of status produced by coemptio and adrogatio extinguished the debts of the wife or adrogatus, and the husband or adrogator acquired by manus and patria potestas their rights without their liabilities. To meet this the praetor gave the creditor an actio rescissoria which was ficticia: Ait praetor: qui quaeve, posteaquam quid cum his actum contractumve sit, capite deminuti deminutaeve esse dicentur, in eos easve quasi id factum non sit judicium dabo, Dig. 4, 5, 2. If the action was not defended by the husband or adrogator, the praetor gave the creditor missio in possessionem and power of sale against all the property of the wife or adrogatus, 3 § 84.

[106981] § 39. Partes autem formularum hae sunt: demonstratio intentio adiudicatio condemnatio.

[107069] § 40. Demonstratio | est ea pars formulae quae—, ut demon|stretur res de qua agitur: uelut haec pars formulae qvod a. agerivs n. negidio hominem vendidit; item haec qvod a. agerivs 〈apvd〉 n. negidivm hominem deposvit.

[107288] § 41. Intentio est ea pars formulae, qua actor desiderium suum concludit: uelut haec pars formulae si paret n. negidivm a. agerio sestertivm x milia dare oportere; item haec qvidqvid paret n. negidivm a. agerio dare facere 〈oportere〉; item haec si paret hominem ex ivre qviritivm a. agerii esse.

[107585] § 42. Adiudicatio est ea pars formulae, qua permittitur iudici rem alicui ex litigatoribus adiudicare: uelut si inter coheredes heredes familiae erciscundae agatur, aut inter socios communi diuidundo, aut inter uicinos finium regundorum. nam illic ita est qvantvm adivdicari oportet, ivdex titio adivdicato.

[107894] § 43. Condemnatio est ea pars formulae, qua iudici condemnandi absoluendiue potestas permittitur: uelut haec pars formulae ivdex n. negidivm a. agerio sestertivm x milia condemna. si non paret, absolve; item haec ivdex n. negidivm a. agerio dvmtaxat 〈x milia〉 condemna. si non paret, absolvito; item haec ivdex n. negidivm a. agerio condemnato et reliqua, ut non adiciatur dvmtaxat 〈x milia〉.

[108288] § 44. Non tamen istae omnes partes simul inueniuntur, sed quaedam inueniuntur, quaedam non inueniuntur. certe intentio aliquando sola inuenitur, sicut in praeiudicialibus formulis, qualis est qua quaeritur, aliquis libertus sit uel quanta dos sit et aliae conplures. demonstratio autem et adiudicatio et condemnatio numquam solae inueniuntur. nihil enim omnino 〈demonstratio〉 sine intentione uel condemnatione ualet; item condemnatio sine demonstratione uel intentione, uel adiudica〈tio sine demonstratione uel inten〉tione nullas uires habet, 〈et〉 ob id numquam solae inueniuntur.

[108870] The formula is composed of the Demonstratio, the Intentio, the Adjudicatio, the Condemnatio.

[108964] The principal function of the part of the formula called Demonstratio is to indicate the subject-matter of dispute, [the cause of action, the title of the plaintiff’s right, the origin of his claim], as in the following example: ‘Whereas Aulus Agerius sold a slave to Numerius Negidius,’ or, ‘Whereas Aulus Agerius deposited a slave in the hands of Numerius Negidius.’

[109334] § 41. The Intentio is that part of the formula which expresses the claim of the plaintiff, thus: ‘If it be proved that Numerius Negidius ought to convey ten thousand sesterces to Aulus Agerius;’ or thus: ‘Whatever it be proved that Numerius Negidius ought to convey or render to Aulus Agerius;’ or thus: ‘If it be proved that the slave in question belongs to Aulus Agerius by the law of the Quirites.’

[109737] The Adjudicatio is that part of the formula which empowers the judex to transfer the ownership of a thing to one of the litigants, and occurs in the actions for partitioning an inheritance between co-heirs, for dividing common property between co-partners, and for determining boundaries between neighbouring landholders. In these the praetor says: ‘The portion of the property that ought to be transferred to Titius, do thou, judex, by thy award transfer to him.’