WORK: Institutes of Roman Law  (slug: gaius-institutes-of-roman-law-09683f)

CHAPTER: 116-de-legitima-agnatorvm-svccessione-2



[220037] Further, the lex Cicereia provides that a creditor who obtains the guaranty of sponsors and fidepromissors shall previously announce and declare to them the amount of the debt to be guaranteed and the number of sponsors or fidepromissors by whom it is to be guaranteed; and in the absence of such declaration the sponsors or fidepromissors are permitted within thirty days to demand a preliminary trial of the issue (praejudicium), whether the requisite declaration was made; and on judgment that it was not made they are discharged of liability. The law makes no mention of fidejussors, but it is usual in a guaranty by fidejussors to make a similar declaration.

[220702] But the benefit of the lex Cornelia is available for all sureties, which forbids the same person to be surety for the same debtor to the same creditor in the same year for more than twenty thousand sesterces of credita pecunia; and if a sponsor or fidepromissor guarantees a larger sum, for instance, one hundred thousand sesterces, he can only be condemned in twenty thousand sesterces. Pecunia credita for purposes of the statute is said to include, besides a present loan, everything which at the time of entering into the suretyship is certain to be due, that is, which depends on no contingency. Accordingly, it includes money stipulated to be paid on a future day; because it is certain that such money will be due, although an action to recover it cannot be brought till a future time. But pecunia in this law includes everything, so that, if we stipulate for the conveyance of wine, or corn, or land, or a slave, the lex Cornelia applies.

[221650] In some circumstances, however, the law permits a surety to be bound for an indefinite amount, as security for dower, for instance, or for that which is due under a will, or by judicial order. Also the lex Julia, imposing a duty of one twentieth on testamentary successions, provides that the securities therein required shall be excepted from the scope of the lex Cornelia.

[222026] § 126. The rights of sponsors, fidepromissors, and fidejussors are also equal in respect of the rule that they cannot be bound for more than their principal. They may, however, be bound for less, just as the adstipulator may stipulate for less. For their obligation, like that of the adstipulator, is an accessory of the principal obligation, and the accessory cannot be greater than the principal.

[222426] They further resemble in this, that whoever pays for the principal can recover the amount from him by action of mandate. Sponsors by the lex Publilia have an additional remedy, being able, unless reimbursed in six months, to recover twice the sum advanced by the action on money paid by a sponsor.

[222725] At the corresponding point of his Institutes (3, 16) Justinian introduces the mention of Correality (et stipulandi et promittendi duo pluresve rei fieri possunt), and it may be expedient to examine the nature of Correality before we embark on the consideration of the various forms of Guaranty.

[223021] Correality, the multiplication of creditores (plures rei credendi) or debitores (plures rei debendi) in a single obligation without a corresponding division of the Object of the right or obligation, was an institution of Roman law in favour of creditors; whereby, exceptionally and usually in virtue of a special agreement, each creditor was severally entitled to recover the whole (solidum) object of the obligation from a common debitor, or each debitor was severally liable to pay the whole object of the obligation to a common creditor. The ordinary rule, to which Correality forms an exception, is that when there are many creditores or many debitores in an obligation, the Object of the obligation is correspondingly divided; so that each creditor is only entitled to recover a proportional fraction of the advantage and each debitor is only bound to bear a proportional fraction of the burden. In Correality each creditor is severally entitled to receive, and each debtor is severally bound to discharge, the whole Object of the obligation. By the ordinary rule, the creditors would be only jointly entitled to receive the whole object; and this the debtors would be only jointly bound to discharge; each creditor would be severally entitled to receive only a ratable part of the Object of the obligation, and a ratable part of the Object is all that each debtor would be severally bound to discharge. By having a number of correal creditores, each entitled to entire performance, a debt could be more readily enforced, e. g. by adstipulatio. By having a number of correal debitores, each liable for entire performance, as if he were sole debitor, a creditor was rendered more secure.

[224714] Correality may originate in various modes:

[224758] (a) Contract, whether Formal or Formless, Dig. 45, 2, 9, in which there are several promisors or several promisees. The usual origin of Correality was Verbal contract or Stipulation.

[224942] (b) Testament: e. g. when a testator charges several co-heirs alternatively with the payment of a legacy.

[225049] (c) Noxal liability of co-owners: e. g. when the co-proprietors of a slave are liable for a noxal action for some mischief that he has committed.

[225196] (d) The relation of filiusfamilias to paterfamilias, or of free agent to principal, when the superior (father, or principal) is liable to an actio adjecticiae qualitatis (actio de peculio, de in rem verso, quod jussu, institoria, exercitoria, 4 § 69) for the obligation of the inferior (son, or agent), the inferior himself being directly liable, and the creditor can elect which he will sue.

[225590] Correality not only as denoting total or integral liability on the part of the debitor, and total or integral claim on the part of the creditor, furnishes a contrast to partial or fractional (in partem, pro rata) liability or claim; but must also be distinguished from another relation of co-debtors and co-creditors to which it is much more nearly akin, namely Solidarity. Correality and Solidarity agree in this, that in both of them every creditor is severally entitled to receive entire performance of the obligation, and every debitor is bound to discharge the entire liability: but differ in this, that whereas Correality implies the unity or identity of the obligation by which the co-creditors are entitled or the co-debtors are bound; Solidarity implies that they are entitled or bound by a plurality or diversity of obligations.

[226430] Solidarity originates in various modes:

[226471] (a) Common delict, or other unlawful act, when several codelinquents incur a liability to indemnification.

[226579] (b) Co-guardianship, when one of the co-guardians has injured the ward by his negligence.

[226670] (c) Some kinds of contract in which there are several promisors but no special agreement to create Correality; e. g. where there are joint borrowers, hirers, agents, depositaries.

[226851] (d) Guaranty by the form of mandate called Mandatum qualificatum, §§ 155-162, comm.; or arising from a simple promise to pay the debt of another, called Constitutum debiti alieni, which, though originally a mere pact, came to be enforced by the praetor.

[227106] Both Correality and Solidarity, as implying liability for entire but alternative performance, lie in the mean between two extremes: on the one side, divided or partial (pro rata) liability; and on the other side, the multiple or cumulative liability, generated by delicts that give rise to actions for penalties. E. g. if several persons combine to commit a theft they are all severally liable to the actio furti for the whole penalty, and payment by one does not discharge his fellow delinquents: or if a person is guilty of an outrage (injuria) which wounds the honour of several, they are all creditors for the penalty, and recovery by one does not extinguish the claims of the rest, 3 § 221. Where the actions on account of an illegal act are purely indemnificatory, as the actions brought on account of theft for damages—condictio furtiva—or on account of Metus, Dolus, Noxa, Vis, there, as we have already stated, the relation of Solidarity subsists between the co-delinquents, and satisfaction by one extinguishes the obligation of the rest.

[228156] The differences between Correality and Solidarity are principally two:

[228228] 1. In Correality the right of action against the remaining co-debtors or by the remaining co-creditors was extinguished by joinder of issue in an action (litis contestatio) against or by one of the parties: in Solidarity the right of action was only extinguished by complete payment or satisfaction (solutio). Electo reo principali fidejussor vel heres ejus liberatur: non idem in mandatoribus observatur, Paulus 2, 17, 16.

[228653] It was possible to avoid the consumption or extinction of the right of action against the surety that was operated by suing the principal by so shaping the stipulatio of fidejussio as not to produce Correality, Dig. 45, 1, 116. But at a later period the extinction of right to sue by litis contestatio was abandoned: and Justinian expressly enacted that in Correality as well as in Solidarity only actual satisfaction of a claim should operate a consumption of the right of action. Justinian’s ordinance is introduced into the Digest by means of a bold interpolation: Cum utro velit Seius aget, ut, si cum uno actum sit et solutum, alter liberetur. Pomponius, Dig. 30, 1, 8, 1; Cod. 8, 40, 28.

[229348] 2. A second difference between Correality and Solidarity consists in the fact that in Solidarity the guarantor who pays the whole has regressus against his co-guarantors, that is to say, has a power of recovering from them contribution of their share of the debt: whereas the Correal debtor who pays has no regressus or right to contribution. (I have here followed Vangerow: Savigny attempts to prove, but apparently without success, that regressus is an incident of Correality.) Where, however, the Solidarity is the effect of co-delinquency (No. a. above) the delinquent who pays has no regressus. Another important characteristic of a Correal obligation is that formal discharge (acceptilatio) by one of the Correal creditors entirely extinguishes the Correal debt so that none of the other Correi can sue for it. Cf. § 215. (On the subject of Correality and Solidarity and for an account of the literature relating to these joint and several forms of obligation, see Sohm, § 74.)

[230333] After this preliminary consideration of the nature of Correality we are in a position to examine the nature of Guaranty or Suretyship, and to fix the relation of fidejussio, one of the latest developments of Suretyship, to other cognate institutions of Roman jurisprudence.

[230608] Fidejussio is a species of Intercessio; and accordingly the abovementioned object requires us to examine the nature and subdivisions of Intercessio.

[230758] Intercession is the assumption of liability for the debt of another person by contract with his creditor. For instance, when a person is hesitating whether he shall accept an inheritance because he has doubts whether it is solvent, that is, whether the assets exceed the liabilities, to induce him to accept it by a general promise of indemnification is not Intercession, because here there is no contract with a creditor on account of a debt owed to him by a third party: but if the ground of his hesitation is a suspicion that the debtors to the inheritance are insolvent, to induce him to accept the inheritance by a promise to make good what he fails to recover from the debtors is Intercession, for here is a contract with a creditor on account of the debt of a third party.

[231539] Intercession is either (A) Privative or (B) Cumulative.

[231596] A. Privative Intercession is the substitution of one obligation for another.

[231674] (1) Substitution for an actually pre-existent debt involves Novation, i. e. the extinction of such preceding debt, and is generally called by civilians Expromissio, though the term is not merely used in our sources in this restricted sense. Cf. Roby, 2, p. 49, n. 1. Expromission, the discharge of a debtor by taking his place in relation to the creditor, may be considered as including Defensio, the defence of an absent debtor in a suit instituted by the creditor; for then the volunteer defendant becomes liable to condemnation in place of the original debtor: Suscipit enim in se alienam obligationem, quippe cum ex hac re subeat condemnationem, Dig. 16, 1, 2, 5, Ad senatusconsultum Velleianum.

[232375] (2) Substitution, not for an actually pre-existent obligation which is novated, but for an obligation which would have to be incurred by another person if the present obligation were not assumed, is called Interventio. Si, quum essem tecum contracturus, mulier intervenerit ut cum ipsa potius contraham, videtur intercessisse, Dig. 16, 1, 8, 14.

[232722] B. Cumulative Intercession, or the addition of an obligation to an obligation, is either Partial or Total, according as either part or the whole of the object of the first obligation is the object of the second or additional obligation.

[232960] (3) Of Partial intercessors we find an example within the limits of Italy, in Sponsors and Fidepromissors under the operation of the lex Furia. By this law the liability of each sponsor was in inverse ratio to their number, § 121. Whether an Italian Sponsor who had not availed himself of the limitation of his liability under the lex Furia was entitled to Regressus under the older lex Appuleia, was a matter of controversy, ibid.

[233393] Total Intercession is divided, according as several debtors are bound by one single obligation or several distinct, though similar, obligations, into two classes, Correality and Solidarity, terms which have been explained above.

[233623] Correality is subdivided into two classes, according as all the debitores are equally principals and originally interested, or some are principal and others only subsidiary or accessory. But in respect of the right of suing or liability to be sued, the accessory, e. g. the fidejussor before the beneficium excussionis or ordinis was allowed him, may be in the same position as the principal.

[234017] Correality in which all the debtors are interested as principals has no specific name As Intercession has been defined to be the assumption of an alien debt (aliena obligatio), this Correality is not a species of Intercession.

[234245] (4) Correality in which one debtor is principal and others are accessory is instanced in Fidejussio. There is not only Correality between the principal and each Fidejussor, but also between the several Fidejussors. This is denied by Savigny, Law of Obligations, § 25, who asserts that though there is Correality between the principal and each Fidejussor there is none between the several Fidejussors: but Vangerow truly observes; § 573, that if the obligation of each Fidejussor is identical with the obligation of the principal it follows, by the fundamental axiom of syllogism, that the obligations of the several Fidejussors are identical with one another: in other words, that there is Correality between the several Fidejussors. Fidejussors have Beneficium divisionis by the epistle of Hadrian, § 121, Beneficium excussionis by Novella 4 of Justinian, and Beneficium cedendarum actionum. If he neglected to avail himself of these, a Fidejussor, like other correal debtors, had no regressus against his co-fidejussors, Dig. 46, 1, 39.

[235285] Correality is again instanced in the Sponsors and Fidepromissors of the provinces external to Italy under the operation of the lex Appuleia. Unlike other correal debtors they had by this statute Regressus by means of an action analogous to that between partners, § 122; though like Fidejussors, they also had Beneficium divisionis under the constitution of Hadrian, § 121.

[235659] (5) Solidary Intercession is exemplified by the Mandator in the contract called mandatum qualificatum. Here a lender gives credit to a borrower in reliance on the representations of the mandator, § 156, who thus is a guarantor of the borrower’s solvency: when there are several such guarantors, their liability is solidary.

[235984] (6) Other Solidary Intercessors are those informally undertaking to pay the debt of another in constitutum debiti alieni. Both the Mandator and the Constituens have Beneficium divisionis, Cod. 4, 18, 3, and Beneficium excussionis, Novella 4.

[236227] The peculiarity of the rules respecting the adstipulator arises from the fact that he was a mandatary, agent, or trustee, the repositary of a special personal confidence. Hence his rights did not pass to his heres nor to his paterfamilias. Ordinary rules, however, obtained so far, that he could not sue so long as he remained a filiusfamilias, nor after his rights had been extinguished by a capitis diminutio.

[236640] The principal function of the Adstipulator and one function of the Adpromissor (the chief function of the latter of course was suretyship) seems to have been to maintain or defend the action on behalf of the principal, i. e. the representation of the principal as plaintiff or defendant in a suit at a period when the doctrine of Agency was still undeveloped.

[237001] We must suppose a time when the Cognitor and Procurator, whose appointment as described, 4 § 83, was such a simple matter, were institutions not yet invented, which was the case in the period of Statute-process (legis actio), concerning which we are told: Nemo alieno nomine lege agere potest, Dig. 50, 17, 123; and when, nevertheless, circumstances often prevented a principal from litigating in person. In questions relating to ownership he might in early times get over the difficulty and practically employ an agent by fiduciary mancipation of the property in dispute to a third person, who would then litigate with the adversary in the rights of his auctor, or the person from whom he deduced his title. But in questions of Obligation this course was not open, for Obligation was not thus transferable. Novation might effect the purpose, 2 § 38: but Novation required the concurrence of the debtor or adversary: and Cession or Procuration, 2 § 39, we have assumed to be as yet uninvented. At this period, then, the only remaining available representative in a suit concerning contractual obligation was a person who had been concerned, though merely as an accessory, § 126, in the original obligation. Ihering, § 56. When the development of the law of mandate led to the frequent appointment of a procurator, the adstipulator ceased to be necessary except for securing performance of an act after the death of the principal promisee, § 117. He ceased to be necessary even for this purpose when a stipulation for an act after the death of the stipulant was decided to be valid, and accordingly the adstipulator has disappeared from the legislation of Justinian.

[238668] The adpromissor at different epochs of the law appears as sponsor, fidepromissor, fidejussor. A sponsor could only intervene when both parties were Roman citizens, a fidepromissor was used when either party was a peregrinus, § 120. There is a striking parallelism between the rules relating to a sponsor or fidepromissor and those relating to an adstipulator. The obligation does not pass to the heres, and the sponsor and fidepromissor can only be adjuncts to a stipulation, the fidejussor may be employed to guarantee any obligation. The stipulation of the sponsor or fidepromissor may be valid when the stipulation of the principal, though creating naturalis obligatio, is invalid civiliter.

[239364] The lex Furia discharging the sponsor and fidepromissor of liability in two years and limiting the liability of each to a proportionate part, is supposed to have been enacted b c. 95.

[239549] The epistle of Hadrian (a. d. 117-138) left the fidejussor liable originally (ipso jure) to the whole debt, with a counteractive right (exceptio) to call on the other solvent sureties to pay their share of the debt, enforced by a clause in the formula, of which the following passage appears to give the terms: Si contendat fidejussor caeteros solvendo esse, etiam exceptionem ei dandam: Si non et illi solvendo sint, Dig. 46, 1, 28. ‘The contention of a fidejussor that his co-fidejussors are solvent may be expressed in an exception: Unless such and such co-guarantors are solvent.’ This privilege of the fidejussor is called Beneficium divisionis.

[240201] The lex Appuleia, which gave the sponsor or fidepromissor an action analogous to that between partners, whereby he could recover by contribution from his co-sureties whatever he had paid in excess of his proportionate share, was passed b. c. 102. It was the rule of the provinces as the lex Furia was the rule of Italy.

[240522] The name of this law, lex Cicereia, was first discovered by Studemund. Its date is not known, but as we gather from the text it was passed at a time when fidejussors were not yet instituted.

[240714] The lex Cornelia, the first which mentions the fidejussor as well as the sponsor and fidepromissor, limiting the amount for which the same guarantor could be bound as security for a contract either of mutuum or of stipulatio in the same year for the same principal in the same stipulation, was passed in the dictatorship of Sylla, b. c. 81, and seems to show that the stringency of the lex Furia had led to the employment of the fidejussor in preference to the sponsor and fidepromissor. The sponsor and fidepromissor have vanished from the legislation of Justinian.

[241282] The lex Julia vicesima or vicesimaria was a law of Augustus, a. d. 6, imposing, in support of the military treasury, a succession duty of one twentieth of the value on all inheritances and legacies acquired by Roman citizens. Certain exemptions from the tax were allowed. It was with the object of increasing the revenue arising from this source that Caracalla extended Roman citizenship to all free inhabitants of the Empire (Roby, 2, p. 32, n. 2).

[241733] The lex Publilia, which enabled a sponsor who had paid the debt of his principal, unless reimbursed within six months, to recover by actio depensi, a form of manus injectio pro judicato (4 § 22), twice the amount of the original debt, is of uncertain date.

[241991] The right of a fidejussor to require an assignment from the creditor of his rights of action is called Beneficium cedendarum actionum. If he neglected to avail himself of it and of his Beneficium divisionis, he had, when sued, no Regressus, that is no means of making his co-sureties share the liability with him, Dig. 46, 1, 39.

[242322] A surety or guarantor of a debt may require the creditor to proceed against the principal first, provided he was solvent and in a position to be sued. But this change in the law, which is called Beneficium excussionis, or ordinis, was not made till a late period, being introduced by Justinian, Novella 4.

[242629] In Correality, as has been remarked above, the right of action against remaining co-debtors was extinguished by the joinder of issue in a suit against one of them (litis contestatio). This power of litis contestatio to extinguish the creditor’s right of action when there was a relation of Correality between a number of debtors was doubtless a motive leading to the substituting for Fidejussio other forms of guaranty involving Solidarity instead of Correality, and consequently free from extinction of right of action by mere litis contestatio. Such forms were Mandatum qualificatum (§§ 155-162, comm.) and Constitutum debiti alieni. At a later period litis contestatio had not this effect, as, in respect of Fidejussio, was expressly declared by Justinian, Cod. 8, 40, 28.

[243406] The general name of a stipulation by way of security for a debt is cautio, 2 § 253. If the debtor alone was bound, it was called nuda repromissio. If sureties were also bound, it was called satisdatio or satisacceptio.

[243626] Before quitting the subject of suretyship we must observe a peculiar feature of Roman law, the incapacity of women to become surety—or intercede in any way for any one. This restriction, which had been recognized to some extent by previous law, was established by the senatusconsultum Vellaeanum passed in the reign of Claudius, a.d. 46, and by the subsequent interpretation of that enactment.

[244021] The senatusconsultum does not declare any proceeding which is contrary to it to be void, but directs the magistrate, if an action is brought, to see that the will of the senate is given effect to, which he did by allowing a woman to plead the exceptio, S. C. Vellaeani, Dig. 16, 1; 4 §§ 115-137, comm.

[244324] The most noticeable rule of English law respecting the contract of guaranty is that it must be in writing. No action shall be brought whereby to charge the defendant upon any special promise to answer for the debt, default, or miscarriage of another person, unless the agreement upon which such action shall be brought, or some memorandum or note thereof, shall be in writing and signed by the party to be charged therewith, or some other person thereunto by him lawfully authorized, Statute of Frauds, 29 Charles II, sect. 4.

[244852] § 128. Litteris obligatio fit ueluti nominibus transscripticiis. fit autem nomen transscripticium duplici modo, uel a re in personam uel a persona in personam.

[245013] § 129. 〈A re in personam trans〉scriptio fit, ueluti si id quod tu ex emptionis causa aut conductionis aut societatis mihi debeas, id expensum tibi tulero.

[245169] § 130. A persona in personam transscriptio fit, ueluti si id quod mihi Titius debet tibi id expensum tulero, id est si Titius te delegauerit mihi.

[245317] § 131. Alia causa est eorum nominum quae arcaria uocantur. in his enim rei, non litterarum obligatio consistit, quippe non aliter ualent quam si numerata sit pecunia; numeratio autem pecuniae re facit obligationem. qua de causa recte dicemus arcaria nomina nullam facere obligationem, sed obligationis factae testimonium praebere.

[245649] § 132. Vnde 〈non〉 proprie dicitur arcariis nominibus etiam peregrinos obligari, quia non ipso nomine sed numeratione pecuniae obligantur; quod genus obligationis iuris gentium est.

[245831] § 133. Transscripticiis uero nominibus an obligentur peregrini merito quaeritur, quia quodammodo iuris ciuilis est talis obligatio; quod Neruae placuit. Sabino autem et Cassio uisum est, si a re in personam fiat nomen transscripticium, etiam peregrinos obligari; si uero a persona in personam, non obligari.

[246140] § 134. Praeterea litterarum obligatio fieri uidetur chirographis et syngraphis, id est si quis debere se aut daturum se scribat; ita scilicet si eo nomine stipulatio non fiat. quod genus obligationis proprium peregrinorum est.

[246368] § 128. Literal contracts, or obligations created by writing, are made by transcriptive entries of debit or credit in a journal. Transcriptive entries are of two kinds, either from thing to person or from person to person.

[246591] § 129. Transcription from thing to person is made when the sum which you owe me on a contract of sale or letting or partnership is debited to you in my journal as if you had received it as a loan.

[246789] § 130. Of transcription from person to person we have an example when the sum which Titius owes me is entered in my journal as debited to you, assuming that you are indebted to Titius and that Titius has substituted me for himself as your creditor.

[247039] § 131. Transcriptive entries differ from mere entries of a person as debtor to cash; here the obligation is not Literal but Real, for it is invalid unless money has been actually paid, and payment of money constitutes a Real obligation. Consequently the entry of a person as debtor to cash does not constitute an obligation, but is evidence of an obligation.

[247399] § 132. Accordingly, it is not correct to say that debits to cash (arcaria nomina) bind aliens as well as citizens, because it is not the entry in the journal but the payment of money that constitutes the contract, a mode of obligation which belongs to jus gentium.

[247665] § 133. Whether transcriptive debits form a contract binding on aliens has been doubted with some reason, for this contract is an institution of civil law, as Nerva held. Sabinus and Cassius, however, held that transcription from thing to person forms a contract binding on an alien, though not transcription from person to person.

[247997] § 134. Another Literal obligation is that created by chirographa and syngraphae, or written acknowledgements of debt or promises to pay, unaccompanied by stipulation. This mode of contract is proper to aliens.

[248208] One of the account-books kept by the Romans, a nation of book-keepers, was a waste or day book, called Adversaria, into which all transactions were at once entered as they occurred. At the end of each month the contents of the Adversaria were posted into the more formal journal, the Tabulae, or Codex accepti et expensi. According to Dionysius of Halicarnassus every Roman had to take an oath once in five years before the Censors that his book-keeping was honest and accurate. (On the subject of Roman book-keeping and the literal contract, see Roby, Bk. V, Appendix A; Muirhead, Roman Law, 258; Sohm, p. 410, and the literature referred to by these writers.)

[248871] One, if not the only, species of Literal obligation, namely Expensilation, in the nature of a novation or transformation of a pre-existing debt into one of a stricter form, was effected by an entry in these domestic registers, and from Cicero, Pro Roscio Comoedo, c. 5, we may infer that the entry was binding even though it had not been transferred from the Adversaria to the Codex. The creditor, apparently, with the consent and by the order of the debtor, debited the latter with a certain sum in the books of the creditor (expensilatio). Afterwards a corresponding entry was made by the debtor in the books of the debtor (acceptilatio). The literal contract, however, appears to have been complete without the latter entry.

[249600] Apparently, the true contract was the entry in the creditor’s book. The consent (jussus) of the debtor to this entry was necessary, but not restricted to any particular form. The entry in the debtor’s book was evidence, but not the only admissible evidence, that he had assented to the entry in the creditor’s book.

[249917] Theophilus, in his Greek version of the Institutes, gives the following account of the process: ἡ δὲ literis [ἐνοχὴ] ἐστὶ τὸ παλαιὸν χρέος εἰς καινὸν δάνειον μετασχηματιζόμενον ῥήμασι καὶ γράμμασι τυπικοɩ̂ς. . . . [Editor: illegible character]ν δὲ ταν̂τα τὰ ῥήματα, ἅτινα καὶ ἐλέγετο καὶ ἐγράϕετο· τοὺς ἑκατὸν χρυσον̂ς, οὓς ἐμοὶ ἐξ αἰτίας μισθώσεως χρεωστεɩ̂ς, σὺ ἐκ συνθήκης καὶ ὁμολογίας δώσεις τω̂ν οἰκείων γραμμάτων; εἰ̂τα ἐνεγράϕετο, ὡς ἀπὸ τον̂ ἐνόχου ἤδη γενομένου ἐκ τη̂ς μισθώσεως, ταν̂τα τὰ ῥήματα· Ἐκ τη̂ς συνθήκης ὀϕείλω τω̂ν οἰκείων γραμμάτων. Καὶ ἡ μὲν προτέρα ἐνοχὴ ἀπεσβέννυτο, καινοτέρα δὲ ἐτίκτετο, Theophilus, 3, 21. ‘A literal obligation was an old debt transformed into a new loan by certain solemn words and writings. The words which were spoken and written in the register were as follows: “The hundred aurei, which you owe me on account of rent, will you pay me on the convention and acknowledgment of your own journal?” Then followed, as if written by the person indebted for rent, these words: “I owe you that sum by the admission of my own journal.” Whereby the pre-existing obligation was extinguished and a new one created.’ [From the mention of ‘solemn words’ Theophilus is supposed to have confounded Expensilatio, which was independent of spoken words, with Stipulatio accompanied by a written record or cautio.]

[251267] The account of Theophilus clearly only applies to one form of expensilation, the transscriptio a re in personam. The use of this kind of transscriptio is obvious: it was a mode of converting Formless contracts into Formal contracts—equitable obligations into civil obligations: of metamorphosing claims recoverable by actions ex bona fide, e.g. conducti locati, empti venditi, which in many points favoured the defendant, into debts recoverable by the short and sharp remedy of the civil action of Condictio, which, when brought for certa pecunia credita, was the more formidable to a dishonest litigant, as it was accompanied by sponsio poenalis, whereby the vanquished party forfeited a third of the sum in litigation, in addition, if he was the defendant, to the original claim, 4 § 171.

[252059] A narrative of Cicero shows the employment and possible misemployment of this transcriptio. He relates how a purchaser was defrauded by a vendor, and in consequence of the form of contract had no redress. Stomachari Canius. Sed quid faceret? Nondum enim Aquilius collega et familiaris meus protulerat de dolo malo formulas, De Off. 3, 14. ‘The purchaser was indignant, but he was helpless, for my colleague Aquilius had not then invented the action of Fraud.’ It may occur to us, on hearing the story, that as the actio Empti was an action ex bona fide, that is, one in which the judex was empowered to consider allegations of bad faith, the defrauded purchaser would not have been without a remedy. But, as Savigny points out, Cicero had guarded against this objection by a certain feature which he gives to the narrative. Emit homo cupidus et locuples tanti quanti Pythius voluit, et emit instructos. Nomina facit, negotium conficit. ‘The purchaser was eager and rich, he bought at the price the seller named, and he bought the gardens ready furnished. The contract is by expensilatio; the business is concluded.’ Nomen, which sometimes signifies any debt, is here used, in a specific sense, for a debt created by Literal contract; accordingly, nomina facit implies that the purchase, as soon as concluded, had been novated, § 176, i. e. extinguished by metamorphosis into a ledger debt; so that the transaction was removed from the domain of equity to that of civil law, which in its primitive simplicity had no provision for dolus malus.

[253602] Transscriptio a persona in personam was the substitution or exchange of a debt owed by C to B, in discharge of a debt owed by B to A; or, at all events, the substitution of C in lieu of B as debtor to A. Transscriptio would thus afford a ready means of transferring obligations from one person to another, especially when the parties were at a distance. It is impossible to form an exact conception of the mode in which these transcriptions were operated without a greater knowledge than we possess of the Roman method of book-keeping. Nomen facere, as we have just stated, is to contract a debt by literal obligation. Nomen signifies the name of the debtor, as in the line of Horace: Scriptos nominibus certis expendere nummos; ‘Recorded on his ledger to lend moneys to solvent borrowers.’ In the business of bankers (argentarii), whose book-keeping of course was extremely regular, the Literal contract appears to have survived when it had fallen into desuetude in other quarters.

[254586] The word Transscripticia may refer to the transfer involved in Novation: Savigny, however, prefers the following origin of the term. The Roman account-book (tabulae accepti et expensi), he supposes, was essentially a Cash-book; a record of incomings and outgoings of actual cash: i. e. the monthly or annual balance of the debits and credits ought to correspond with and explain the metallic contents of the cash-box or arca at the end of the month or year. This correspondence or agreement would be destroyed by the introduction of Fictitious loans (expensilatio) into the accounts, unless every such entry to the credit of the cashier or chest was neutralized and cancelled by a cross or opposite entry, of an equally fictitious character, to the debit of the chest or cashier. But if this device was adopted the balance of the book would coincide with the actual contents of the chest; and the fictitious entries would be called Transscripticia because they were always double: because each was always accompanied by its shadow across the page. Verm. Schriften, 1, 205, &c.

[255664] In the time of Justinian both of the modes of Expensilatio, properly confined to Roman citizens, though the Sabinians were inclined to extend it in one form to aliens, § 133, had become obsolete; as also another form of Literal contract, the Syngrapha or Chirographum, available where the parties were aliens. Syngrapha and Chirographum, apparently, are synonymous, and signify a written acknowledgment of a debt, such contract in Greece being always ground to support an action, whatever its subject or form. In the Corpus Juris the term Chirographum generally signifies a cautio or a document which is evidence of the existence or discharge of a debt, and the term Syngrapha occurs in the Greek Novellae of Justinian in the same sense; cf. Sohm, p. 414, n. 3.

[256427] The desuetude of Nomina transscripticia was probably due, not simply to the fact that the Roman system of book-keeping was strange in the east, but also to the invention of constitutum, a praetorian pact (pactum vestitum), which instead of converting, like Expensilatio, an obligation bonae fidei into an obligation stricti juris, superadded an actionable obligation to a previous obligation, whether natural or civil [Ubi quis pro alio constituit se soluturum, adhuc is pro quo constituit obligatus manet, Dig. 13, 5, 28, Inst. 4, 6, 9]; and which with its excessively penal sponsio, 4 § 171, gave the creditor even a more effective remedy than the action on Expensilatio (Condictio for pecunia certa credita).

[257140] Arcarium nomen was the record, not of a fictitious loan, like nomen transscripticium, but of the counting out of money from the cash-box (arca), that is, of a genuine loan, and was, accordingly, simply a memorandum of a Real obligation.

[257378] The coexistence of Nomina Arcaria with Nomina Transscripticia shows that entry in a Ledger did not operate a novation and convert a debt into a ledger debt, unless the transcriptive entry represented a fictitious, not an actual, loan.

[257614] A stipulatio, unlike the entry in the journal or ledger of an actual loan (nomina arcaria), was not an invariable accompaniment of an advance of money (mutui datio, annumeratio); and, when it was employed simultaneously with annumeratio, unlike nomina arcaria, it always constituted the contract: there were not two contracts, a Real contract and a Verbal contract, but only a Verbal contract, and this without the intervention of Novation, Dig. 46, 2, 6, 1, and Dig. 46, 2, 7. Nam quotiens pecuniam mutuam dantes eandem stipulamur, non duae obligationes nascuntur sed una verborum, Dig. 45, 1, 126, 2. ‘An advance accompanied by Stipulation does not produce two contracts, but one, a Verbal contract.’