WORK: Institutes of Roman Law  (slug: gaius-institutes-of-roman-law-09683f)

CHAPTER: 120-commentarivs-qvartvs



[219929] The actio de in rem verso, given against the paterfamilias or dominus, if a transaction entered into by a person in their power, though they had not authorized it, turned to their profit (si in rem ejus versum est), is based on the principle of the condictio, as e.g. of the condictio indebiti, that where the property of one person is increased without any adequate legal ground (sine causa) at the expense of another, the latter can claim restitution. The actions de peculio and tributoria, which had the peculium or the merx peculiaris of the son or slave for their object, show that while the peculium of the subordinate members of the family was legally the property of the head, it was recognized by the law for some purposes as if it were the de facto property of the son or slave.

[220719] Thus obligations between them and their superior, which were unenforceable by action (obligationes naturales), had to be taken into account by the judex in the distribution among creditors of the peculium, or of that part of it, which was appropriated to trade.

[220982] § 75. Ex maleficiis filiorum familias seruorumque, ueluti si furtum fecerint aut iniuriam commiserint, noxales actiones proditae sunt, uti liceret patri dominoue aut litis aestimationem sufferre aut noxae dedere erat enim iniquum nequitiam eorum ultra ipsorum corpora parentibus dominisue damnosam esse.

[221287] Inst. 4, 8, pr.

[221304] § 76. Constitutae sunt autem noxales actiones aut legibus aut edicto praetoris: legibus, uelut furti lege xii tabularum, damni iniuriae lege Aquilia; edicto praetoris, uelut iniuriarum et ui bonorum raptorum.

[221514] Inst. 4, 8, 4.

[221530] § 77. Omnes autem noxales actiones caput secuntur. nam si filius tuus seruusue noxam commiserit, quamdiu in tua potestate est, tecum est actio; si in alterius potestatem peruenerit, cum illo incipit actio esse; si sui iuris coeperit esse, directa actio cum ipso est, et noxae deditio extinguitur. ex diuerso quoque directa actio noxalis esse incipit. nam si pater familias noxam commiserit, et is se in adrogationem tibi dederit aut seruus tuus esse coeperit, 〈quod〉 quibusdam casibus accidere primo commentario tradidimus, incipit tecum noxalis actio esse quae ante directa fuit.

[222112] Inst. 4, 8, 5.

[222128] § 78. Sed si filius patri aut seruus domino noxam commiserit, nulla actio nascitur; nulla enim omnino inter me et eum qui in potestate mea est obligatio nasci potest. ideoque etsi in alienam potestatem peruenerit aut sui iuris esse coeperit, neque cum ipso neque cum eo cuius nunc in potestate est agi potest. unde quaeritur, si alienus seruus filiusue noxam commiserit mihi, et is postea in mea esse coeperit potestate, utrum intercidat actio an quiescat. nostri praeceptores intercidere putant, quia in eum casum deducta sit, in quo consistere non potuerit, ideoque, licet exierit de mea potestate, agere me non posse; diuersae scholae auctores, quamdiu in mea potestate sit, quiescere actionem putant, quia ipse mecum agere non possum, cum uero exierit de mea potestate, tunc eam resuscitari.

[222925] Inst. 4, 8, 6.

[222941] § 79. Cum autem filius familias ex noxali causa mancipio datur, diuersae scholae auctores putant ter eum mancipio dari debere, quia lege xii tabularum cautum sit, 〈ne aliter filius de potestate patris〉 exeat, quam si ter fuerit mancipatus; Sabinus et Cassius ceterique nostrae scholae auctores sufficere unam mancipationem crediderunt, et illas tres legis xii tabularum ad uoluntarias mancipationes pertinere.

[223352] § 80. Haec ita de his personis quae in potestate 〈sunt〉, siue ex contra|ctu siue ex maleficio earum —. quod uero ad eas | personas quae in manu mancipioue sunt 〈—〉, ita ius dicitur, ut cum ex contractu earum agatur, nisi ab eo cuius iuri subiectae sint in solidum defendantur, bona quae earum futura forent, si eius iuri subiectae non essent, ueneant. sed cum rescissa capitis deminutione cum iis imperio continenti iudicio agitur, —

[223787] (13 uersus in C legi nequeunt) —|—|— xii tabularum —|

[223842] (7 uersus in C legi nequeunt)—

[223874] § 81. — Quid ergo est? — diximus — non permissum fuerit ei mortuos homines dedere, tamen etsi quis eum dederit qui fato suo uita excesserit, aeque liberatur.

[224033] § 75. For a delict, such as theft or outrage, committed by a son or slave, a noxal action lies against the father or master, who has the option of either paying the damages assessed or surrendering the delinquent. For it is not just that the misdeed of a son or slave should involve the father or master in any detriment beyond the loss of his body.

[224384] § 76. Noxal actions were introduced partly by statute, partly by the edict of the praetor: by statute, for instance the action for theft by the enactment of the Twelve Tables, and the action for injury to property by the lex Aquilia; by the edict, for instance theaction for outrage (injuriarum) and the action for rapine.

[224708] All noxal actions are said to follow the person of the delinquent. Accordingly if your son or slave has done a wrong while he is in your power, an action lies against you; if he falls under the potestas, patria or dominica, of another person, an action lies against his new superior: if he becomes his own master (sui juris), a direct action lies against the delinquent himself, and the noxal action is extinguished. Conversely, a direct action may change into a noxal one: thus if a paterfamilias has committed a delict, and then has made himself your son by adrogatio or having been a free man has become your slave, as I showed in the first book might happen in certain circumstances, a noxal action lies against you in place of the direct action which formerly lay against the delinquent.

[225502] But no action lies for an offence by a son or slave committed against his father or master; for between me and a person in my power no obligation is possible; and, consequently, if he passes into the power of another, or becomes his own master (sui juris), neither he himself in the one case nor the person in whose power he now is in the other can be sued. Hence it has been asked whether, if another man’s son or slave has wronged me and subsequently passes into my power, the action is in consequence extinguished, or is only in abeyance. Our school maintains that the action is extinguished, because a state of circumstances has arisen in which an action is impossible, and therefore if the delinquent pass again out of my power I have no action. The other school maintains that while he is in my power the action is only in abeyance, because I cannot bring an action against myself, but that it revives when he passes out of my power.

[226443] § 79. When a filiusfamilias is conveyed by mancipation to the injured party in a noxal action, the other school hold that he ought to be mancipated three times, because the law of the Twelve Tables provides that a son cannot pass out of the power of the father unless he is three times mancipated. Sabinus and Cassius and the other authorities of my school hold that a single mancipation is sufficient, and suppose that the three conveyances of the Twelve Tables are only required in voluntary mancipations.

[226952] So much for the contracts and delicts of persons under the power of a father or master. As to persons subject to manus or mancipium, when they are sued for contracts, unless they are defended against the whole damages by the superior to whom they are subject, the goods which would have belonged to them but for their subjection are ordered by the praetor to be sold. But when their change of status is supposed to be rescinded and an action is brought resting on the praetor’s executive supremacy (judicium quod imperio continetur). . . .

[227493] § 81. But though I said that the surrender of a dead man was not allowed yet if the delinquent died a natural death and the body is surrendered by the person sued on his account in a noxal action, the judgment is satisfied.

[227718] Gaius explained the various modes by which a man might lose his freedom, 1 § 160. A person who fraudulently allowed himself to be sold with the view of sharing the purchase money, Inst. 1, 3, 4, a freedman ungrateful to his patron, Inst. 1, 16, 1, a woman who persisted in intercourse with a slave without the permission of the master, all forfeited their freedom, the last by a Senatusconsultum Claudianum which was repealed by Justinian, Inst. 3, 12, 1. In the law mentioned by Gaius, l. c., a man who failed to register himself at the census (incensus) lost his freedom; and by the Twelve Tables the fur manifestus and insolvent debtor were assigned (addicti) to the injured party, though, apparently, 3 § 189, not reduced to slavery.

[228457] Justinian decides in favour of the Sabinians, Inst. 4, 8, 6, that the action for the delict of a slave is extinguished, without possibility of future revival, when the delinquent slave comes into the power of the person aggrieved.

[228689] As to the probable contents of the lacuna, cf. Krueger and Studemund’s Notes. The death of a delinquent slave before litis contestatio extinguished the liability of the master. The Autun fragments of interpretation of Gaius, which have recently been discovered (see Krueger’s Edition of these Fragments in Krueger and Studemund’s Gaius, 4th ed., App. p. xl, &c.), contain the following:

[229077] Sed interest, utrum serui filiiue nomine noxalis actio propo[natur an] animalium; nam si serui filiiue nomine condemnatus fuit do[minus uel] pater poe*** in noxam dare etiam mortuum condemn—noxali actione potest seruum etiam mortuum in noxam dare. [Et non solum si] totum corpus det, liberatur, sed etiam si partem aliquam corporis. denique tr[actatur de] capillis et unguibus, an partes corporis sint. quidam enim dicunt— [—]|tationi — foris posita animal m[ortuum]| dedi non potest.

[229563] Quae ratio est, ut serui mortui etiam dedantur? uoluere [—] | — imponere seruis uel filiis, ut delinquentes semet t[—] | uel potestatem dominorum ***. namque hoc uolebant liberari a dom[—]|uus delinquebat, non poterat dare in usum aut reddere, dabat [—no]|xam —. Ergo cum praetor corpus te dedere dom[—] | parentem putes — iure uti t[— do]|mino uel parenti etiam occidere eum et mortuum dedere d[—] | — patria potestas potest n[—] | cum patris potestas talis est, ut habeat uitae et necis pot[estatem]. De filio hoc tractari crudele est, sed ********* non est **n post r[—|dere, sed est hoc *** iure aut *** quod praebebit lex xii tabularum. sed deferre hoc [—] | debet propter calumniam.

[230253] Ergo ideo interest mortuum dedere [—]|ter animalibus nec est * nisi *****ctio** ponis his quae ratione [carent].

[230367] It would seem from the above that the dead body of a delinquent son or slave, or part of it, might be surrendered in satisfaction to the plaintiff, but not that of an animal which had caused injury to another (pauperies), though it is a question whether the noxal liability would continue if the son or slave were killed by the head of the household in the exercise of the jus vitae necisque. We know that the master of a slave did not escape such liability by his voluntary manumission (on the primitive conception of noxal liability, cf. Holmes, Common Law, chap. I).

[230938] As the Romans became more civilized the noxal surrender of a son or daughter by the parent became repugnant to public feelings, and Justinian (Inst. 4, 8, 7) speaks of it as a thing of the past.

[231134] Mischief (pauperies) occasioned by an animal might by a law of the Twelve Tables be atoned for by noxae deditio, Inst. 4, 9, and is probably the subject of the lacuna in the text.

[231315] § 82. Nunc admonendi sumus agere nos aut nostro nomine aut alieno, ueluti cognitorio, procuratorio, tutorio, curatorio, cum olim, quo tempore legis actiones in usu fuissent, alieno nomine agere non liceret, praeterquam ex certis causis.

[231553] Inst. 4, 10, pr.

[231571] § 83. Cognitor autem certis uerbis in litem coram aduersario substituitur. nam actor ita cognitorem dat qvod ego a te uerbi gratia fvndvm peto, in eam rem l. titivm tibi cognitorem do; aduersarius ita qvia tv a me fvndvm petis, in eam 〈rem〉 tibi p. mevivm cognitorem do. potest ut actor ita dicat qvod ego tecvm agere volo, in eam rem cognitorem do, aduersarius ita qvia tv mecvm agere vis, in eam rem cognitorem do. nec interest, praesens an absens cognitor detur; sed si absens datus fuerit, cognitor ita erit, si cognouerit et susceperit officium cognitoris.

[232134] § 84. Procurator uero nullis certis uerbis in litem substituitur, sed ex solo mandato et absente et ignorante aduersario constituitur. quin etiam sunt qui putant eum quoque procuratorem uideri, cui non sit mandatum, si modo bona fide accedat ad negotium et caueat ratam rem dominum habiturum; quamquam et ille cui mandatum 〈est〉 plerumque satisdare debet, quia saepe mandatum initio litis in obscuro est et postea apud iudicem ostenditur.

[232574] Inst. 4, 10, 1.

[232591] § 85. Tutores autem et curatores quemadmodum constituantur, primo commentario rettulimus.

[232682] Inst. 4, 10, 2.

[232699] § 86. Qui autem alieno nomine mine agit, intentionem quidem ex persona domini sumit, condemnationem autem in suam personam conuertit. nam si uerbi gratia L. Titius 〈pro〉 P. Meuio agat, ita formula concipitur si paret n. negidivm p. mevio sestertivm x milia dare oportere, ivdex n. negidivm l. titio sestertivm x milia condemna. si non paret, absolve; in rem quoque si agat, intendit p. mevii rem esse ex ivre qviritivm, et condemnationem in suam personam conuertit.

[233166] § 87. Ab aduersarii quoque parte si interueniat aliquis cum quo actio constituitur, intenditur dominum dare oportere, condemnatio autem in eius personam conuertitur qui iudicium accipit; sed cum in rem agitur, nihil 〈in〉 intentione facit eius persona cum quo agitur, siue suo nomine siue alieno aliquis iudicio interueniat; tantum enim intenditur rem actoris esse.

[233532] A man may sue either on his own account or on account of another as his cognitor, procurator, guardian (tutor), or curator, whereas in the days of statute-process a man could only sue on account of another in certain cases.

[233757] § 83. A cognitor for a cause is appointed by a set form of words in the presence of the adversary. The form in which the plaintiff appoints a cognitor is the following: ‘Whereas I sue you for, say, an estate, in that matter I appoint Lucius Titius as my cognitor;’ the defendant thus: ‘Whereas you sue me for an estate, in that matter I appoint Publius Maevius as my cognitor.’ Or the plaintiff may use the words: ‘Whereas I intend to sue you, in that matter I appoint Lucius Titius as my cognitor;’ and the defendant these: ‘Whereas you intend to sue me, in that matter I appoint Publius Maevius as my cognitor.’ It is immaterial whether the person appointed cognitor is present or absent; but if an absent person is appointed, he is only cognitor if he consents and undertakes the office.

[234549] A procurator is substituted in a suit for the principal without using any particular form of words, but simply by an informal mandate, and even in the absence and without the knowledge of the other party to the action. According to the opinion of some, a person may even become a procurator without a mandate if he undertakes the office in good faith and engages that the principal will ratify his proceeding. Although he who is acting under a mandate is also as a rule bound to give this security, the fact that he has a mandate being often concealed in the initial stage of the suit, and only coming to light subsequently when the parties are before the judge.

[235213] § 85. How guardians and curators are appointed has been explained in the first book.

[235299] § 86. He who sues on account of another names the principal in the intentio and himself in the condemnatio. If, for example, Lucius Titius sues for Publius Mevius, the formula runs thus: ‘If it be proved that Numerius Negidius ought to pay to Publius Mevius ten thousand sesterces, do thou, judex, condemn Numerius Negidius to pay to Lucius Titius ten thousand sesterces; if it be not proved, absolve him.’ In a real action the thing is affirmed in the intentio to be the property of Publius Mevius by the law of the Quirites, and the representative is named in the condemnatio.

[235879] § 87. When the defendant is represented by a cognitor or procurator in a personal action the principal is named in the intentio, and his representative in the condemnatio. In a real action neither the principal defendant nor his representative is named in the intentio, which only affirms that the thing belongs to the plaintiff.

[236210] If there is a genuine antithesis between agere suo nomine and alieno nomine, the procuratorium, tutorium, &c., nomen, which is the alienum nomen with which the procurator or guardian sues, must mean the name, not of the procurator or guardian, but of the principal or ward. When a man sues suo nomine he uses his own name in the intentio; therefore it might at first sight be supposed, that when a man sues procuratorio nomine he would use the procuratorium nomen in the intentio: the name inserted in the intentio by a procurator is of course however not the name of the procurator but that of the principal, the name of the procurator being only inserted in the condemnatio, § 36. But Gaius is evidently using the word ‘agere’ here, not for the claim as set out in the intentio, but in a general sense. Statute-process was incapable of representation or procuration (alieno nomine agere), because it could not be modified for this purpose by the praetor; that is to say, it could not as in the formulary procedure frame a condemnatio, in which the procurator’s name was substituted for that of the principal.

[237322] Justinian enumerates the cases in which representation was permitted in statute-process: Cum olim in usu fuisset alterius nomine agere non posse, nisi pro populo, pro libertate, pro tutela: praeterea lege Hostilia permissum est furti agere eorum nomine, qui apud hostes essent aut rei publicae causa abessent quive in eorum cujus tutela essent. et quia hoc non minimam incommoditatem habebat, quod alieno nomine neque agere neque excipere actionem licebat, coeperunt homines per procuratores litigare, Inst. 4, 10, pr. Eam popularem actionem dicimus quae suum jus populo tuetur, Dig. 47, 23, 1. A popularis actio was one brought by a common informer to recover a penalty. The informer enforced, not a private but a public right, that is, sued as the procurator of the people; and therefore an infamis, as he was disabled from being procurator, was incompetent to prosecute in such an action. To public actions and actions by an adsertor libertatis (see 1 § 17, comm.) Justinian adds, as maintainable by a representative under the old jurisprudence, actions on behalf of a ward. We have already mentioned, 1 §§ 142-145, comm., that until the ward attained the age of seven, when he ceased to be infans, the guardian had to bring actions for the ward; after the age of seven the ward maintained his own actions with the sanction of the guardian, though sometimes the latter did so on his behalf.

[238717] A person who without a mandate undertook the defence of an absent neighbour was called negotiorum gestor (Inst. 3, 27, 1) or defensor, or procurator voluntarius. The employment of a cognitor, from the necessity of appointing him in the presence of the adversary and by a certain formula, was discontinued as inconvenient, and Justinian only speaks of the procurator. Bethmann-Hollweg, vol. 3, appendix 1, quotes from Symmachus the report of a case in which the defendant objected to a procurator (exceptio invalidae procurationis), and the plaintiff proved his appointment by production of a document from the praetor’s record office (ex actis praetoriis) at a late stage of judicial proceedings. A procurator thus appointed by protocol was called procurator praesentis, or apud acta factus, and was to some extent in a similar position to that of a cognitor. Keller, Civil Process, § 52.

[239607] § 88. Videamus nunc quibus ex causis is cum quo agitur uel hic qui agit cogatur satisdare.

[239699] Inst. 4, 11, pr.

[239717] § 89. Igitur si uerbi gratia in rem tecum agam, satis mihi dare debes; aequum enim uisum est 〈te〉 ideo quod interea tibi rem, quae an ad te pertineat dubium est, possidere conceditur, cum satisdatione cauere, ut si uictus sis nec rem ipsam restituas nec litis aestimationem sufferas, sit mihi potestas aut tecum agendi aut cum sponsoribus tuis.

[240063] Inst. l. c.

[240076] § 90. Multoque magis debes satisdare mihi, si alieno nomine iudicium accipias.

[240156] Inst. l. c.

[240169] § 91. Ceterum cum in rem actio duplex sit, aut enim per formulam petitoriam agitur aut per sponsionem, siquidem per formulam petitoriam agitur, illa stipulatio locum habet quae appellatur ivdicatvm solvi, si uero per sponsionem, illa quae appellatur pro praede litis et vindiciarvm.

[240453] Inst. l. c.

[240466] § 92. Petitoria autem formula haec est, qua actor intendit rem svam esse.

[240541] § 93. Per sponsionem uero hoc modo agimus: prouocamus aduersarium tali sponsione si homo qvo de agitvr ex ivre qviritivm mevs est, sestertios xxv nvmos dare spondes?; deinde formulam edimus; qua intendimus sponsionis summam nobis dari oportere; qua formula ita demum uincimus, si probauerimus rem nostram esse.

[240853] § 94. Non tamen haec summa sponsionis exigitur. non enim poenalis est, sed praeiudicialis, et propter hoc solum fit, ut per eam de re iudicetur. unde etiam is cum quo agitur non restipulatur. ideo autem appellata est pro praede litis vindiciarvm stipulatio, quia in locum praedium successit, qui olim, cum lege agebatur, pro lite et uindiciis, id est pro re et fructibus, a possessore petitori dabantur.

[241258] § 95 Ceterum si apud centumuiros agitur, summam sponsionis non per formulam petimus, sed per legis actionem; sacramento enim reum prouocamus; eaque sponsio sestertium cxxv nummum fit scilicet propter legem Crepereiam.

[241477] § 96. Ipse autem qui in rem agit, si suo nomine agat, satis non dat.

[241547] Inst. l. c.

[241560] § 97. Ac nec si per cognitorem quidem agatur, ulla satisdatio uel ab ipso uel a domino desideratur. cum enim certis et quasi sollemnibus uerbis in locum domini substituatur cognitor, merito domini loco habetur.

[241772] Inst. l. c.

[241785] § 98. Procurator uero si agat, satisdare iubetur ratam rem dominum habiturum; periculum enim est, ne iterum dominus de eadem re experiatur. quod periculum 〈non〉 interuenit, si per cognitorem actum fuerit, quia de qua re quisque per cognitorem egerit, de ea non magis amplius actionem habet, quam si ipse egerit.

[242098] Inst. l. c.

[242111] § 99. Tutores et curatores eo modo quo et procuratores satisdare debere uerba edicti faciunt; sed aliquando illis satisdatio remittitur.

[242249] Inst. l. c.

[242262] § 100. Haec ita, si in rem agatur; si uero in personam, ab actoris quidem parte quando satisdari debeat quaerentes, eadem repetem us quae diximus in actione qua in rem agitur.

[242439] Inst. l. c. 1.

[242455] § 101. Ab eius uero parte cum quo agitur, siquidem alieno nomine aliquis interueniat, omni modo satisdari debet, quia nemo alienae rei sine satisdatione defensor idoneus intellegitur. sed siquidem cum cognitore agatur, dominus satisdare iubetur; si uero cum procuratore, ipse procurator. idem et de tutore et de curatore iuris est.

[242788] Inst. 4, 11, 1.

[242805] § 102. Quodsi proprio nomine aliquis iudicium accipiat in personam, certis ex causis satisdare solet, quas ipse praetor significat. quarum satisdationum duplex causa est: nam aut propter genus actionis satisdatur, aut propter personam, quia suspecta sit; propter genus actionis, ueluti iudicati depensiue aut cum de moribus mulieris agitur; propter personam, ueluti si cum eo agitur qui decoxerit, cuiusue bona 〈a〉 creditoribus possessa proscriptaue sunt, siue cum eo herede agatur quem praetor suspectum aestimauerit.

[243325] Inst. l. c.

[243338] We next inquire under what circumstances the plaintiff or defendant is required to give security.

[243437] § 89. If I sue you in a real action you must give me security. For as you are permitted during the suit to retain possession of a thing to which your title is doubtful, it is fair that you should give me security with sureties so that if judgment goes against you and you refuse to restore the thing or to pay its value I may have the power of proceeding against you or your sponsors.

[243823] § 90. And there is all the more reason that you should give security if you are only undertaking the action as the representative of another.

[243966] § 91. A real action is either commenced by a petitory formula or by a sponsio: if the plaintiff proceeds by petitory formula, recourse is had to the stipulation known as security for satisfaction of judgment; if he proceeds by sponsio, the stipulation employed is known as security for the thing in dispute and for mesne profits.

[244297] § 92. The Intentio of a petitory formula containing the assertion that the thing belongs to the plaintiff.

[244405] § 93. But in a proceeding by sponsio we challenge the other party to such a wager as follows: ‘If the slave in question belongs to me by the law of the Quirites, do you promise to pay me twenty-five sesterces?’ and we then deliver a formula in which we sue for the sum named in the wager, but we only obtain judgment by this formula if we prove that the thing belongs to us.

[244781] § 94. But the sum named in the wager in this case is not exacted, for it is not really penal, but prejudicial, and is used merely as a device for instituting a trial of ownership. Hence, the defendant does not enter into a counter stipulation with the plaintiff. But the stipulation in the place of security for the thing in dispute and for mesne profits (pro praede litis et vindiciarum) is so named because it was substituted for personal sureties (praedes); for in the days of statute-process restitution of the thing in dispute and the mesne profits was secured to the claimant (petitor) by the possessor giving him such sureties.

[245417] § 95. When, however, the case is tried in the centumviral court the sum of the wager is not sued for by formula but by statute-process. For then we challenge the defendant by sacramentum, and a sponsio of a hundred and twenty-five sesterces is entered into by virtue of the lex Crepereia.

[245707] § 96. But if a plaintiff in a real action sues in his own name he gives no security.

[245793] § 97. And even if a cognitor sues, no security is required either from him or from his principal, for the cognitor being appointed by a fixed and, as it were, solemn form of words in the place of the principal, he is properly identified with the principal.

[246051] § 98. But if a procurator sues, he is required to give security for the ratification of his proceedings by his principal, as otherwise the principal might sue again on the same claim, which he cannot do after suing by a cognitor on account of the acts of the latter being regarded as his own.

[246345] § 99. Guardians (tutores) and curators are required by the edict to give the same security as procurators, but are sometimes excused.

[246480] § 100. So much for real actions. In personal actions the plaintiff is governed by the same rules in respect of giving security as in real actions.

[246628] As regards the defendant, if another person intervenes for him in the action, security must always be given, for no one is considered to be a sufficient defender of another without security; but in a suit against a cognitor it is the principal who gives security, while in a suit against a procurator it is the procurator who gives it; and this same rule applies to guardians and curators.

[247019] But if a defendant accepts process in his own name in a personal action, he only gives security in certain cases named in the edict. These cases are of two kinds, depending either on the nature of the action or on the suspicious character of the defendant. The nature of the action is the reason in a suit against a judgment debtor, or a principal indebted to his surety, or in an action (for dower) in which the conduct of the wife is in question. The suspicious character of the defendant is the reason if he has already made away with his property, or if his goods have been possessed or proscribed for sale by his creditors, or if an heir is sued whom the praetor looks on as a suspect.

[247711] In a real action the defendant was required to give security that he would satisfy the judgment (satisdatio judicatum solvi); in a personal, with a few exceptions, if he appeared in his own cause, he was not required. Justinian relieved him of the necessity of giving such security in real actions. But a defendant, whether in a real or personal action, might be compelled either to promise or to give security that he would appear and defend the action till it was concluded (cautio judicio sisti). Inst. 4, 11, 2.

[248228] In the time of Gaius, if the defendant in a real action refused to give security judicatum solvi, the possession was transferred from him to the plaintiff by the interdict Quem fundum, Quam hereditatem, or Quem usumfructum, as the case might be, and he was reduced at least for some purposes to the position of plaintiff; cf. Ulp. Inst. Fragm. Vind. in Krueger, Jus Antejus. 2, 159, ‘Some interdicts may either initiate or restore possession, as the interdicts Quem fundum and Quam hereditatem. For if I sue a person for land or an heritage, and he refuses to give security, he is compelled to transfer the possession to me whether I never before had possession, or once had and afterwards lost possession’; and Ulpian, Fragmenta Vaticana, 92, ‘The plaintiff has a right to security in a real action for a servitude as well as for a corporal thing, and therefore, analogous to the interdict, Quem fundum, there is an interdict, Quem usumfructum, for the transfer of a usufruct’; cf. also Paulus, Receptae Sententiae, 1, 11, 1, ‘In a demand of a heritage, security must be given, or else possession is transferred to the demandant. If, however, the demandant refuse to give security, possession remains with the possessor, for in equal circumstances law favours the possessor.’ Cf. Lenel, § 248. 2, n. q.

[249533] The same principle may perhaps also have applied to Praedial servitudes. If A asserted against B the Urban servitude altius non tollendi (si ageretur, jus vicino non esse, aedes altius tollere), i. e. sought by actio Confessoria of jus altius Non tollendi (with an intentio, perhaps, in the following form: Si paret jus Numerio Negidio non esse aedes altius tollendi invito Aulo Agerio) to restrain B from exercising the indefinite powers of ownership by raising the height of his house, B might decline to defend the action and thus avoid a judicial decision as to the existence of the servitude; but as a penalty for this he would not be allowed afterwards to exercise his alleged right without first proving before a tribunal the nullity of A’s claim; proving, that is, either that A never had such a servitude over his house, or that he, B, had extinguished it by acquisition of the counterservitude (libertatis usucapio). That is to say, being originally in possession, or rather quasi-possession of the jus altius tollendi (for servitudes are not, strictly speaking, subjects of possession), B was deprived of this position; and, if he afterwards wished to exercise his right of building, had first to recover possession of it as plaintiff in a suit: i. e. by actio Negatoria of jus Non altius tollendi, if he denied that A as dominans ever enjoyed such a servitude, or by actio Confessoria of jus altius tollendi, if he claimed as serviens to have reacquired the freedom of his house by usucapio libertatis.

[251049] The penalty would only consist in an inversion of the order of proof: B as plaintiff would have to prove his own proprietorship before A as defendant was put to prove the existence of the servitude: whereas, if A had been plaintiff, A would have had to begin by proving the existence of the servitude before B was put to his answer.

[251383] So vice versa: if B had originally wished to prove his right to build as plaintiff, either in an actio Negatoria of jus Non altius tollendi, or in an actio Confessoria of jus altius tollendi, and if A had declined to defend either action by giving securities, &c. in the course prescribed by law; A would have been restrained from afterwards interfering with B except as plaintiff in a suit in which B was made defendant, Dig. 39, 1, 15. Cf. 2, §§ 1-14, §§ 28-39, comm., §§ 1-9, comm.

[251869] At a later period, as we have seen, the cautio judicatum solvi was not required from the defendant in a real action, and translatio possessionis might be averted if the defendant merely gave the cautio judicio sisti.

[252087] The sum staked in the praedes sacramenti, which Gaius had told us, § 14, was a thousand or five hundred asses, he now, § 95, defines as one hundred and twenty-five sesterces.

[252263] The explanation of this is as follows: Originally the sestertius, as the name implies, was two asses and a half, and the denarius ten asses. Both the sestertius and the denarius were silver coins. In the Second Punic War, about b. c. 217, in consequence of the insolvency of the State, the denarius was made equal to sixteen asses and the sestertius remained, as before, one fourth of the denarius, that is, became equal to four asses. One hundred and twenty-five sesterces, therefore, were equal to five hundred asses. This change was brought about by the lex Crepereia.

[252836] The Sponsio praejudicialis, though giving rise to a personal action in form, might in effect be a means of deciding a real action. It resembles somewhat the Feigned Issue or issue in a fictitious action on a wager, whereby the Court of Chancery, before it had the power of summoning a jury, might refer an issue of fact to trial by jury, or the parties in a court of law by consent or by direction of some act of parliament might determine some disputed right without the formality of a regular action, thereby saving much time and expense; see Blackstone’s Commentaries. In the Sponsio poenalis there was both a sponsio and restipulatio, that is, both parties forfeited the penal sum if they lost the action, and the penal sum might be serious, in an action de pecunia certa credita being one third, and in an action de pecunia constituta being one half of the sum in dispute, § 171.

[253722] In the actio Sacramenti in rem and per Sponsionem two different stipulations must be distinguished. In the Sacramentum there was (A) the praedes sacramenti, and (B) the praedes litis et vindiciarum, § 16; in the actio in rem per Sponsionem there was (A) the sponsio praejudicialis, and (B) the satisdatio pro praede litis et vindiciarum. In the formula petitoria there was only one stipulation, (B) the satisdatio judicatum solvi, corresponding to the second stipulation in the Sacramentum and Sponsio. §§ 91, 93.

[254237] In the interdicts Uti possidetis and Utrubi, each party being originally both plaintiff and defendant, there were (A) two sponsiones and two restipulationes for a penal sum, on which stipulations the principal issue was founded: there was no security (B) exactly corresponding to the Pro praede litis et vindiciarum, but the highest bidder at the fructus licitatio must either enter into a fructuaria stipulatio, § 16, which in the event of his failing in the action he must forfeit, besides having by the judicium Cascellianum or Secutorium, or action for giving effect to the main decision, to hand over the possession and mesne profits to the successful party; or as an alternative, if he refuses to enter into the fructuaria stipulatio, he is subject to the judicium fructuarium, by which he is required to give the satisdatio judicatum solvi. §§ 166-169.

[255098] As a plaintiff’s procurator could not bring to trial and consume the plaintiff’s right, he had to give cautio rem ratam dominum habiturum: and as a defendant’s procurator could not bring to trial the defendant’s obligation, he had to give security judicatum solvi.

[255364] The husband sued for the dower of his divorced wife might retain a portion on various grounds, of which Immorality was one, Ulpian, Fragm., 6, 9, 11. ‘Retentions in the restitution of dower are on account of children, immorality, expenditure, donation, articles purloined by the wife. On account of children, if the fault of the wife, or the father in whose power she is, occasioned the divorce. Then a sixth is retained on account of each child, but not more than three sixths altogether. For gross immorality a sixth is retained, for slight immorality an eighth. Only adultery is gross immorality.’ (Cf. § 44, comm.)

[255984] Besides the forfeiture of vadimonium, fraudulent absconding to avoid the summons to appear was an act of bankruptcy, or motive for missio in possessionem. Praetor ait: Qui fraudationis causa latitabit, si boni viri arbitratu non defendetur, ejus bona possideri vendique jubebo, Dig. 42, 4, 7, 1. ‘If a debtor fraudulently abscond, and no sufficient representative defends him, I will order his goods to be possessed and sold.’

[256412] A heres might, on cause shown to the praetor, immediately after his entry on the succession, be required by the creditors to give security for the payment of their claims, with the alternative of seizure and sale, though only on the ground of his being unlikely to be able to satisfy them, § 102. But after a lapse of time it was necessary to prove not only poverty, but fraudulent behaviour on the part of the heres, Dig. 42, 5, 31.

[256847] The stipulatio judicatum solvi contained three clauses: Judicatum solvi stipulatio tres clausulas in unum collatas habet: de re judicata, de re defendenda, de dolo malo, Dig. 46, 7, 6. ‘The stipulation judicatum solvi is composed of three clauses, for satisfaction of the judgment, for defending the action, and for fraud.’ The action must be defended ‘to the satisfaction of a reasonable man,’ which was interpreted to mean that, if a defensor appeared before the judex, the second clause was not satisfied unless the defensor was prepared to give further security judicatum solvi, Dig. 46, 7, 5, 3. ‘A defensor may prevent the stipulation taking effect if he defends “to the satisfaction of an arbitrator,” that is, with adequate security.’ Cf. Roby, 2. p. 384.

[257612] Justinian as a general rule relieved the defendant in any action who appeared in his own person from the first and third clauses of the security judicatum solvi, but not from the second. The vadimonium or cautio judicio sistendi, which originally, it seems, only referred to adjourned appearances in jure, was at this period extended to the judicia, and bound the defendant to appear before the judex and remain to the end of the trial. If, then, in consequence of an adjournment in jure, there had been a vadimonium between the parties, no further stipulation would be necessary; otherwise the defendant would have had to enter into the undertaking that formed the second clause of the stipulation judicatum solvi, Inst. 4, 11, 2. ‘This is not the present rule. The defendant now is not required either in a real or personal action, if he appear in person, to give security for satisfaction of the judgment, but only for his own personal presence and continuance in court to the end of the trial.’

[258612] The procurator of the plaintiff appointed before the judex or in the record office of the magistrate by memorandum (insinuatio) in the register of his public proceedings (apud acta) was assimilated to the cognitor whom he superseded, and was not required to give security; otherwise he had to give security ratam rem dominum habiturum, because Litis Contestatio by him operated no consumption.

[259007] The procurator of the defendant might either have himself to give security, or his principal, as fidejussor of his procurator, gave security judicatum solvi in his place, as in the case of the cognitor, which might include a mortgage (hypotheca) of all his property. A defensor (whether authorized or unauthorized) of the defendant must find security judicatum solvi, because Litis Contestatio by him operated consumption, § 101.

[259438] § 103. Omnia autem iudicia aut legitimo iure consistunt aut imperio continentur.

[259520] § 104. Legitima sunt iudicia quae in urbe Roma uel intra primum urbis Romae miliarium inter omnes ciues Romanos sub uno iudice accipiuntur; eaque 〈e〉 lege Iulia iudiciaria, nisi in anno et sex mensibus iudicata fuerint, expirant. et hoc est quod uulgo dicitur e lege Iulia litem anno et sex mensibus mori.

[259827] § 105. Imperio uero continentur recuperatoria et quae sub uno iudice accipiuntur interueniente peregrini persona iudicis aut litigatoris. in eadem causa sunt, quaecumque extra primum urbis Romae miliarium tam inter ciues Romanos quam inter peregrinos accipiuntur. ideo autem imperio contineri iudicia dicuntur, quia tamdiu ualent, quamdiu is qui ea praecepit imperium habebit.

[260205] § 106. Et siquidem imperio continenti iudicio actum fuerit, siue in rem siue in personam, siue ea formula quae in factum concepta est, siue ea quae in ius habet intentionem, postea nihilo minus ipso iure de eadem re agi potest; et ideo necessaria est exceptio rei iudicatae uel in iudicium deductae.

[260506] § 107. Si uero legitimo iudicio in personam actum sit ea formula quae iuris ciuilis habet intentionem, postea ipso iure de eadem re agi non potest, et ob id exceptio superuacua est; si uero uel in rem uel in factum actum fuerit, ipso iure nihilo minus postea agi potest, et ob id exceptio necessaria est rei iudicatae uel in iudicium deductae.

[260851] § 108. Alia causa fuit olim legis actionum: nam qua de re actum semel erat, de ea postea ipso iure agi non poterat; nec omnino ita, ut nunc, usus erat illis temporibus exceptionum.

[261033] § 109. Ceterum potest ex lege quidem esse iudicium, sed legitimum non esse; et contra ex lege non esse, sed legitimum esse. nam si uerbi gratia ex lege Aquilia uel Ollinia uel Furia in prouinciis agatur, imperio continebitur iudicium; idemque iuris est et si Romae apud recuperatores agamus, uel apud unum iudicem interueniente peregrini persona; et ex diuerso si ex ea causa, ex qua nobis edicto praetoris datur actio, Romae sub uno iudice inter omnes ciues Romanos accipiatur iudicium, legitimum est.

[261537] § 103. Actions are either statutable or are derived from magisterial power.

[261614] Statutable actions are those that are instituted within the city of Rome, or within an area limited by the first milestone, between Roman citizens, before a single judex; and these by the lex Julia judiciaria expire in a year and six months from their commencement, unless previously decided; which is the meaning of the saying that by the lex Julia an action dies in eighteen months.

[262000] § 105. Magisterial power is the source of those actions that are instituted before recuperators, or before a single judex, if the judex or a party is an alien, or that are instituted beyond the first milestone from Rome, whether the parties are citizens or aliens. They are said to be derived from magisterial power because they can only be prosecuted as long as the praetor who delivered the formula continues in office.

[262423] § 106. To have sued in an action derived from magisterial power, whether real or personal, and whether it had a formula of fact (in factum) or an allegation of law (in jus), is not by direct operation of law a bar to the institution of a subsequent action on the same question: and therefore a counteractive plea (exceptio) is necessary alleging that the matter has been already decided (res judicata) or that issue has been joined upon it.

[262865] § 107. But if a statutable action in personam with an intentio of civil law has been already brought, a subsequent action on the same question cannot by direct operation of law be afterwards maintained, and on this account a counteractive plea is not required. But if a statutable action in rem or a statutable action in personam with an intentio of fact has been brought, a subsequent action on the same question may nevertheless by direct law be maintained, and on this account the counteractive plea that the matter has been already decided, or the plea that there has been a previous joinder of issue on it is necessary.

[263491] § 108. It was otherwise formerly in the case of statute-process, since in this procedure a subsequent action on a question which had already been the subject of an action was always barred by direct operation of law, nor were counteractive pleas (exceptiones) at all in use in those times, as they are now.

[263799] An action may arise from statute (ex lege) and yet not be statutable (legitimum), or statutable and yet not arising from statute. For instance, an action arising from the lex Aquilia, or Ollinia, or Furia, if maintained in the provinces, is derived from the power of the magistrate, and so it is if instituted at Rome before recuperators, or though instituted before a single judex, if the judex or a party is an alien; and, on the contrary, an action given by the edict, if maintained at Rome, before a single judex, between Roman citizens, is statutable (legitimum).

[264369] The sum total of the powers of a magistrate, so far as he was charged with the administration of justice, is described by the term Officium jus dicentis. This officium contained two ingredients—jurisdictio (in the narrower sense of the term) and imperium.

[264626] Of these two elements, Jurisdictio, which is the essential element of the Officium jus dicentis, denoted the power (perhaps originally vested in the Pontifex) of administering the civil law in the ordinary course of procedure. It consisted chiefly in presiding over the preliminary stages of litigation, and in the period of legis actiones was summed up in the utterance of the solemn words, Do, Dico, Addico; but in the formulary period it was principally performed, not by oral utterances, but by the delivery of written documents (verbis conceptis). In genuine litigation it was called jurisdictio contentiosa; in fictitious litigation, e. g. manumission by vindicta, alienation by in jure cessio, it was called jurisdictio voluntaria.

[265366] Imperium as coupled with the administration of civil justice (imperium quod jurisdictioni cohaeret, Dig. 1, 21, 1, 1), or as including it (cui etiam jurisdictio inest, Dig. 2, 1, 3), was called imperium mixtum, as opposed to imperium merum, or gladii potestas, the administration of criminal justice. Imperium mixtum may be divided into two functions, (1) cognitio extraordinaria and (2) actiones honorariae.

[265776] (1) Magistrates invested with imperium had the power of issuing commands (jus decernendi) to which they enforced obedience by fine (mulcta), distress (pignus), and imprisonment, and, as a preliminary to issuing a command (decretum), of summoning parties before them (vocatio), by means of a lictor, and conducting in person an investigation of facts (causae cognitio). To these functions of the praetor must be referred Restitutio in integrum, Missio in possessionem, and other proceedings which the praetor decided in person without reference to a judex, a form of procedure which finally embraced all cases, superseding the ordo judiciorum or formulary system.

[266440] (2) But even of suits belonging to the ordo judiciorum, which conformed, that is, to the principle of appointing a judex, a portion must be referred to the praetor’s imperium. All the new actions, unknown to the civil law, which the praetor invented when executing the powers conferred upon him by the law of uncertain date that introduced the formulary system, the lex Aebutia; such as fictitious actions and actions in factum; in a word, all actiones honorariae, were emanations of the praetorian imperium.

[266950] Jurisdictio is sometimes used in a wider sense as equivalent to officium jus dicentis; and then Lex and Jurisdictio form an antithesis similar to that which is formed by Jurisdictio in the narrower sense and Imperium, the antithesis, namely, of Legislator and Administrator.

[267226] This antithesis is the principle of many of the divisions or classifications in Roman jurisprudence, and is expressed in various terms. We have legitimum jus opposed to praetorium jus, § 34: legitimum jus opposed to praetoris jurisdictio, § 111: jus civile opposed to jus praetorium or jus honorarium, Dig. 1, 1, 7: actio legitima opposed to actio honoraria, Dig. 35, 2, 32, pr., and Collatio, 2, 5, 5: actio legitima opposed to actio utilis, Dig. 39, 3, 22, 2: actio civilis opposed to actio honoraria (omnes actiones aut civiles dicuntur aut honorariae), Dig. 44, 7, 25, 2, and Dig. 50, 16, 178, 3: actiones quae ipso jure conpetunt opposed to actiones quae a praetore dantur, § 112: actiones quae ex legitimis et civilibus causis descendunt opposed to actiones quas praetor ex sua jurisdictione comparatas habet, Inst. 4, 6, 3: actio civilis opposed to actio in factum a praetore danda, Dig. 2, 14, 7, 2: actio juris civilis opposed to interdictum, Dig. 43, 26, 14: and lex opposed to praetor (actionum modus vel lege vel per praetorem introductus), Dig. 50, 17, 27.

[268297] Although the division into judicia legitima and judicia quae imperio continentur does not exactly coincide with the division into actiones legitimae and actiones honorariae (e. g. an actio in factum, if litigated at Rome before a Roman judex by two Romans, would be judicium legitimum, and, vice versa, an actio civilis, if litigated before recuperators or in the provinces or between aliens, would be judicium quod imperio continetur, § 109), yet it is essentially the same, being based on the same antithesis of the Legislator and the Executive.

[268846] Statutory actions (judicia legitima), so named perhaps from the lex Julia judiciaria, the statute by which they were defined, had by that statute a pendency of eighteen months. After that period they could neither be prosecuted nor renewed, as the right of action was consumed by res in judicium deducta. If the delay was caused by the defendant the plaintiff had a remedy by an action De dolo, Dig. 4, 3, 18, 4. Actions binding (continentia) by magisterial power had a still shorter pendency, the commission of the judex only continuing in force so long as the praetor who appointed him, and who himself was only appointed for a year, continued in office.

[269504] It is difficult to reconcile this account of the prescription or limitation of legal process with what we read of the duration of some controversies. Martial speaks of a cause that had been litigated in the three Fora, the Forum Romanum, the Forum Julium, and the Forum Augustum, for twenty years:

[269803] Bethmann-Hollweg, § 80, suggests that the limitation did not apply to Centumviral suits nor to Cognitio extraordinaria; and that any litigation might be protracted by a series of appeals.

[269992] This limit to the duration of legal proceedings, though it has left some traces in the Digest, was obsolete long before Justinian. Theodosius limited the pendency of actions to thirty years, Cod. Theod. 4, 14, 1; i. e. he ordained that as the right of action expired unless Litis contestatio took place within thirty years from the nativity of an action; so, after Litis contestatio, an interval of thirty years after any act of the judge or one of the parties should be a bar to any further prosecution of the action. Justinian limited the duration of civil suits to three years from Litis contestatio, and sanctioned the law against a party who failed to proceed in the action after being ordered to do so by contumacial proceedings (eremodicium, ἔρημος δίκη) against the contumacious plaintiff or defendant, Cod. 3, 1, 13; if both parties agreed to let the litigation lie dormant, he limited the dormancy or pendency to forty years. Bethmann-Hollweg, § 147.

[270954] The expiration of the commission of the judex by the expiration of the functions of the praetor who appointed him suggests an analogy to the Common Law previous to 1 Geo. 3, c. 23; by which act judges are continued in their offices notwithstanding any demise of the crown, which was formerly held to vacate their seats.

[271275] The division of actions into those with a pendency of eighteen months (judicia legitima) and those which expire with the praetorship (judicia imperio continentia) is not coincident with the division into those which are ipso jure extinctive of future litigation and those which are merely counteractive ope exceptionis, § 106. For although all judicia imperio continentia, whether in jus or in factum, are merely liable to be met by an exception, some judicia legitima, i. e. real actions and actiones honorariae, are not ipso jure extinctive, § 107. Gaius, therefore, would have been guilty of an inaccuracy if, 3 §§ 180, 181, he meant to identify the two divisions, but when he says, l. c. § 181, ‘si legitimo judicio debitum petiero, postea de eo ipso jure agere non possim,’ he seems only to be speaking of an actio stricti juris for the recovery of a debt, and not to refer in any way to actiones in rem or actiones honorariae.

[272209] The reason why real actions and actions in factum had not the same power of Novation as personal actions in jus was probably as follows: Under the legis actiones the same claim could not be the subject of a second trial, being ipso jure consumed or extinguished by having been once sued on; § 108. Nam qua de re actum semel erat, de ea postea ipso jure agi non poterat: nec omnino ita, ut nunc, usus erat illis temporibus exceptionum. After the lex Aebutia, which instituted the formulary procedure, an action in personam with an intentio in jus concepta, e. g. si paret Numerium Negidium Aulo Agerio x H.S. dare oportere, an action on which the parties had joined issue was consumed ipso jure in the same way as actions under the older procedure, provided it was a judicium legitimum, i. e. instituted between Roman citizens before a single judex, and within an area bounded by the first milestone. Proceedings thus defined, when once issue was joined in them, produced what is called a necessary novation, 3 § 180. Tollitur adhuc obligatio litis contestatione, si modo legitimo judicio fuerit actum: nam tunc obligatio quidem principalis dissolvitur, incipit autem teneri reus litis contestatione. But this formal rule was not interpreted as applicable to actions in factum, since such actions do not allege in the intentio of their formula any legal claim of the plaintiff, but only a fact; and thus do not formally contain any obligation, which could be the subject of novation; actions in factum indeed were used precisely in those cases, where no right was recognized by the civil law, that is where no right would have been enforceable by statute-process. Nor was the principle of ipso jure consumption applicable to real actions (actiones in rem), as the assertion made in the intentio of such actions, e. g. hunc fundum ex jure Quiritium meum esse, was not made exclusively against a particular defendant, and therefore did not prevent the action being ipso jure maintainable a second time. In Real actions and actions in factum, therefore, even though in other respects they had the characteristics of judicia legitima, the defendant required the protection of the exceptio rei in judicium deductae or rei judicatae. Cf. Keller, Civil Process, § 60.

[274470] The nature of the lex Ollinia is not known.

[274515] The same imperium mixtum whence emanated new actions in favour of the plaintiff also issued exceptions in favour of the defendant, and in particular the exceptio rei in judicium deductae or rei judicatae, which supplemented the novation or consumption whereby a right of action was extinguished or annihilated by direct operation of law (ipso jure, § 106). The aim of the law in barring once-used rights of action directly by consumption or indirectly by exceptio, was to protect a defendant from being harassed by successive suits, and to guard against the public evil which would arise in the shape of a general unsettlement and uncertainty of rights if judicial decisions were not conclusive, Dig. 44, 2, 6. ‘That one right of action should only be tried once is a reasonable rule to prevent interminable litigation and the embarrassment of contrary decisions.’ Accordingly, it was adopted as a maxim that (in the absence of appeal or after appeal) judicial decisions should be assumed to be true. Res judicata pro veritate accipitur, Dig. 1, 5, 25. The principle may be stated more at length as follows: A judgment shall not be contradicted by a judgment in a subsequent trial between the same parties where the same right is in question (except, of course, by the judgment of a court of appeal). Et generaliter, ut Julianus definit, exceptio rei judicatae obstat quotiens inter easdem personas eadem quaestio revocatur vel alio genere judicii, Dig. 44, 2, 7, 4. ‘The plea of previous judgment is a bar whenever the same question of right is renewed between the same parties by whatever form of action.’ Let us consider more minutely the import of this rule.

[276179] The parties must be the same. Cum res inter alios judicatae nullum aliis praejudicium faciant, Dig. 44, 2, 1. ‘A judgment between certain parties does not determine the rights of other parties.’

[276375] This is subject to certain exceptions. For instance, a judgment is conclusive not only against the parties but also against their successors, whether universal or particular, Cod. 8, 35, 2. A judgment in a suit litigated by the father respecting the status (legitimacy) of a child is conclusive on all the world. A mortgagee, purchaser, husband, are bound by the judgment in a suit about title to the property litigated by the mortgagor, vendor, donor of dower, Dig. 42, 1, 63. A suit between a testamentary heir and the heir by intestacy may bind the legatees and the manumissi who accordingly may be entitled to be made parties and to appeal. In these cases the judex is said to establish jus, i. e. jus inter omnes, not merely jus inter partes: Placet enim ejus rei judicem jus facere, Dig. 25, 3, 3, pr.: Jus facit haec pronuntiatio, Dig. 30, 1, 50, 1.

[277233] The form of action is immaterial provided that the same right is contested. Thus a depositor, lender, pledgor, may recover damages for injury to the thing deposited, lent, or pledged, either by action on his contract or under the lex Aquilia, but if cast in one, he cannot bring the other, if the question of liability is really the same. Cf. Grueber, Lex Aquilia, p. 230, &c.

[277611] It is otherwise as if the right contested is really different; if in one action a plaintiff claims a jus in rem, in the other a jus in personam. Paulus respondit, ei qui in rem egisset nec tenuisset, postea condicenti non obstare exceptionem rei judicatae, Dig. 44, 2, 31. ‘If a plaintiff after losing a real action brings a personal action, he is not barred by the plea of previous judgment.’

[278006] The term ‘the same right’ must be taken to include a right and its correlative duty; in other words, it is immaterial that the position of plaintiff and defendant is inverted. Si quis rem a non domino emerit, mox petente domino absolutus sit, deinde possessionem amiserit et a domino petierit, adversus exceptionem, ‘Si non ejus sit res,’ replicatione hac adjuvabitur: ‘At si res judicata non sit,’ Dig. 44, 2, 24. ‘A purchaser of a thing from a non-proprietor, sued for it by the true proprietor and acquitted, afterwards losing possession thereof, and seeking (by actio Publiciana, 2 § 43) to recover it from the former proprietor, may meet the exception by which he pleads true dominion by the replication of previous judgment.’ This example further shows that the plea, though invented chiefly to protect defendants, is sometimes available for plaintiffs.

[278867] When the same right is in question it is immaterial that the secondary object (2 § 1, comm.) of the right is different. Thus, a plaintiff claiming to be heir, who fails when he brings hereditatis petitio for Blackacre, cannot afterwards bring hereditatis petitio for Whiteacre as a part of the same inheritance. Of course, if there is no question of hereditas, the difference in the object involves a different right of Ownership: and the Vindicatio by which a man claims Blackacre is not barred by a previous Vindicatio in which he claimed Whiteacre.

[279420] Perhaps the same right may be in question even when the primary object, the benefit which the right immediately contemplates, is different. Thus, a plaintiff who fails in a condictio furtiva brought to recover stolen property, cannot afterwards maintain an actio furti to recover a penalty for theft. We might say that the plaintiff has a single compound right to recover his property and to recover a penalty, but perhaps it is more accurate to say that he has two separate rights which, however, stand or fall together by necessary implication. The identity of the right contested is more expressly insisted on in the legal maxim, De eadem re ne bis sit actio, which grounded the exceptio rei in judicium deductae, founded on the novation of the plaintiff’s original right by Litis contestatio. The maxim, Res judicata pro veritate accipitur, grounds the exceptio rei judicatae, which rests on the novation of Litis contestatio by Condemnatio or Absolutio, 3 § 180; post litem contestatam condemnari oportere, post condemnationem judicatum facere oportere. The two exceptions were substantially the same, and were pleaded in the formula by the same terms: Quod ea res in judicium ante venisset, cf. Lenel, tit. xliv, § 275. The maxim, Res judicata pro veritate accipitur, is the more comprehensive as extending beyond the right to the facts constituting the title and their logical consequences. Bethmann-Hollweg, § 111.

[280844] It is immaterial, namely, whether a proposition was decided as the final question, or as an essential element and immediate ground of the final decision (ratio decidendi). Every judgment is a decision not only on the ultimate issue, but by implication on all the antecedent pleas, not only the exception, replication, duplication (which are not a direct answer to the claim of the plaintiff or defendant, being only counteractive, § 115), but also on all facts, e. g. solutio, acceptilatio, novatio, which run counter to the claim of the plaintiff in the intentio and so would not be expressed in a Roman formula. Thus, a plaintiff who fails when he sues by real action for a particular thing, or by a personal action for a debt, basing his claim on the presupposition of his succession to a person deceased, cannot afterwards claim the whole succession by hereditatis petitio. Hence we often meet with praescriptio praejudicialis, e. g. Ea res agatur si in ea re praejudicium hereditati non fiat, § 133, or exceptio praejudicialis, e. g. extra quam si in reum capitis praejudicium fiat, Cic. de Inventione, 2, 20; i. e. dilatory pleas whereby a party seeks to postpone a less important issue (causa minor) until a more important issue (causa major) with which it is indissolubly connected shall have been decided. This praescriptio implies that if the more important issue were decided on possibly inadequate examination, as incidental or ancillary to the decision of the minor issue, the re-trial of the more important issue would be barred by the exceptio rei judicatae.

[282419] Observe that the rule is, a judgment shall not be contradicted by a judgment in another action when the same right is in question, not, when the same title is in question. The latter expression would be sufficient to meet the case of personal actions. Here every different obligation is ground to support a different action, and every different title engenders a different obligation. Thus a plaintiff who fails in an action on tort alleging Dolus is not precluded from a subsequent action on tort alleging Culpa, Dig. 40, 12, 13. But the rule so stated would not adequately meet the case of real actions. Here it is immaterial that the plaintiff alleges a different title. There can be many obligations between the same parties in respect of the same subject; but the same subject only admits of one owner, and consequently of only one valid title to ownership. Hence the plaintiff in a real action was required to adduce all his fancied titles on pain of being barred by the exception of res judicata, and if, for instance, he claims ownership on the ground of tradition he cannot afterwards claim by another title, e. g. usucapion, § 131 a. A man who fails in a claim as testamentary heir may, however, afterwards claim as heir by descent, Dig. 5, 3, 8: he has as many actions (hereditatis petitio) as he has delations: in fact the legacies and the arbitrary division of the succession between the co-heirs make a testamentary inheritance quite a different right (alia res) from an intestate inheritance. (So Ihering, § 51. But cf. Savigny, § 300.) The rule, of course, does not apply to a title not in existence at the time of the former action (causa superveniens), and it is defeated if the plaintiff takes the precaution expressly to limit the former action (probably by means of a praescriptio) to the investigation of a specific title, a limitation called causae adjectio. If he was allowed by the praetor to do this and failed in his suit, he could afterwards claim to be owner by a different title. Si quis petat fundum suum esse eo, quod Titius eum sibi tradiderit, si postea alia ex causa petat causa adjecta, non debet summoveri exceptione, Dig. 44, 2, 11, 2. ‘A plaintiff who loses an action in which he claimed property in land on the ground of delivery of possession, is not barred by exception from bringing another real action, expressly limited, like the former, to a specific title.’

[284825] Directly extinctive (ipso jure) consumption of a right of action vanished with the formulary system, and in Justinian’s time the averment of Res judicata is only found under the form of Exceptio or a Counteractive plea. Indeed, when the judex of the republican period ceased to be commissioned to hear and determine causes, one of the conditions of Judicium legitimum, of which such consumption was a consequence (unus judex, § 107), was always of necessity wanting.

[285293] But this was not the only change: the consumption of a right of action by the operation of Res in judicium deducta, whether as a directly extinctive (ipso jure) or a counteractive plea (ope exceptionis); in other words, necessary Novation operated by Litis contestatio, was also abrogated and is not to be found in the statute-book of Justinian. Even the operation of Res judicata, so far as it was governed by the same rules as Res in judicium deducta and merely indicated by its name a later stage of the proceedings (sententia lata), may also be said to have been abolished. The rules, that is to say, which governed the transformed Exceptio rei judicatae, as it prevailed in the time of Justinian, were much more rational and flexible than the hard-and-fast doctrine of Necessary novation, whether by Litis contestatio or by Sententia lata, which prevailed in the time of Statute-process, § 108, and apparently survived to the days of Gaius. In determining whether the exceptio rei judicatae should be allowed to put a stop to the maintenance of a new action, the judge in Justinian’s time would have to consider whether the second action raised the same question between the same parties as the first action; in other words, whether the reasons why the plaintiff’s first action was dismissed were still applicable in the case of the second action. If they were, the exceptio would prevail, if not, if e. g. the plaintiff’s first action had been dismissed in consequence of Plus petitio or some dilatory plea or by consumption of process (duration of suit for eighteen months, or termination of praetorship), he was no longer held to have eternally forfeited his claim: but suitors were merely restrained, in accordance with the real object of the institution, from harassing their opponents with renewed litigation on the precise questions that had once been adequately decided. The operation of the plea was not less powerful nor less extensive, but made more completely conformable to equity. Savigny, §§ 280-301.

[287315] § 110. Quo loco admonendi sumus eas quidem actiones quae ex lege senatusue consultis proficiscuntur perpetuo solere praetorem accommodare, eas uero quae ex propria ipsius iurisdictione pendent plerum|que intra annum dare.

[287538] Inst. 4, 12, pr.

[287556] § 111. Aliquando tamen—|imitatur ius legitimum: quales sunt eae, quas bonorum possessoribus ceterisque qui heredis loco sunt accommodat. furti quoque manifesti actio quamuis ex ipsius praetoris iurisdictione proficiscatur, perpetuo datur; et merito, cum pro capitali poena pecuniaria constituta sit.

[287857] Inst. l. c.

[287870] § 112. Non omnes actiones, quae in aliquem aut ipso iure conpetunt aut a praetore dantur, etiam in heredem aeque conpetunt aut dari solent. est enim certissima iuris regula, ex maleficiis poenales actiones in heredem nec conpetere nec dari solere, ueluti furti, ui bonorum raptorum, iniuriarum, damni iniuriae. sed heredibus huius modi actiones conpetunt nec denegantur, excepta iniuriarum actione et si qua alia similis inueniatur actio.

[288310] Inst. 4, 12. 1.

[288327] § 113. Aliquando tamen 〈etiam〉 ex contractu actio neque heredi neque in heredem conpetit; nam adstipulatoris heres non habet actionem, et sponsoris et fidepromissoris heres non tenetur.

[288514] Inst. l. c.

[288527] Here we ought to take notice that actions founded on a statute (lex) or a senatusconsultum are granted by the praetor after any length of time has elapsed, but those founded on the praetor’s own jurisdiction are usually only granted within a year from their having arisen.

[288801] But sometimes the praetor follows the pattern of civil law and makes his actions perpetual; such are the actions which he grants to the praetorian successor (bonorum possessor) and to other persons who are in the position of an heir (heres) (§ 35). So for theft detected in the commission (furti manifesti), the action, though praetorian, is perpetual; and properly so, the pecuniary penalty having been instituted in the place of capital punishment.

[289253] It is not always the case that the actions, whether civil or praetorian, which lie against a man lie also against his heir, the rule being absolute that penal actions arising from delict, for instance, from theft (actio furti), rapine (vi bonorum raptorum), outrage (injuriarum), unlawful damage (damni injuriae), are not granted against the heir of the delinquent; but the heirs of the injured party are competent to bring, and are not refused, these actions, except in the case of the action for outrage and any similar action if such is to be found.

[289807] § 113. Sometimes, however, even an action upon contract cannot be brought by the heir, nor against the heir; for the heir of the adstipulator has no action, nor does any lie against the heir of the sponsor or fidepromissor.

[290032] Having considered what time may elapse between joinder of issue in an action (litis contestatio) and its termination (sententia lata), Gaius proceeds to inquire what time may elapse between the nativity of a right of action or the event which marks the first moment of the right of action (actio nata) and the exercise of this right or actual commencement of the action. Thus he is here taking notice of the subject which we call the Limitation of actions.

[290490] Originally all civil actions (actiones civiles) were unlimited in duration (actiones perpetuae); afterwards the praetors limited in their edicts the right of bringing most of the new actions which they introduced (actiones praetoriae) to the period of a year from the date of the event on which the action was founded ‘infra annum judicium dabo.’ The aediles limited their actions on account of sale to a still shorter period, viz. to six or twelve months of dies utiles. But the praetorian actions which were framed after the pattern of the civil law were, as we see by the text, § 111, like the civil actions they copied, unlimited, while on the other hand some few civil actions were subject to a limitation, as the Querela Inofficiosi Testamenti, which had to be brought within five years. Those actions which could be brought after any time had elapsed were called on this account actiones perpetuae, as opposed to actiones temporales, which were actions limited in respect of duration. At some uncertain period a limitation was introduced by the provincial governors in suits relating to land, known as praescriptio longi temporis: if plaintiff and defendant were domiciled in the same province, ten years’ possession, accompanied with justus titulus and bona fides on the part of the possessor, entitled the defendant to plead the exceptio temporis, and so to defeat the action of the owner for recovery of possession: twenty years’ possession was required if plaintiff and defendant were domiciled in different provinces. In later times, indeed, as we noticed when we were dealing with the subject of usucapion, such possession constituted not simply a limitation of the owner’s action, that is, afforded a good defence against his action, but operated like usucapion; that is, transferred the ownership to the possessor. Constantine introduced a forty years’ limitation of a real action or prescription: that is, ordained that an owner should lose his right of action after forty years’ possession, Cod. 7, 39, 2, pr. The emperors Honorius and Theodosius II, a. d. 424, made all actions, not otherwise limited, subject to a limitation of thirty or in some exceptional cases forty years, so that from this time actio perpetua no longer meant an action which was unlimited, but one which could be maintained at any time within this long period. See 2 §§ 40-61, comm., 4 § 131, comm.

[292881] Justinian made longi temporis praescriptio, or possessio, that is, continuous possession for ten or twenty years, subject to the conditions of usucapion, the universal mode of acquiring ownership in land by operation of time; and added a second form called longissimi temporis praescriptio, Cod. 7, 39, 8. But we are only concerned with praescriptio here in its original form as a limitation of the owner’s right of action; as a mode of acquiring ownership it belongs to another part of this treatise. And even as a limitation of action such prescription has this peculiarity, that it cannot be pleaded generally, but only by a defendant, who has been in possession of the property in question for the prescribed period. Thus being a defence founded on possession, and not simply on the owner’s omission to bring his action, it comes to a great extent under the category of substantive law.

[293773] Longi temporis praescriptio was applicable as a defence not only to actions of an owner claiming possession of his property, but also to those relating to the existence of a servitude, and though a lex Scribonia is said to have done away with the usucapion of servitudes, in later imperial law praescriptio became a mode of acquiring servitudes, as it was of acquiring ownership. In the thirteenth century the canon law required as a condition both of acquisitive and of extinctive prescription, in all cases brought for restitution of possession, continued bona fides (not merely bona fides in the inception, as the civil law required for usucapion) on the part of the possessor. This principle applied to the defendant in all real actions and in various personal actions, viz. commodati, depositi, locati, pigneraticia, the latter being the action whereby a person who had given over his property in pledge to his creditors sued on the contract for its restitution. Accordingly, by canon law, the debitor rei alienae, e. g. rei commodatae, as opposed to the debitor rei propriae, e. g. pecuniae creditae, had neither the right of acquisitive nor of extinctive prescription in the absence of continued bona fides. Savigny, § 244.

[295005] In every limitation of an action or prescription, whether of longer or shorter duration, two points have to be fixed: the moment at which the time of prescription begins to run and the moment at which it is terminated. I proceed to the consideration of this problem.

[295273] The date of the Nativity of a right of action (actio nata), or the moment from which prescription begins to run, is in Real actions the moment when a Real right is violated; e. g. the moment when the defendant takes unpermitted possession of a thing of which the plaintiff is proprietor; or when a hirer or borrower converts detention into possession by beginning to possess in his own name and not in the name of the proprietor.

[295704] In Personal action on delict prescription begins to run from the moment of the delict; for at this moment the sanctioning right of the plaintiff to recover the penalty is complete.

[295886] Similarly in Quasi-contracts: prescription of tutelae judicium begins to run from the end of the guardianship when the tutor’s default is established: that of condictio indebiti from the date of the mistaken payment.

[296104] In actions on Contract, according to most writers including Savigny, prescription similarly begins to run from the moment at which the contract is violated, i. e. from the inception of the creditor’s sanctioning right. According to Vangerow, § 147, the running of prescription does not always wait for the violation of the creditor’s primary right, or a breach of the contract by the debtor. If a term for performance is fixed, then indeed prescription will begin to run from the expiration of the term, i. e. from the violation of the plaintiff’s primary right, Cod. 7, 39, 7, 4: but whenever no term is prefixed, prescription begins not, as Savigny holds, from the creditor’s demand of performance, but from the completion of the contract; i. e. contemporaneously with the origin of the primary right. It precedes any violation of the plaintiff’s right, unless we assume (what is absurd) that the default of instantaneous performance is such a violation. Savigny, § 240.

[297078] Savigny would except from the rule those contracts which, like mutuum, depositum, commodatum and the like, essentially and in their nature contemplate a certain delay in performance. In such contracts he holds that prescription begins not from the completion of the contract, but from the demand of performance.

[297391] It seems paradoxical to maintain that for the purposes of prescription the right of action precedes the existence of a wrong: but Vangerow’s doctrine seems to be confirmed by the Digest: Est . . . scriptum eum qui rem deposuit, statim posse depositi actione agere: hoc enim ipso dolo facere eum qui suscepit, quod reposcenti rem non reddat, Dig. 16, 3, 1, 22; from which it appears that the action is equivalent to a demand. Similarly we read in the Institutes of Justinian, 3, 15, 2 [Ex stipulatione pura] confestim peti potest. Indeed it would be strange, as Vangerow observes, if the neglect of a creditor or his successor to demand repayment for 100 years adjourned the inception of prescription for all that period. Cf. Windscheid, 1 § 107, n. 5.

[298144] It is clear that the Nativity of an action is not to be identified with Mora, but will often be an earlier occurrence. Mora, which in respect of interest and liability for loss is attended with serious consequences to a defendant (whereas praescriptio is adverse to the plaintiff), does not arise before one of two events; either the expiration of the term prefixed for payment, or the debtor’s refusal to comply with the creditor’s demand, 2 § 280, comm. The demand of the creditor is necessary to disprove the presumption that the delay of payment was by his indulgence: no such condition, according to Vangerow’s doctrine, delays the nativity of a right of action.

[298813] The other limit of Prescription, or the event by which it is broken (interruptio), is any recognition of a right by the defendant or the institution of a suit by the plaintiff. The institution of a suit was in earlier times identified with Litis contestatio: but in the latest period, as this stage of procedure could be delayed by the arts of the defendant, it was necessary to fix some other point, with which this and the other effects of Litis contestatio should be connected. Savigny, § 278. Accordingly Citation, awarded by the judge in response to the libellus of the plaintiff and served upon the defendant (insinuatio, conventio) by a public officer, was deemed to be the moment at which an action commences, and prescription is interrupted, or usucapion is revocable. Interruptio per conventionem introducta, Cod. 7, 39, 7, 5. Qui obnoxium suum in judicium clamaverit et libellum conventionis ei transmiserit . . . . videri jus suum omne eum in judicium deduxisse et esse interrupta temporum curricula, Cod. 7, 40, 3.

[299842] The opinion of Savigny that prescription in later Roman law was interrupted or put a stop to in all actions alike by Citation is the generally received one, though Vangerow and others maintain that this only applies to actiones perpetuae, not to actiones temporales, the old rule as to litis contestatio still surviving according to them in respect of the latter. Savigny refuses to accept such limitation, and explains (§ 242, III) how this erroneous view (as he considers it) arose. The passages from the older writers mentioning litis contestatio in this connexion all refer to actiones temporales, for the simple reason that none other were prescriptible in the classical law, but it does not follow that this difference between the two kinds of action was maintained, when all actions became prescriptible; indeed, if there was to be any difference, the interruption of actiones temporales ought to have been made easier than that of actiones perpetuae, and not, as according to Vangerow’s view it would be, more difficult. The two passages in the Digest which seem to support Vangerow, Dig. 12, 2, 9, 3, Dig. 27, 7, 8, 1, the compilers forgot to alter, so as to bring them into accordance with existing law. (Windscheid, 1 § 108, n. 4.)

[301086] We must distinguish between the interruption and the mere suspension, dormancy, or stay, of prescription. When prescription is interrupted (for instance, by acknowledgment of the debt) the already elapsed period of inactivity on the part of the plaintiff is cancelled, and the whole prescription must recommence from the date of the interruption. When prescription is suspended, if such suspension takes place after prescription has begun to run, the period which has elapsed is not invalidated but is added to the period which follows the removal of the obstacle which caused the suspension. Suspension, as expressed in the modern maxim: Agere non valenti non currit praescriptio, is produced by some inability of the plaintiff to sue: but this rule is not generally applicable, when the action can be carried on by an agent, as in the case of a lunatic; though suspension is produced by the party entitled being impubes or by his minority, except in the prescription of thirty years: it is also produced by the obstacles recognized in the rules of tempus utile, 2 § 165, comm., and by the beneficium deliberandi accorded to the heir, 2 § 162, comm. By the ordinance de tigno injuncto in the Twelve Tables the right of the co-owner of building materials to sue for them was suspended so long as they formed part of a building, Inst. 2, 1, 7, 10.

[302434] Exception had sometimes a stronger, sometimes a weaker, operation: the stronger effect is the extinction of both civilis and naturalis obligatio. Such is the effect of the exceptio Sc. Vellaeani, 3 §§ 110-127, comm. The weaker operation is a bar to civilis obligatio, but leaves naturalis obligatio unimpeded and is instanced by exceptio Sc. Macedoniani, 3 §§ 90, 91, comm. Naturalis obligatio, as we have already mentioned, 3 §§ 88, 89, comm., besides the negative feature that it is not a ground to support an action may have other important consequences: it excludes indebiti condictio in the event of payment by mistake, and it may be a ground to support compensatio, novatio, pignus, fidejussio, constitutum. Let us examine whether prescription or Exceptio temporalis had the weaker or the stronger operation.

[303250] We must distinguish between Real and Personal actions.

[303306] The effect of the mere limitation of a real action (e. g. vindicatio) is that the right of the original owner continues, but is not ground to support an action against the possessor or his successor. If the thing passes into the possession of a stranger, then the original owner can recover it from him by vindicatio: and if it comes by lawful means into the possession of the original owner, the former possessor cannot recover it from him by vindicatio, Cod. 7, 39, 8, 1. In the event of bona fides there could under the law of Justinian after thirty or forty years be no question of mere limitation; because then, as we have seen, the very jus of the original owner would have been extinguished. In real actions, then, limitation does not entirely deprive the owner of his right, though here of course there is no obligatio naturalis.

[304145] The effect of prescription or limitation in personal actions is controverted. Savigny holds that the stronger effect is confined to exceptions founded on jus naturale; and that prescription being, as shown by its arbitrary numerical character, an institution of jus civile, can only have the weaker operation, i. e. leaves untouched the obligatio naturalis, § 249. Vangerow, however, seems to show conclusively, § 151, that this doctrine is not tenable. Many passages of the Digest show that in temporal actions prescription of right to sue had the stronger operation, excluding fidejussio, Dig. 46, 1, 37, and constitutum, Dig. 13, 5, 18, 1, that is not regarding a prescribed debt as a subsisting debt for the purpose of being secured by way of suretyship, though if it had been a natural obligation, it could have been thus secured, and admitting condictio indebiti, Dig. 46, 8, 25, that is if a prescribed debt was paid to the creditor by mistake, the debtor could claim repayment, which if a natural obligation remained after the time of limitation had passed, he could not have done: and there is no reason why its operation should not be equally strong in perpetual actions. Indeed the very object of prescription, the setting of some limit to the duration of uncertainty, would be defeated if a creditor were allowed to enforce by Compensation a claim that for an indefinite period he had not attempted to enforce by action. Prescription, then, in all personal actions has the stronger operation. (English law seems to differ, at least so far as it recognizes a debt made irrecoverable by the statute of limitations as a sufficient consideration to give legal force to the debtor’s promise to pay: for, in the absence of all legal obligation, a mere moral obligation would admittedly not suffice to bind the debtor before the tribunals. Also a lien, or right to detain goods till a debt is satisfied, exists after the remedy by action is barred by the Statute of Limitations.)

[306131] Has prescription the same effect upon the grounds of defence (Exceptions) that it has upon the grounds of attack (Actions): can there be temporis Replicatio as well as temporis Exceptio? This depends upon the nature of the exception. In the case of some exceptions there are corresponding actions, which other exceptions are without. An instance of the latter class is the exceptio rei judicatae when judgment in a vindicatio is given in favour of the possessor. This merely denies the right of the plaintiff without affirming the right of the defendant, and therefore cannot be used by the defendant as a ground of action: but it may be employed by the defendant as a means of defence against the plaintiff or his successor after any lapse of years.

[306883] An instance of exception having a corresponding action is exceptio metus, which belongs to a defendant who may, if he chooses, be a plaintiff in an actio quod metus causa. So, too, there is the exceptio doli and the actio doli.

[307112] Savigny holds, § 249, that such exceptions are imprescriptible; but the better opinion seems to be that they have the same duration as the right of action (in the words of the French jurists: Tant dure l’action, tant dure l’exception): for the reason alleged for making exceptions imprescriptible: Is cum quo agitur non habet potestatem quando conveniatur, Dig. 44, 4, 5, 6, the inability of the person armed with the exception to fix when the matter shall be litigated, is inapplicable when the same person is also armed with a right of action. Vangerow, l. c.

[307675] The rules prescribed by the praetor for the duration of actions seem to have been as follows; purely restorative or remedial actions (quae rei persecutionem habent) i. e. actions where there is neither gain for the plaintiff nor loss for the defendant, but the patrimony of each is left at its original level, § 7, are generally speaking perpetual; that is to say, according to the change in the law made subsequently to the time of Gaius, are prescribed in thirty years. Cf. Dig. 44, 7, 35 In honorariis actionibus sic esse definiendum Cassius ait, ut quae rei persecutionem habeant, hae etiam post annum darentur, ceterae intra annum. Honorariae autem, quae post annum non dantur, nec in heredem dandae sunt, ut tamen lucrum ei extorqueatur, sicut fit in actione doli et interdicto unde vi et similibus. Penal actions given by the praetor (quibus poenam persequimur), using the word in a wide sense to include both those actions, where there is no gain to the plaintiff but possibly a loss to the defendant, as well as those where if judgment passes for the plaintiff there is enrichment for the plaintiff and impoverishment for the defendant, are annual. But the actio furti manifesti, though a praetorian action, was perpetual, for the reason given by Gaius in § 111.

[308948] The actio rerum amotarum, being brought for the purpose of restitution, was perpetual. Cf. Dig. 35, 2, 21, 5 Haec actio licet ex delicto nascatur, tamen rei persecutionem continet et ideo non anno finitur, sicut et condictio furtiva.

[309183] The actio doli mali, if brought for complete indemnification, was annual: but if the damages were limited to the amount gained by the defendant, in which case the action was rei persecutoria, it was perpetual, Dig. 4, 3, 28.

[309409] When a right of action was limited to a year, this was an annus utilis, that is, a year of dies utiles, of days open to jurisdiction, and on which the plaintiff was not hindered by any insurmountable obstacle, such as absence of plaintiff or defendant, illness of plaintiff and inability to appoint a procurator, Dig. 44, 3, 1. An annus utilis, though nominally a year, might really be a much longer period. Where a right of action lasted beyond a year, every day was counted (tempus continuum), 2 § 173. From the indefinite duration of annus utilis it is clear that the suggestion, Inst. 4, 12, pr., of a connexion between the annus of prescription and the annus of the praetorship is purely fanciful.

[310113] The transmission of an action to the heirs of the parties is either active transmission, i. e. transmission to the heir of the party having a right of action, or passive transmission, i. e. transmission of liability to the heir of the party subject to an action.

[310377] The general rule relating to transmission is, that all actions are transmissible, both actively, that is, to the heirs of the party having a right of action, and passively, that is, to the heirs of the party subject to an action.

[310608] The exceptions are that (1) as to active transmission Vindictive actions (of which the type is actio injuriarum), i. e. actions brought to avenge wrong to the feelings rather than to repair wrong to the property, are not transmitted to the heirs of the party having a right of action; and that (2) as to passive transmission, delictal actions are only transmitted against the heirs of the party subject to an action so far as the inheritance has been enriched by his wrong.

[311083] But condictio furtiva lies against the heres of the defendant for the whole amount of loss caused by the furtum, which some writers explain by saying that, although this action is occasioned by delict, it is not deemed to be delictal or penal, but purely restorative (rei persecutoria). Condictio furtiva, however, is not only occasioned by delict, but gives rise to penal consequences, should the damages exceed the amount of profit which the defendant has derived from the delict. The fact that these penal consequences attach not only to the fur himself but also to his heir can only be regarded as an anomaly, whether we look on the action as a delictal one, or as a species of condictio sine causa. Cf. Dernburg, Pand. 3 § 139, Windscheid, Pand. 2 § 453.

[311844] Penal actions, either when their object is reparation for the injury or when it is the recovery of a penalty, when once brought, that is, when they have once reached the stage of litis contestatio, become capable of both active and passive transmission: Poenales autem actiones, si ab ipsis principalibus personis fuerint contestatae, et heredibus dantur et contra heredes transeunt, Inst. 4, 12, 1. In modern systems of law based on the Roman, the heir is as a rule liable on account of the delicts of the deceased to the extent of the property to which he has succeeded, and not simply for the amount the inheritance has been enriched by the wrong.

[312496] English law was made, as we have seen, by statute, more favourable than Roman law to the plaintiff in actions ex delicto in respect of the passive transmission of the remedy.

[312672] The executors of a testator and administrators of an intestate have the same remedy for injury to the personal property of the deceased as he would have had in his lifetime, 4 Edw. III, c. 7; 25 Edw. III, st. 5, c. 5.

[312891] For an injury committed against his real property within six months of his death, they may bring an action within one year after his death. And for an injury to either real or personal property committed within six months before the death of the wrong-doer, an action may be brought against his executors or administrators within six months after they have taken on themselves administration, 3 & 4 Will. IV, c. 42. (Cf. Pollock, Law of Torts, pp. 59, 60, 4th ed.)

[313357] Under Justinian, when the Adstipulator, Sponsor, and Fidepromissor had disappeared, all actions founded on contract were passively transmissible in solidum against the heirs of the defendant; and it was apparently a mere inadvertence of Tribonian to repeat, Inst. 4, 12, 1, the words of Gaius, § 113, which contemplate the possibility that an action founded on contract should be incapable of passive transmission. (For another explanation of this passage see the note to it in Moyle’s Inst.)

[313851] § 114. Superest ut dispiciamus, si ante rem iudicatam is cum quo agitur post acceptum iudicium satisfaciat actori, quid officio iudicis conueniat, utrum absoluere, an ideo potius damnare, quia iudicii accipiendi tempore in ea causa fuerit, ut damnari debeat. nostri praeceptores absoluere eum debere existimant, nec interesse cuius generis sit iudicium; et hoc est quod uulgo dicitur Sabino et Cassio placere omni|a iudicia absolutoria esse. —|— de bonae fidei iudiciis autem idem sentiunt, quia in eiusmo|di iudiciis liberum est officium iudicis. tantumdem | et de in rem actionibus putant, quia formulae uer|bis id ipsum exprimatur —|—|quibus —|— petentur et ad —|— interdum enim —|—|—|— sunt etiam | in personam tales actiones in quibus exprimitur —|—| actori qu —|—|—| paratus ad actoris —|—|—|actum fuerit.

[314664] Inst. 4, 12, 2.

[314681] We next inquire whether, if the defendant before judgment, but after the parties have joined issue, satisfies the plaintiff, the judex has power to absolve him, or must condemn him, because he was liable to condemnation when the formula was delivered. The authorities of my school hold that he should be absolved without distinction of the kind of action; and hence the common saying that according to Sabinus and Cassius all actions involve free power of absolution. The other school agree in respect of actions bonae fidei, where the judex has more discretion, and of real actions because there is an express provision to this effect in the terms of the formula: (as also in respect of actiones arbitrariae in personam, since they likewise contain an express provision in their formula that the judex is not to condemn if the defendant satisfies the plaintiff; but not in respect of actions stricti juris).

[315591] Respecting the power of the judex to absolve the defendant in the above circumstances, Justinian confirmed the opinion of the Sabinians, Inst. 4, 12, 2.

[315745] The principle, Omnia judicia esse absolutoria, indicates an exception to the effects of Litis contestatio. The motive of the effects ascribed to Litis contestatio is in general to avert from the plaintiff the injurious consequences of the protracted duration of a trial. Accordingly if judgment passed in his favour he was put into the position he would have occupied if judgment had immediately followed on Litis contestatio. If this rule had been universal no event supervening on Litis contestatio could have extinguished the plaintiff’s right to have judgment in his favour, which in some cases would have been unjust to the defendant, but the free discretion given to the judex by the formula of a bonae fidei action enabled him to take into account any circumstances arising after joinder of issue which would entitle the defendant to absolution, if admissible.

[316614] In actions stricti juris it seems at first to have been held that what would have been an adequate ground for the extinction of the plaintiff’s claim if it had happened before Litis contestatio, e. g. the purely casual destruction of the subject of litigation, was ineffectual to save the defendant from condemnation if it happened after Litis contestatio. Finally, however, the doctrine prevailed that, in the absence of Mora, such an event was effectual for the absolution of the defendant, even when it occurred after Litis contestatio. See 3 § 180, comm.

[317174] In real actions, where the condemnation or absolution of the defendant was left to the arbitrium of the judge, as in the formula petitoria, the purely casual destruction of an object in the hands of a bona fide possessor, even when it happened after joinder of issue, produced the absolution of the defendant, on the ground that impossibilium non est obligatio. It is to be observed, however, that the circumstances arising subsequent to Litis contestatio effectual for the absolution of the defendant in a real action are limited to those which destroy the Obligation engendered by Litis contestatio. The defendant, that is to say, is subject to condemnation in damages in spite of his having acquired the plaintiff’s property by usucapion completed after Litis contestatio (for, as we have seen, usucapion was not interrupted by Litis contestatio), in spite of the extinction of the plaintiff’s servitude by non-usus completed after the same date, in spite similarly of casual destruction of the subject in his hands, he being mala fide possessor or after mora, and in spite of destruction by his culpa, he being bona fide possessor.

[318311] Subject to this limitation, the rule was universal: omnia judicia esse absolutoria: i. e. all classes of action, real as well as personal, stricti juris as well as bonae fidei, whatever the original right of the plaintiff, may terminate by a judgment in favour of the defendant in consequence of some event (casual destruction of the subject, voluntary restitution by the defendant, &c.) subsequent to Litis contestatio. Cf. Vangerow, § 160.

[318754] The words in the text ‘quia formulae verbis id ipsum exprimatur’ refer to the direction to the judex in the formula petitoria not to condemn the defendant if he restores the thing, which is the object of the action, to the plaintiff. Compare what has been stated respecting actiones Arbitrariae, § 47, comm.

[319063] § 115. Sequitur ut de exceptionibus dispiciamus.

[319113] Inst. 4, 13, pr.

[319131] § 116. Conparatae sunt autem exceptiones defendendorum eorum gratia cum quibus agitur. saepe enim accidit, ut quis iure ciuili teneatur, sed iniquum sit eum iudicio condemnari.

[319309] Inst. l. c.

[319322] § 116 a. Veluti 〈si〉 stipulatus sim a te pecuniam tamquam credendi causa numeraturus, nec numerauerim; nam eam pecuniam a te peti posse certum est, dare enim te oportet, cum ex stipulatu teneris; sed quia iniquum est te eo nomine condemnari, placet per exceptionem doli mali te defendi debere.

[319617] Inst. 4, 13, 1.

[319634] § 116 b. Item si pactus fuero tecum, ne id quod mihi debeas a te petam, nihilo minus [id ipsum] a te petere possum dari mihi oportere, quia obligatio pacto conuento non tollitur; sed placet debere me petentem per exceptionem pacti conuenti repelli.

[319884] Inst. 4, 13, 3.

[319901] § 117. In his quoque actionibus quae 〈non〉 in personam sunt exceptiones locum habent. ueluti si metu me coegeris aut dolo induxeris, ut tibi rem aliquam mancipio darem; nam si eam rem a me petas, datur mihi exceptio, per quam, si metus causa te fecisse uel dolo malo arguero, repelleris.

[320190] § 117 a. Item si fundum litigiosum sciens a non possidente emeris eumque a possidente petas, opponitur tibi exceptio, per quam omni modo summoueris.

[320340] § 118. Exceptiones autem alias in edicto praetor habet propositas, alias causa cognita accommodat. quae omnes uel ex legibus uel ex his quae legis uicem optinent, substantiam capiunt, uel ex iurisdictione praetoris proditae sunt.

[320571] Inst. 4, 13, 7.

[320588] § 119. Omnes autem exceptiones in contrarium concipiuntur, quam adfirmat is cum quo agitur. nam si uerbi gratia reus dolo malo aliquid actorem facere dicat, qui forte pecuniam petit quam non numerauit, sic exceptio concipitur si in ea re nihil dolo malo a. agerii factvm sit neqve fiat: item si dicat contra pactionem pecuniam peti, ita concipitur exceptio si inter a. agerivm et n. negidivm non convenit, ne ea pecvnia peteretvr; et denique in ceteris causis similiter concipi solet; ideo scilicet quia omnis exceptio obicitur quidem a reo, sed ita formulae inseritur, utcondicionalem faciat condemnationem, id est ne aliter iudex eum cum quo agitur condemnet, quam si nihil in ea re qua de agitur dolo actoris factum sit; item ne aliter iudex eum condemnet, quam si nullum pactum conuentum de non petenda pecunia factum fuerit.

[321419] § 120. Dicuntur autem exceptiones aut peremptoriae aut dilatoriae.

[321487] Inst. 4, 13, 8.

[321504] § 121. Peremptoriae sunt quae perpetuo ualent nec euitari possunt, ueluti quod metus causa aut dolo malo, aut quod contra legem senatusue consultum factum est, aut quod res iudicata est uel in iudicium deducta est, item pacti conuenti quod factum est, ne omnino pecunia peteretur.

[321786] Inst. 4, 13, 9.

[321803] § 122. Dilatoriae sunt exceptiones quae ad tempus ualent, ueluti illius pacti conuenti quod factum est uerbi gratia, ne intra quinquennium peteretur; finito enim eo tempore non habet locum exceptio. cui similis exceptio est litis diuiduae et rei residuae. nam si quis partem rei petierit et intra eiusdem praeturam reliquam partem petat, hac exceptione summouetur quae appellatur litis diuiduae; item si is, qui cum eodem plures lites habebat, de quibusdam egerit, de quibusdam distulerit, ut ad alios iudices eant, si intra eiusdem praeturam de his quas distulerit, agat, per hanc exceptionem quae appellatur rei residuae summouetur.

[322439] Inst. 4, 13, 10.

[322457] § 123. Obseruandum est autem ei cui dilatoria obicitur exceptio, ut differat actionem; alioquin si obiecta exceptione egerit, rem perdit; non enim post illud tempus, quo integra re 〈eam〉 euitare poterat, adhuc ei potestas agendi superest re in iudicium deducta et per exceptionem perempta.

[322748] Inst. l. c.

[322761] § 124. Non solum autem ex tempore, sed etiam ex persona dilatoriae exceptiones intelleguntur, quales sunt cognitoriae: ueluti si is qui per edictum cognitorem dare non potest per cognitorem agat, uel dandi quidem cognitoris ius habeat, sed eum det cui non licet cognituram suscipere. nam si obiciatur exceptio cognitoria, si ipse talis erit, ut ei non liceat cognitorem dare, ipse agere potest; si uero cognitori non liceat cognituram suscipere, per alium cognitorem aut per semet ipsum liberam habet agendi potestatem, et tam hoc quam illo modo euitare 〈potest〉 exceptionem; quodsi dissimulauerit eam et per cognitorem egerit, rem perdit.

[323402] Inst. 4, 13, 11.

[323420] § 125. Sed peremptoria quidem exceptione si reus per errorem non fuerit usus, in integrum restituitur adiciendae exceptionis gratia; dilatoria uero si non fuerit usus, an in integrum restituatur, quaeritur.

[323628] § 126. Interdum euenit, ut exceptio, quae prima facie iusta uideatur, inique noceat actori. quod cum accidat, alia adiectione opus est adiuuandi actoris gratia; quae adiectio replicatio uocatur, quia per eam replicatur atque resoluitur uis exceptionis. nam si uerbi gratia pactus sum tecum, ne pecuniam quam mihi debes a te peterem, deinde postea in coutrarium pacti sumus, id est ut petere mihi liceat, et, si agam tecum, excipias tu, ut ita demum mihi condemneris, si non convenerit, ne eam pecvniam peterem, nocet mihi exceptio pacti conuenti; namque nihilo minus hoc uerum manet, etiamsi postea in contrarium pacti sumus; sed quia iniquum est me excludi exceptione, replicatio mihi datur ex posteriore pacto hoc modo si non postea convenit, vt mihi eam pecvniam petere liceret.

[324411] Inst. 4, 14, pr.

[324429] § 126 a. Item si argentarius pretium rei quae in auctionem uenerit persequatur, obicitur ei exceptio, ut ita demum emptor damnetur, si ei res quam emerit, tradita est; et est iusta exceptio; sed si in auctione praedictum est, ne ante emptori 〈res〉 traderetur, quam si pretium soluerit, replicatione tali argentarius adiuuatur avt si praedictvm est, ne aliter emptori res traderetvr, qvam si pretivm emptor solverit.

[324846] § 127. Interdum autem euenit, ut rursus replicatio, quae prima facie iusta sit, inique reo noceat. quod cum accidat, adiectione opus est adiuuandi rei gratia, quae duplicatio uocatur.

[325031] Inst. 4, 14, 1.

[325048] § 128. Et si rursus ea prima facie iusta uideatur, sed propter aliquam causam inique actori noceat, rursus adiectione opus est qua actor adiuuetur, quae dicitur triplicatio.

[325223] Inst. 4, 14, 3.

[325240] § 129. Quarum omnium adiectionum usum interdum etiam ulterius quam diximus uarietas negotiorum introduxit.

[325348] § 130. Videamus etiam de praescriptionibus quae receptae sunt pro actore.

[325423] § 131. Saepe enim ex una eademque obligatione aliquid iam praestari oportet, aliquid in futura praestatione est: ueluti cum in singulos annos uel menses certam pecuniam stipulati fuerimus; nam finitis quibusdam annis aut mensibus huius quidem temporis pecuniam praestari oportet, futurorum autem annorum sane quidem obligatio contracta intellegitur, praestatio uero adhuc nulla est. si ergo uelimus id quidem quod praestari oportet petere et in iudicium deducere, futuram uero obligationis praestationem in integro relinquere, necesse est ut cum hac praescriptione agamus ea res agatvr cvivs rei dies fvit; alioquin si sine hac praescriptione egerimus, ea scilicet formula qua incertum petimus, cuius intentio his uerbis concepta est qvidqvid paret n. negidivm a. agerio dare facere oportere, totam obligationem, id est etiam futuram in hoc iudicium deducimus, et quae ante tem|pus obligatio—|—|.

[326321] § 131 a. Item si uerbi gratia ex empto agamus, ut nobis fundus mancipio detur, debemus hoc modo praescribere ea res agatvr de fvndo mancipando, ut postea, si ueli|mus uacuam possessionem nobis tradi, *trad—|—|— sumus, totius illius iuris obligatio illa incer|ta actione qvidqvid ob eam rem n. negidivm a. agerio dare facere oportet, per intentionem consumitur, ut postea nobis agere uolentibus de uacua possessione tradenda nulla supersit actio.

[326768] § 132. Praescriptiones autem appellatas esse ab eo, quod ante formulas praescribuntur, plus quam manifestum est.

[326882] § 133. Sed his quidem temporibus, sicut supra quoque notauimus, omnes praescriptiones ab actore proficiscuntur. olim autem quaedam et pro reo opponebantur, qualis illa erat praescriptio ea res agatvr, si in ea re praeivdicivm hereditati non fiat, quae nunc in speciem exceptionis deducta est et locum habet, cum petitor hereditatis alio genere iudicii praeiudicium hereditati faciat, ueluti | cum singulas res petat; est enim iniquum per unius rei—

[327332] (25 uersus in C legi nequeunt)—|.

[327367] § 134. — intentione formulae det—m est, cui dari oporteat; et sane domino dari oportet quod seruus stipulatur; at in praescriptione de facto quaeritur, quod secundum naturalem significationem uerum esse debet.

[327578] § 135. Quaecumque autem diximus de seruis, cadem de ceteris quoque personis quae nostro iuri subiectae sunt dicta intellegemus.

[327707] § 136. Item admonendi sumus, si cum ipso agamus qui incertum promiserit, ita nobis formulam esse propositam, ut praescriptio inserta sit formulae loco demonstrationis hoc modo ivdex esto. qvod a. agerivs de n. negidio incertvm stipvlatvs est, cvivs rei dies fvit, qvidqvid ob eam rem n. negidivm a. agerio dare facere oportet et reliqua.

[328046] § 137. Si cum sponsore aut fideiussore agatur, praescribi solet in persona quidem sponsoris hoc modo ea res agatvr, qvod a. agerivs de l. titio incertvm stipvlatvs est, qvo nomine n. negidivs sponsor est, cvivs rei dies fvit, in persona uero fideiussoris ea res agatvr, qvod n. negidivs pro l. titio incertvm fide sva esse ivssit, cvivs rei dies fvit; deinde formula subicitur.

[328425] § 115. We have next to examine the nature of Exceptions.

[328483] § 116. Exceptions have been established for the protection of the defendant, as it is often the case that a person is under a liability by the civil law when justice forbids his condemnation.

[328676] § 116 a. If, for instance, I have stipulated that you shall pay me a sum of money, on account of my advancing you the money, and then never advanced it, I can certainly sue you for the money, as by civil law you ought to pay, being bound by the stipulation; but it would be iniquitous that you should be condemned on this account, and therefore it is established that you may defend yourself against my claim by the exception of Fraud (doli).

[329120] § 116 b. Or if I informally agree not to sue you for a debt you owe me, my right to assert in the intentio of the formula that you are bound to pay me nevertheless continues unimpaired, because a mere pact cannot extinguish a civil obligation, but it is held that my action would be defeated by the exception of pact or agreement between the parties.

[329472] Actions which are not exclusively maintainable against one definite person also admit of exceptions; for instance, if by threats of violence or by fraud you compelled or induced me to convey the ownership of a thing to you by mancipation, and you sue me for it by vindication, I am granted an exception of intimidation or fraud, which, if I prove, I defeat your claim.

[329842] § 117 a. Or if you knew land was an object of litigation, and bought it of a person not in possession, when you claim it of a person in possession you are entirely defeated by means of an exception.

[330042] § 118. Some exceptions are published by the praetor in his edict, while others are granted by him after taking special cognizance of the case, while all are either founded on statute or on what is equivalent to statute, or on the praetor’s jurisdiction.