WORK: Dialogues Concerning Two New Sciences  (slug: galileo-galilei-dialogues-concerning-two-new-sci-8eceb2)

CHAPTER: 14-corollary-iii



[0] From this it follows that the times of descent along all chords drawn through either C or D are equal one to another.

[119] It also follows that, if from any one point there be drawn a vertical line and an inclined one along which the time of descent is the same, the inclined line will be a chord of a semicircle of which the vertical line is the diameter.

[354] Moreover the times of descent along inclined planes will be equal when the vertical heights of equal lengths of these planes are to each other as the lengths of the planes themselves; thus it is clear that the times of descent along CA and DA, in the figure just before the last, are equal, provided the vertical height of AB (AB being equal to AD), namely, BE, is to the vertical height DF as CA is to DA.

[762] Please allow me to interrupt the lecture for a moment in order that I may clear up an idea which just occurs to me; one which, if it involve no fallacy, suggests at least a freakish and interesting circumstance, such as often occurs in nature and in the realm of necessary consequences.

[1050] If, from any point fixed in a horizontal plane, straight lines be drawn extending indefinitely in all directions, and if we imagine a point to move along each of these lines with constant speed, all starting from the fixed point at the same instant and moving with equal speeds, then it is clear that all of these moving points will lie upon the circumference of a circle which grows larger and larger, always having the aforesaid fixed point as its center; this circle spreads out in precisely the same manner as the little waves do in the case of a pebble allowed to drop into quiet water, where the impact of the stone starts the motion in all directions, while the point of impact remains the center of these ever-expanding circular waves. But imagine a vertical plane from the highest point of which are drawn lines inclined at every angle and extending indefinitely; imagine also that heavy particles descend along these lines each with a naturally accelerated motion and each with a speed appropriate to the inclination of its line. If these moving particles are always visible, what will be the locus of their positions at any instant? Now the answer to this question surprises me, for I am led by the preceding theorems to believe that these particles will always lie upon the circumference of a single circle, ever increasing in size as the particles recede farther and farther from the point at which their motion began. To be more definite, let A be the fixed point from which are drawn the lines AF and AH inclined at any angle whatsoever. On the perpendicular AB take any two points C and D about which, as centers, circles are described passing through the point A, and cutting the inclined lines at the points F, H, B, E, G, I. From the preceding theorems it is clear that, if particles start, at the same instant, from A and descend along these lines, when one is at E another will be at G and another at I; at a later instant they will be found simultaneously at F, H and B; these, and indeed an infinite number of other particles travelling along an infinite number of different slopes will at successive instants always lie upon a single ever-expanding circle. The two kinds of motion occurring in nature give rise therefore to two infinite series of circles, at once resembling and differing from each other; the one takes its rise in the center of an infinite number of concentric circles; the other has its origin in the contact, at their highest points, of an infinite number of eccentric circles; the former are produced by motions which are equal and uniform; the latter by motions which are neither uniform nor equal among themselves, but which vary from one to another according to the slope.

[3772] Further, if from the two points chosen as origins of motion, we draw lines not only along horizontal and vertical planes but in all directions then just as in the former cases, beginning at a single point ever-expanding circles are produced, so in the latter case an infinite number of spheres are produced about a single point, or rather a single sphere which expands in size without limit; and this in two ways, one with the origin at the center, the other on the surface of the spheres.

[4263] The idea is really beautiful and worthy of the clever mind of Sagredo.

[4335] As for me, I understand in a general way how the two kinds of natural motions give rise to the circles and spheres; and yet as to the production of circles by accelerated motion and its proof, I am not entirely clear; but the fact that one can take the origin of motion either at the inmost center or at the very top of the sphere leads one to think that there may be some great mystery hidden in these true and wonderful results, a mystery related to the creation of the universe (which is said to be spherical in shape), and related also to the seat of the first cause [prima causa].

[4922] I have no hesitation in agreeing with you. But profound considerations of this kind belong to a higher science than ours [a più alte dottrine che le nostre]. We must be satisfied to belong to that class of less worthy workmen who procure from the quarry the marble out of which, later, the gifted sculptor produces those masterpieces which lay hidden in this rough and shapeless exterior. Now, if you please, let us proceed.

[5348] If the heights of two inclined planes are to each other in the same ratio as the squares of their lengths, bodies starting from rest will traverse these planes in equal times.

[5525] Take two planes of different lengths and different inclinations, AE and AB, whose heights are AF and AD: let AF be to AD as the square of AE is to the square of AB; then, I say, that a body, starting from rest at A, will traverse the planes AE and AB in equal times. From the vertical line, draw the horizontal parallel lines EF and DB, the latter cutting AE at G. Since FA:DA=EAmacronsup2:BAmacronsup2, and since FA:DA=EA:GA, it follows that EA:GA=EAmacronsup2:BAmacronsup2. Hence BA is a mean proportional between EA and GA. Now since the time of descent along AB bears to the time along AG the same ratio which AB bears to AG and since also the time of descent along AG is to the time along AE as AG is to a mean proportional between AG and AE, that is, to AB, it follows, ex æquali, that the time along AB is to the time along AE as AB is to itself. Therefore the times are equal.

[6411] q. e. d.

[6421] The times of descent along all inclined planes which intersect one and the same vertical circle, either at its highest or lowest point, are equal to the time of fall along the vertical diameter; for those planes which fall short of this diameter the times are shorter; for planes which cut this diameter, the times are longer.

[6749] Let AB be the vertical diameter of a circle which touches the horizontal plane. It has already been proven that the times of descent along planes drawn from either end, A or B, to the circumference are equal. In order to show that the time of descent along the plane DF which falls short of the diameter is shorter we may draw the plane DB which is both longer and less steeply inclined than DF; whence it follows that the time along DF is less than that along DB and consequently along AB. In like manner, it is shown that the time of descent along CO which cuts the diameter is greater: for it is both longer and less steeply inclined than CB. Hence follows the theorem.

[7423] If from any point on a horizontal line two planes, inclined at any angle, are drawn, and if they are cut by a line which makes with them angles alternately equal to the angles between these planes and the horizontal, then the times required to traverse those portions of the plane cut off by the aforesaid line are equal.

[7746] Through the point C on the horizontal line X, draw two planes CD and CE inclined at any angle whatever: at any point in the line CD lay off the angle CDF equal to the angle XCE; let the line DF cut CE at F so that the angles CDF and CFD are alternately equal to XCE and LCD; then, I say, the times of descent over CD and CF are equal. Now since the angle CDF is equal to the angle XCE by construction, it is evident that the angle CFD must be equal to the angle DCL. For if the common angle DCF be subtracted from the three angles of the triangle CDF, together equal to two right angles, (to which are also equal all the angles which can be described about the point C on the lower side of the line LX) there remain in the triangle two angles, CDF and CFD, equal to the two angles XCE and LCD; but, by hypothesis, the angles CDF and XCE are equal; hence the remaining angle CFD is equal to the remainder DCL. Take CE equal to CD; from the points D and E draw DA and EB perpendicular to the horizontal line XL; and from the point C draw CG perpendicular to DF. Now since the angle CDG is equal to the angle ECB and since DGC and CBE are right angles, it follows that the triangles CDG and CBE are equiangular; consequently DC:CG=CE:EB. But DC is equal to CE, and therefore CG is equal to EB. Since also the angles at C and at A, in the triangle DAC, are equal to the angles at F and G in the triangle CGF, we have CD:DA=FC:CG and, permutando, DC:CF=DA:CG=DA:BE. Thus the ratio of the heights of the equal planes CD and CE is the same as the ratio of the lengths DC and CF. Therefore, by Corollary I of Prop. VI, the times of descent along these planes will be equal.

[9413] q. e. d.

[9423] An alternative proof is the following: Draw FS perpendicular to the horizontal line AS. Then, since the triangle CSF is similar to the triangle DGC, we have SF:FC=GC:CD; and since the triangle CFG is similar to the triangle DCA, we have FC:CG=CD:DA. Hence, ex æquali, SF:CG=CG:DA. Therefore CG is a mean proportional between SF and DA, while DA:SF=DAmacronsup2:CGmacronsup2. Again since the triangle ACD is similar to the triangle CGF, we have DA:DC=GC:CF and, permutando, DA:CG = DC:CF: also DAmacronsup2:CGmacronsup2=DCmacronsup2:CFmacronsup2. But it has been shown that DAmacronsup2:CGmacronsup2=DA:SF. Therefore DCmacronsup2:CFmacronsup2=DA:FS. Hence from the above Prop. VII, since the heights DA and FS of the planes CD and CF are to each other as the squares of the lengths of the planes, it follows that the times of descent along these planes will be equal.

[10291] The times of descent along inclined planes of the same height, but of different slope, are to each other as the lengths of these planes; and this is true whether the motion starts from rest or whether it is preceded by a fall from a constant height.

[10542] Let the paths of descent be along ABC and ABD to the horizontal plane DC so that the falls along BD and BC are preceded by the fall along AB; then, I say, that the time of descent along BD is to the time of descent along BC as the length BD is to BC. Draw the horizontal line AF and extend DB until it cuts this line at F; let FE be a mean proportional between DF and FB; draw EO parallel to DC; then AO will be a mean proportional between CA and AB. If now we represent the time of fall along AB by the length AB, then the time of descent along FB will be represented by the distance FB; so also the time of fall through the entire distance AC will be represented by the mean proportional AO: and for the entire distance FD by FE. Hence the time of fall along the remainder, BC, will be represented by BO, and that along the remainder, BD, by BE; but since BE:BO=BD:BC, it follows, if we allow the bodies to fall first along AB and FB, or, what is the same thing, along the common stretch AB, that the times of descent along BD and BC will be to each other as the lengths BD and BC.

[11627] But we have previously proven that the time of descent, from rest at B, along BD is to the time along BC in the ratio which the length BD bears to BC. Hence the times of descent along different planes of constant height are to each other as the lengths of these planes, whether the motion starts from rest or is preceded by a fall from a constant height.

[11983] q. e. d.

[11993] If a plane be divided into any two parts and if motion along it starts from rest, then the time of descent along the first part is to the time of descent along the remainder as the length of this first part is to the excess of a mean proportional between this first part and the entire length over this first part.

[12309] Let the fall take place, from rest at A, through the entire distance AB which is divided at any point C; also let AF be a mean proportional between the entire length BA and the first part AC; then CF will denote the excess of the mean proportional FA over the first part AC. Now, I say, the time of descent along AC will be to the time of subsequent fall through CB as the length AC is to CF. This is evident, because the time along AC is to the time along the entire distance AB as AC is to the mean proportional AF. Therefore, dividendo, the time along AC will be to the time along the remainder CB as AC is to CF. If we agree to represent the time along AC by the length AC then the time along CB will be represented by CF.

[13037] q. e. d.

[13047] In case the motion is not along the straight line ACB but along the broken line ACD to the horizontal line BD, and if from F we draw the horizontal line FE, it may in like manner be proved that the time along AC is to the time along the inclined line CD as AC is to CE. For the time along AC is to the time along CB as AC is to CF; but it has already been shown that the time along CB, after the fall through the distance AC, is to the time along CD, after descent through the same distance AC, as CB is to CD, or, as CF is to CE; therefore, ex æquali, the time along AC will be to the time along CD as the length AC is to the length CE.

[13686] If a vertical plane and any inclined plane are limited by two horizontals, and if we take mean proportionals between the lengths of these planes and those portions of them which lie between their point of intersection and the upper horizontal, then the time of fall along the perpendicular bears to the time required to traverse the upper part of the perpendicular plus the time required to traverse the lower part of the intersecting plane the same ratio which the entire length of the vertical bears to a length which is the sum of the mean proportional on the vertical plus the excess of the entire length of the inclined plane over its mean proportional.

[14346] Let AF and CD be two horizontal planes limiting the vertical plane AC and the inclined plane DF; let the two last-mentioned planes intersect at B. Let AR be a mean proportional between the entire vertical AC and its upper part AB; and let FS be a mean proportional between FD and its upper part FB. Then, I say, the time of fall along the entire vertical path AC bears to the time of fall along its upper portion AB plus the time of fall along the lower part of the inclined plane, namely, BD, the same ratio which the length AC bears to the mean proportional on the vertical, namely, AR, plus the length SD which is the excess of the entire plane DF over its mean proportional FS.

[15029] Join the points R and S giving a horizontal line RS. Now since the time of fall through the entire distance AC is to the time along the portion AB as CA is to the mean proportional AR it follows that, if we agree to represent the time of fall through AC by the distance AC, the time of fall through the distance AB will be represented by AR; and the time of descent through the remainder, BC, will be represented by RC. But, if the time along AC is taken to be equal to the length AC, then the time along FD will be equal to the distance FD; and we may likewise infer that the time of descent along BD, when preceded by a fall along FB or AB, is numerically equal to the distance DS. Therefore the time required to fall along the path AC is equal to AR plus RC; while the time of descent along the broken line ABD will be equal to AR plus SD.

[15873] q. e. d.

[15883] The same thing is true if, in place of a vertical plane, one takes any other plane, as for instance NO; the method of proof is also the same.

[16026] Given a perpendicular line of limited length, it is required to find a plane having a vertical height equal to the given perpendicular and so inclined that a body, having fallen from rest along the perpendicular, will make its descent along the inclined plane in the same time which it occupied in falling through the given perpendicular.

[16366] Let AB denote the given perpendicular: prolong this line to C making BC equal to AB, and draw the horizontal lines CE and AG. It is required to draw a plane from B to the horizontal line CE such that after a body starting from rest at A has fallen through the distance AB, it will complete its path along this plane in an equal time. Lay off CD equal to BC, and draw the line BD. Construct the line BE equal to the sum of BD and DC; then, I say, BE is the required plane. Prolong EB till it intersects the horizontal AG at G. Let GF be a mean proportional between GE and GB; then EF:FB=EG:GF, and EFmacronsup2:FBmacronsup2=EGmacronsup2:GFmacronsup2=EG:GB. But EG is twice GB; hence the square of EF is twice the square of FB; so also is the square of DB twice the square of BC. Consequently EF:FB=DB:BC, and componendo et permutando, EB:DB + BC=BF:BC. But EB=DB + BC; hence BF=BC=BA. If we agree that the length AB shall represent the time of fall along the line AB, then GB will represent the time of descent along GB, and GF the time along the entire distance GE; therefore BF will represent the time of descent along the difference of these paths, namely, BE, after fall from G or from A.

[17559] q. e. f.

[17569] Given an inclined plane and a perpendicular passing through it, to find a length on the upper part of the perpendicular through which a body will fall from rest in the same time which is required to traverse the inclined plane after fall through the vertical distance just determined.

[17855] Let AC be the inclined plane and DB the perpendicular. It is required to find on the vertical AD a length which will be traversed by a body, falling from rest, in the same time which is needed by the same body to traverse the plane AC after the aforesaid fall. Draw the horizontal CB; lay off AE such that BA + 2AC:AC=AC:AE, and lay off AR such that BA:AC=EA:AR. From R draw RX perpendicular to DB; then, I say, X is the point sought. For since BA + 2AC:AC=AC:AE, it follows, dividendo, that BA + AC:AC=CE:AE. And since BA:AC=EA:AR, we have, componendo, BA + AC:AC=ER:RA. But BA + AC:AC=CE:AE, hence CE:EA=ER:RA=sum of the antecedents: sum of the consequents=CR:RE. Thus RE is seen to be a mean proportional between CR and RA. Moreover since it has been assumed that BA:AC=EA:AR, and since by similar triangles we have BA:AC=XA:AR, it follows that EA:AR=XA:AR. Hence EA and XA are equal. But if we agree that the time of fall through RA shall be represented by the length RA, then the time of fall along RC will be represented by the length RE which is a mean proportional between RA and RC; likewise AE will represent the time of descent along AC after descent along RA or along AX. But the time of fall through XA is represented by the length XA, while RA represents the time through RA. But it has been shown that XA and AE are equal.

[19194] q. e. f.

[19204] Given a vertical line and a plane inclined to it, it is required to find a length on the vertical line below its point of intersection which will be traversed in the same time as the inclined plane, each of these motions having been preceded by a fall through the given vertical line.

[19490] Let AB represent the vertical line and BC the inclined plane; it is required to find a length on the perpendicular below its point of intersection, which after a fall from A will be traversed in the same time which is needed for BC after an identical fall from A. Draw the horizontal AD, intersecting the prolongation of CB at D; let DE be a mean proportional between CD and DB; lay off BF equal to BE; also let AG be a third proportional to BA and AF. Then, I say, BG is the distance which a body, after falling through AB, will traverse in the same time which is needed for the plane BC after the same preliminary fall. For if we assume that the time of fall along AB is represented by AB, then the time for DB will be represented by DB. And since DE is a mean proportional between BD and DC, this same DE will represent the time of descent along the entire distance DC while BE will represent the time required for the difference of these paths, namely, BC, provided in each case the fall is from rest at D or at A. In like manner we may infer that BF represents the time of descent through the distance BG after the same preliminary fall; but BF is equal to BE. Hence the problem is solved.

[20686] If a limited inclined plane and a limited vertical line are drawn from the same point, and if the time required for a body, starting from rest, to traverse each of these is the same, then a body falling from any higher altitude will traverse the inclined plane in less time than is required for the vertical line.

[21001] Let EB be the vertical line and CE the inclined plane, both starting from the common point E, and both traversed in equal times by a body starting from rest at E; extend the vertical line upwards to any point A, from which falling bodies are allowed to start. Then, I say that, after the fall through AE, the inclined plane EC will be traversed in less time than the perpendicular EB. Join CB, draw the horizontal AD, and prolong CE backwards until it meets the latter in D; let DF be a mean proportional between CD and DE while AG is made a mean proportional between BA and AE. Draw FG and DG; then since the times of descent along EC and EB, starting from rest at E, are equal, it follows, according to Corollary II of Proposition VI that the angle at C is a right angle; but the angle at A is also a right angle and the angles at the vertex E are equal; hence the triangles AED and CEB are equiangular and the sides about the equal angles are proportional; hence BE:EC=DE:EA. Consequently the rectangle BE.EA is equal to the rectangle CE.ED; and since the rectangle CD.DE exceeds the rectangle CE.ED by the square of ED, and since the rectangle BA.AE exceeds the rectangle BE.EA by the square of EA, it follows that the excess of the rectangle CD.DE over the rectangle BA.AE, or what is the same thing, the excess of the square of FD over the square of AG, will be equal to the excess of the square of DE over the square of AE, which excess is equal to the square of AD. Therefore FDmacronsup2=GAmacronsup2 + ADmacronsup2=GDmacronsup2. Hence DF is equal to DG, and the angle DGF is equal to the angle DFG while the angle EGF is less than the angle EFG, and the opposite side EF is less than the opposite side EG. If now we agree to represent the time of fall through AE by the length AE, then the time along DE will be represented by DE. And since AG is a mean proportional between BA and AE, it follows that AG will represent the time of fall through the total distance AB, and the difference EG will represent the time of fall, from rest at A, through the difference of path EB.

[23086] In like manner EF represents the time of descent along EC, starting from rest at D or falling from rest at A. But it has been shown that EF is less than EG; hence follows the theorem.