WORK: Lexicon of the Ten Attic Orators  (slug: harpocration-lexicon-of-the-ten-attic-orators-a57385)

CHAPTER: 01-lexicon-of-the-ten-attic-orators



[0] 1. Abaris. A proper name. They say that when a plague had spread over the whole inhabited world, Apollo, in answer to both Greeks and barbarians who consulted his oracle, declared that the Athenian people should make prayers on behalf of all. While many nations were sending embassies to them, Abaris too, they say, came as an envoy from the Hyperboreans. The time of his arrival is disputed: Hippostratus says he came in the fifty-third Olympiad, Pindar in the reign of Croesus king of Lydia, and others in the twenty-first Olympiad.

[536] Abios. Antiphon applied "abios" to a man who possessed a great livelihood ("polys bios"), just as Homer calls a thickly wooded forest "axylon" ("woodless").

[694] Abrokomas. He was a satrap of Artaxerxes king of the Persians.

[758] Agatharchos. Demosthenes mentions him. He was a distinguished painter, son of Eudemus, a Samian by birth.

[865] Temple of Good Fortune (Agathes Tyches Neos). Lycurgus mentions it in his work On the Administration, and others as well.

[988] Agasikles. Hyperides speaks about Agasikles. A speech against him was also written by Dinarchus, in which it is shown that he bribed the people of Halimous wholesale, and that for this reason, though a foreigner, he was enrolled in the citizen body.

[1239] Agoi. This word has many meanings. Isaeus used it in the sense of "to carry off," "to bring into court," and "to drag" in the speech entitled On Behalf of Eumathes, for the Recovery of Freedom, speaking thus: "Xenocles wronged me by taking Eumathes away into freedom, while I was bringing him into slavery, so far as my own share was concerned." And he often used the word in the same sense throughout the speech. Antiphon, in his work On Truth, says "the laws hold great things" ("agoi"), in the sense of "would lead" or "consider." This usage is frequent.

[1798] Agelaion ("of the herd-like"). Isocrates uses it in the Panathenaicus, as if he meant "of the many sophists and wanderers." The metaphor is taken from herd animals, which graze in whatever places they happen upon, or from fish, which are said to feed in shoals and in herds.

[2074] Agenes. Used instead of "childless" in Isaeus, in his speech On the Estate of Menecles.

[2163] Agesilaus. He was, as Xenophon shows, a distinguished and noble king of the Lacedaemonians, who subdued much of Asia, making use of the soldiers who had marched up country with Cyrus.

[2348] Aglauros. The daughter of Cecrops. It is also an epithet of Athena.

[2417] Hagneuete ten polin ("keep the city pure"). Antiphon, in his second speech, uses it instead of "purify."

[2523] Agnias. Isaeus, in the speech Against Eucleides, Concerning a Plot of Land. Androtion, in the fifth book of his Atthis, and Philochorus relate that this man and his fellow envoys were captured and put to death by the Lacedaemonians.

[2757] Agnous. A deme of the tribe Acamantis; the demesman is called Agnousios. Demosthenes, in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon.

[2882] Agnomonos ("without judgment"). Used instead of "thoughtlessly and rashly" by Demosthenes in the Philippics.

[2992] Agoras ("assemblies"). Hyperides, in the speech Against Polyeuctus, Concerning the Decree: "These men often hold assemblies." Perhaps it is used here instead of "meetings." The word has other meanings as well.

[3203] Agoranomoi ("market-officials"). The magistrates who administer the goods for sale in the marketplace; Demosthenes in his speech Against Timocrates. Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Athenians, says that five are chosen by lot for the Piraeus and five for the city.

[3474] Agorasai. Used instead of "to buy" by Hyperides in the Deliac speech.

[3545] Agraphiou ("for unregistered debt"). A kind of suit so called, brought against those who, owing money to the public treasury and being for that reason registered as debtors, then had their names erased before paying. That this is so is taught by Demosthenes or Dinarchus in the speech Against Theocrines, by Lycurgus in the speech Against Aristogiton, and also by Pytheas in his Defense Against the Information.

[3958] Agrious ("savage men"). Aeschines, in the speech Against Timarchus, applies this to those passionately devoted to boy-favorites and to harsh lovers of boys. Menander too calls a man who is intensely given to dice a "savage" gambler.

[4192] Agryle. A deme of the tribe Erechtheis; the demesman is Agryleus, and the local adverb is "from Agryle" (Agrylethen).

[4311] Aguias ("streets"). Demosthenes, in the speech Against Meidias: "to set up choruses according to ancestral custom and to make the streets fragrant with the savor of sacrifice." Some accent the word as oxytone and treat it as feminine, taking it to mean "the streets"; but it is better to give it the circumflex, as derived from "agyieus." An agyieus is a pillar tapering to a point, which they set up before their doors, as Aristophanes makes clear in the Wasps and Eupolis as well. Some say these belong to Apollo, others to Dionysus, others to both. The full form, then, is "agyieas," and in the Attic dialect "agyias," just as they say "Steirias" and "Melias" and the like by contraction. Aristophanes, in the Birds: "to slaughter sheep on altars fed with oxen and to make the streets fragrant with sacrifice." They say this custom is peculiar to the Dorians, as Dieuchidas makes clear in the third book of his Megarian History. The things called "agyieis" among the Attic writers would be the altars before the houses, as Cratinus and Menander say. And Sophocles, in his Laocoon, transferring Athenian customs to Troy, says: "The street-altar shines, steaming with fire, with drippings of myrrh, the fragrances of the barbarians."

[5547] Agyrrhios. A demagogue of no small note; Demosthenes in his speech Against Timocrates.

[5635] Agonian. Isocrates uses it in the speech On the Exchange of Property to mean "to contend in a contest."

[5740] Agoniontes. Used instead of "contending" by the same author in the Panegyricus.

[5821] Adeetos. Used instead of "lacking nothing" in Antiphon, On Truth, book one.

[5898] Adelphizein. Used instead of "to call someone brother" in Isocrates, in the Aeginetic speech; in Hecataeus of Miletus, in the second book of the Genealogies; in Strattis; and in Apollophanes, in the Iphigeron.

[6109] Ademonouses ("of one at a loss"). Of one in perplexity.

[6166] Adephagous triereis ("ravenous triremes"). Lysias uses it in the deposition On Behalf of Eucritus, if the speech is genuine; and Philistus speaks of a "ravenous fifty-oared ship." They would mean the ships kept on full pay and consuming much. The term seems derived by metaphor from full-grown racehorses, which are accustomed, as the poet says, to "eat their fill." Alcaeus, in his Comic-Tragedy, called drinkers' lamps "ravenous."

[6600] Adiastaton ("undivided"). Antiphon used it of that which is not yet separated or distinguished.

[6697] Adikiou ("for wrongdoing"). As it were "of a wrong." It is the name of a suit. This penalty is paid single, if it is rendered before the ninth prytany; otherwise it is paid double.

[6879] Adokimastos. To be "examined" (dokimasthenai) is to be enrolled among the men; and "adokimastos" is one not yet enrolled, in Lysias, in the speech Against Demosthenes for Maladministration of a Guardianship, if it is genuine.

[7106] Adrasteian. Some say that she is the same as Nemesis, and that she got her name from Adrastus son of Talaus, who was visited with her displeasure for the things he boasted against the Thebans, and who, in consequence of certain oracles, founded a temple of Nemesis, which was afterward called the temple of Adrasteia, as Antimachus shows in these lines: "There is a certain Nemesis, a great goddess, who has obtained all these things as her portion from the blessed gods. To her Adrastus first raised an altar by the stream of the river Aesepus, where she is honored and called Adrasteia." Some, however, list her as distinct from Nemesis, as Menander and Nicostratus do. Demetrius of Scepsis says that Adrasteia is Artemis, established by a certain Adrastus.

[7867] Adunatoi ("the disabled"). Aeschines, in the speech Against Timarchus. Those who possessed less than three minas and were maimed in body. These men, on being approved by the Council, received two obols a day, or one obol, as Aristotle says in the Constitution of the Athenians; but according to Philochorus, nine drachmas a month. There is also a speech, said to be by Lysias, On Behalf of the Disabled Man, in which the recipient is mentioned as receiving an obol.

[8334] Aei ("ever"). Used instead of "until" in Antiphon's Samothracian speech. Its usage is frequent. And Thucydides in his preface . . . began thus: "thus, then, does my argument ever stretch toward this point for me."

[8549] Aidris. Without knowledge; ignorant.

[8587] Aeilogia ("perpetual accountability"). The being ever subject to rendering account and audit. So Demosthenes and Isaeus.

[8709] Aeiesuo. Antiphon uses it for eternity, and for the standing always in the same condition, just as "euesto" too is used for happiness.

[8845] Aerkton ("unfenced"). Used instead of "unwalled" and "visible from every side" by Lysias.

[8936] Aetos ("eagle, gable"). The part of buildings at the roof, which some call the pediment (aetoma). Aristophanes, in the Birds: "for we will roof your houses up to the gable."

[9111] Azenieus. Azenia is a deme of the tribe Hippothontis, and the demesman is Azenieus; Aeschines, in the speech Against Ctesiphon.

[9240] Azeteton ("not to be investigated"). That which is forbidden to be subject to inquiry and accusation; in Aeschines, in the speech Against Ctesiphon.

[9390] Atheoretos. Used instead of "unseen" in Antiphon, in his work On Concord.

[9465] Athenodoros. An Athenian by birth, a soldier; Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristocrates.

[9560] Athmoneus. Athmonia is a deme of the tribe Cecropis, from which the demesman is Athmoneus.

[9652] Aigeion. A hero-shrine of Aegeus at Athens; Dinarchus in his speech Against Polyeuctus.

[9741] Aigeidai. Demosthenes in the Funeral Oration, if it is genuine. The tribe Aegeis was named after Aegeus son of Pandion, whence the tribesmen are called Aegeidae.

[9904] Aigidas ekaloun ("they called aigides"). They called the nets made of woolen fillets "aigides"; Lycurgus in his work On the Administration, and Nymphodorus. Herodotus, in book four, says that these are called "aigeai" by the Libyans.

[10139] Aigilieus. Hyperides. Aigilia is a deme of the tribe Antiochis, whence the demesman is Aigilieus.

[10238] Aidesasthai. Used instead of "to be persuaded to relent" by Lysias in the speech Against Demosthenes for Maladministration of a Guardianship, if it is genuine, and by Demosthenes in his speech Against Nausimachus and Xenopeithes. But in the speech Against Aristocrates this same word is used instead of "to appease and persuade."

[10569] Aithalides. Aithalidai is a deme of the tribe Leontis, of which the demesman is Aithalides.

[10662] Aithiopion. The name of a place in Euboea.

[10706] Aikias ("of assault"). A kind of private suit brought for blows, of which the assessment is not fixed in the laws; rather, the accuser sets down the assessment at whatever he thinks the wrong is worth, and the jurors decide.

[10932] Ainious ("the people of Aenus"). Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristocrates. Aenus is a city of Thrace. Homer: "who had come from Aenus." Ephorus, in the fourth book of his work, speaking of the towns of Thrace, says: "Next to these is the city of Aenus, which Greeks from Alopeconnesus first colonized, and afterward they brought in settlers from Mytilene and Cyme as well."

[11313] Aixonesin ("at Aixone"). Isaeus, in the speech Against Medon, Concerning a Plot of Land. Aixone is a deme of the tribe Cecropis. Its people were ridiculed in comedy as foul-mouthed, whence "to behave like an Aixonean" came to mean "to speak abusively"; Menander in the Canephorus. And Plato, in his dialogue On Courage, says: "I shall say nothing in reply to this, though I have something to say, lest you call me an Aixonean."

[11742] Akademeia. There were three gymnasia: the Lyceum, the Cynosarges, and the Academy. It was named after Academus, who consecrated it.

[11875] Akamantis. Demosthenes, in the speech Against Boeotus, Concerning the Name: "having been born in the tribe Acamantis." This is one of the ten tribes, named after Acamas son of Theseus.

[12061] Akare. Used instead of "little" or "nothing" in Antiphon.

[12120] Akinakes. Demosthenes in his speech Against Timocrates. It is a Persian sword. Anaximenes too mentions it in the first book of his work On Alexander.

[12271] Ake. This is a city in Phoenicia; Demosthenes in his speech Against Callippus. Nicanor, who wrote on changes of names, and Callimachus in his Memoranda say it is the city now called Ptolemais; but Demetrius says, more precisely, that it was the citadel of Ptolemais that was formerly named Ake.

[12567] Akmazeis ("you are in your prime"). Used instead of "you do what belongs to the young" by Hyperides in the speech Against Mantitheus, and by Lysias in the speech Against Nicarchus the flute-player, if it is genuine.

[12784] Akritos. Used instead of "undistinguished, confused" by Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon.

[12891] Akroasthai. Used instead of "to obey" by Antiphon in the speech Against Philinus.

[12974] Akte. Properly a certain coastal portion of Attica; Hyperides in the speech On the Salt-Fish; whence also comes the "Actite" stone. Some called Attica itself by this name, some after a certain king Actaeon, others because the greater part of the country is by the sea.

[13244] Aktia. Hyperides, in the speech Concerning Polyeuctus' Holding a Generalship. The Actia was an ancient contest, as Callimachus makes clear in his work On Contests.

[13409] Alabastothekai. The cases for alabaster jars, which in common speech they call perfume-cases; Demosthenes in the speech On the Embassy. Alabaster jars are flasks which cannot be grasped (labesthai) because of their smoothness.

[13637] Halaieus. The name of a deme.

[13668] Alastor. One whom no man could ever forget; Demosthenes On Behalf of Ctesiphon. The word is frequent in tragedy. "Haleas": Demosthenes in the speech On the Embassy. It is a Thessalian city. The citizens are called Haleis.

[13891] Alexandros. Demosthenes, in the sixth book of the Philippics, says: "when Alexander, the ancestor of these men, came as herald about these matters." This is the one surnamed Philhellene, son of Amyntas, father of Perdiccas; he served under Mardonius, by whom he was sent to demand earth and water from the Athenians. They not only paid him no heed but, with strong threats, sent him away. There is another Alexander, himself also a king of the Macedonians, the elder brother of Philip, about whom Demosthenes says in the speech On the Embassy: "and yet this Apollophanes was among those who killed Alexander, the brother of Philip." There is yet another Alexander, a Thessalian, about whom again Demosthenes speaks in his speech Against Aristocrates: "And what of that Alexander, the Thessalian?" This man is from Pherae; the Athenians fought as his allies against the Thebans, at the time when Pelopidas was held prisoner by him. And there is another Alexander, the Molossian, brother of Olympias the wife of Philip, whom again Demosthenes mentions in the seventh book of the Philippics, if the speech is genuine.

[15007] Halipedon tines ("some say the Halipedon"). Some say the Halipedon is the Piraeus. But it is also, in general, a place which was formerly sea and afterward became a plain. For this reason the first syllable has the rough breathing; for it is, as it were, "a plain of the sea" (halos pedion). Or else it means a level, well-trodden plain, ground as it were smooth, as Aristophanes uses it in the Banqueters with the smooth breathing, "on level ground." Some say that the coastal plain is so called. Others say it was so named from the fact that horses can roll in it, that is, raise dust.

[15596] Halimousioi. Demosthenes, in the appeal Against Eubulides. Halimous is a deme of the tribe Leontis, and the demesmen are Halimousioi.

[15731] Halirrothios. A proper name, son of Poseidon; Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristocrates.

[15826] Alketas. King of the Molossians; Isaeus in the speech Concerning Matters Spoken in Macedonia. But there was also another Alketas, a subordinate commander of Alexander.

[15995] Alkibiades. The son of Cleinias. But there was another, the great-grandfather of the one just mentioned, of whom Lysias says, in the speech Against Alcibiades for Desertion, if the speech is genuine, that both he himself and his maternal grandfather were twice ostracized. There is yet another Alcibiades whom Antiphon mentions in his Defense Against the Indictment of Demosthenes; some of the other orators mention him too, and the comic poets. He is of the deme Phegous, a guest-friend of Alcibiades.

[16499] Alkimachos. Demosthenes in the speech Against Euergus and Mnesibulus. He is a general, of the deme Anagyrous, who commanded in the war against Philip. There is another Alkimachos, a Macedonian, whom Hyperides mentions in the speech Against Demades thus: "we made Alkimachos and Antipater Athenians and proxenoi." Anaximenes, in the second book of his work On Alexander, recorded a public speech of his, against which he says Demosthenes spoke in reply.

[16953] Alkmaionidai. A distinguished family at Athens, descended from Alcmaion.

[17027] Alogian ("want of reckoning"). The having no reckoning, but acting without calculation; Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristocrates, and Plato.

[17175] Halogoi eranistai ("unreckoned contributors"). Perhaps those who have not yet paid out the share falling to them according to the order, fixed by the cycle, of the names entered for the loan-club. Dinarchus, in the speech Against the Sons of Patrocles, Concerning a Loan-Club.

[17453] Halonnesos. A small island in the Aegean Sea; Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon, as also Archemachus in the fourth book of his Euboean History. The dispute over Halonnesus is also mentioned by Theopompus in his fourth book and by Anaximenes in the fourth book of the Philippics.

[17741] Alope. Lycurgus in the speech Concerning the Priestess. Daughter of Cercyon, by whom and by Poseidon was born Hippothoon, the eponym of the tribe Hippothontis, as Hellanicus relates in the second book of his Atthis, and Euripides in the play of the same name, and Dinarchus in the Adjudication of the People of Phalerum.

[18063] Halourgopolike ("the dealing in purple"). The trade in purple, as we call it; Isaeus in the speech Against Elpagoras and Demophanes.

[18197] Haloa. Demosthenes in his speech Against Neaera. The Haloa is an Attic festival, which Philochorus says was named from the fact that at that time men spent their time about the threshing-floors (halos). He says, in his work On Festivals, that it is held in the month Posideon.

[18475] Alopeke. A deme of the tribe Antiochis; the demesman is Alopekeus, and the local form is "from Alopeke" (Alopekethen). Philochorus, in his third book, shows whence they got the name.

[18659] Alopekonnesos. A city of those in the Chersonese.

[18710] Amadokos. Isocrates, in the speech To Philip. There were two of this name, father and son; the latter came to fight as an ally of Philip in the war against Cersobleptes. Theopompus mentions both in the eleventh book of the Philippics.

[18946] Amazoneion. Isaeus, in the speech Against Diocles. Ammonius has discussed the dedication of the Amazons at Athens in his work On Altars and Sacrifices. It is a shrine which the Amazons established.

[19145] Hamaxanteia. A deme of the tribe Hippothontis. The demesman is Hamaxanteus.

[19222] Amblothridion. An aborted fetus.

[19256] Ambrakia. A city on the Ambracian Gulf, a colony of the Corinthians.

[19326] Hamippoi. Isaeus, in the Temenic speech. Those who serve in war together with horses. Some say that certain riding-horses are yoked to one another, and the man who drives them leads the one along while he rides the other. These are called hamippoi. This is the same as Homer's "leaping now to one, now to another." But the hamippoi are foot-soldiers, as is clear from Thucydides and from Xenophon in the seventh book of the Hellenica. And perhaps they are a kind of advance-runner, stationed together with the cavalry; at any rate Philochorus, in his sixteenth book, mentions advance-runners as well.

[19928] Ammonis. The trireme sacred to Ammon; Dinarchus in his speech Against Himeraeus.

[20010] Amorges. He is a bastard son of Pissuthnes.

[20055] Amorgos. It is something resembling fine linen; Aeschines in the speech Against Timarchus. The comic poets often mention "Amorgine" stuffs, as do Aristophanes in the Lysistrata and Eupolis in the Cities.

[20260] Amphignoein. Used instead of "to be ignorant" or "to be in doubt about one's knowledge," as also Lysias uses it in the speech Against Aesion, Concerning the Theft of Books, if the speech is genuine.

[20460] Amphideai. They are a kind of anklet; Aristophanes in the Thesmophoriazusae. But Lysias, in his speech Against Euthydicus, uses it in a special sense, saying: "being unable to throw them out because the doors were bound with clasps (amphideai)."

[20707] Amphidromia. Lysias in the speech On the Miscarriage, if the speech is genuine. A certain day was observed for newborn children, on which they carried the infant at a run around the hearth, and the household and friends received gifts of octopuses and cuttlefish.

[20972] Amphiktyones. It is a council of the Greeks, gathering at Thermopylae. It was named either from Amphictyon son of Deucalion, because he gathered the nations together while he reigned, as Theopompus says in his eighth book (these were twelve: Ionians, Dorians, Perrhaebians, Boeotians, Magnesians, Achaeans, Phthiotians, Malians, Dolopians, Aenianians, Delphians, Phocians); or from the fact that those gathered together were dwellers around (perioikoi) Delphi, as Anaximenes says in the first book of his Hellenica.

[21489] Amphipolis. Antiphon, Concerning the Tribute of the Lindians. This is a city of Thrace. Formerly it was called Ennea Hodoi ("Nine Ways"), as Androtion says in the twelfth book of his Atthis. Marsyas, in his Macedonian History, says it was named Amphipolis because the place was surrounded by dwellings, having formerly been called Acra; others say it was called "city of Ares."

[21868] Amphisbetein ("to dispute"). Amphisbetein and parakataballein: those who lay claim to estates are said to "dispute" or to "pay a deposit," some asserting that the estate is not subject to adjudication, on the ground that the deceased has a son, whether by birth or by adoption; others, claiming that since he died childless they have a juster right to the estate than the man who obtained it by lot, being either kinsmen or heirs by will. So Demosthenes and Hyperides have explained the matter of paying a deposit.

[22384] Amphissa. Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. A city of Locris. Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Opuntians, says thus: "Andraemon was its founder, and they named it Amphissa because the place is surrounded (periechesthai) by mountains."

[22641] Amphoteropaoun ("for both voyages"). Demosthenes, in the speech Against Dionysodorus. When someone lends a maritime loan on condition of sailing both from here to some place and from there back here, this is called "for both voyages" (amphoteroploun).

[22894] Hamosgepos. Used instead of "in some one way" by Lysias in his speech on the indictment Against Aristagoras, if it is genuine.

[23022] Anaballei ("he postpones"). Used instead of "he puts off into delays" and, as it were, "he postpones," by Demosthenes in the Philippics.

[23160] Anagein. The denouncing of the man who has sold something and proceeding against him; Lysias in the speech Against Boeon, if it is genuine, and Dinarchus.

[23316] Anageis ("polluted men"). Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon. Written with one alpha, it means the impure; if written "enageis," it means those held in the curse, that is, in the pollution.

[23514] Anaginoskomenos. Used instead of "being persuaded" by Antiphon, Isaeus, and Herodotus in his first book.

[23620] Anagkaion. Used instead of "prison" by Isaeus in the speech Against Hermon, and by Xenophon in the Hellenica. Callisthenes used "anogeon" ("upper chamber"), which ought rather to be the form said.

[23818] Anagurasios. Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon. Anagyrous is a deme of the tribe Erechtheis, whence the demesman is Anagurasios.

[23956] Anadikasasthai. To plead a case anew (from the beginning); so Isaeus. Hence too "anadikoi kriseis," the cases tried over again, when witnesses are convicted of false testimony.

[24134] Anathesthai ("to reset"). Antiphon, in his work On Concord: "but to set life over again like a board-piece is not possible," in the sense of living over again after repenting of one's former life. It is said by metaphor from those who play at draughts; Plato in the Hipparchus, or Lover of Gain.

[24431] Anairetheis. Used instead of "taken up and reared" in Isocrates, in the speech To Philip.

[24522] Anainesthai. In common usage "to refuse," but in a special sense it is used of matters relating to marriage and sexual love; Demosthenes in the special plea On Behalf of Phormio, Plato in the Phaon, Menander in the Sicyonian.

[24749] Anakaiasin ("at Anacaea"). Isaeus, in the speech Against Diocles. Anacaea is a deme of the tribe Hippothontis.

[24861] Anakalupteria ("unveiling-gifts"). Gifts given to brides, both by the husband and by the household and friends, when they are first unveiled so as to be seen by the men. The same gifts are also called "epaulia." These are what we call "things seen for the first time."

[25131] Anakeion. Demosthenes in his speech Against Stephanus. A shrine of the Dioscuri.

[25213] Anakrisis ("preliminary examination"). An inquiry held by each magistrate before the trials, concerning the matters bearing on the suit. They also examine whether the case ought to be brought into court at all. The word occurs often among the orators, as also in Lysias, in his speech Against Aristodemus.

[25520] Anaktes. Anaktes and anassai ("lords and ladies"): Isocrates in the Evagoras. The orator seems to be mentioning a certain custom in Cyprus. At any rate Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Cyprians, says: "the sons and brothers of the king are called lords (anaktes), and his sisters and wives ladies (anassai)."

[25835] Anaxagoras. A sophist, son of Hegesibulus, a Clazomenian, a pupil of Anaximenes of Miletus. He was nicknamed "Mind," since he said that matter and Mind are the guardians of all things. This is the man who said that the sun is a red-hot mass.

[26078] Anaxibios. Lysias in the speech Against Thrasybulus. He was a general of the Lacedaemonians.

[26172] Anapodizomena ("things gone over again"). Used instead of "things examined," or instead of "the same things said or done over again from the beginning," by Antiphon, On Truth, book one.

[26359] Anaseisas. Used instead of "having threatened"; Demosthenes Against Aristogiton.

[26441] Anasuntaxas. Used instead of "having drawn up anew" by Hyperides Against Polyeuctus.

[26527] Anati ("without harm"). Used instead of "without ruin, without evil" by Isaeus in the speech Against Apollodorus.

[26642] Anaflustioi. Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon. Anaphlystus is a deme of the tribe Antiochis. Some mention Anaphlystus as a city.

[26781] Anaforan. The referring of the blame for things done wrong upon others; Demosthenes On Behalf of Ctesiphon.

[26890] Andera ("banks"). Hyperides, in the speech Against Conon. They call the banks of rivers "andera" because they are always moist and wet. Others say it means the mounds, because they are above and over the moist places; among these too is Hyperides.

[27139] Andokidou Hermes ("the Hermes of Andocides"). Aeschines, in the speech Against Timarchus: "then the Hermes called the Hermes of Andocides is not the dedication of Andocides, but of the tribe Aegeis." And Andocides himself, in his speech On the Mysteries, has said that the dedication belonged to the tribe Aegeis, so that Duris speaks rashly in saying it belonged to Andocides.

[27518] Andrapodokapelos. The man now called a slave-dealer, so named from his trafficking (kapeleuein) in slaves, that is, selling them; Isaeus in the speech Against Hermon.

[27686] Andrapodistes ("kidnapper"). Lycurgus, in the speech Against Lycophron: "I marvel that we punish with death the kidnappers, who deprive us only of our household slaves."

[27857] Andreia ("the prime of manhood"). The age of grown men; Antiphon in his work On Concord.

[27947] Androlepsia ("seizure of men"). The seizing of men from a city; for they used to take as pledges the city that harbored a murderer and would not give him up for punishment. Demosthenes Against Aristocrates. In this passage he also uses the neuter form, "androlepsion."

[28217] Andron. Antiphon, in his Defense Against the Indictment of Demosthenes. Craterus, in the fifth book of his Decrees, says that the Andron who proposed the decree concerning Antiphon the orator was one of the Four Hundred.

[28439] Anelousa gar ton nomon touton ekeirotonesen autei ("for having repealed this law she voted for her"). Demosthenes says this in the speech Against Androtion; but since the passage is obscure and elliptical, different men interpret it differently. In the Atticianus manuscripts there was a twofold reading: one thus, "for having repealed this law, she voted for herself," in the sense of "for having transgressed this law, she granted a vote about herself, whether she ought to be crowned"; the other reading, "for having repealed this law, she voted, having taken that one for herself."

[29026] Anemutas. Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. This man is a Theban by birth.

[29118] Anepopteutos. Hyperides, in the speech On Behalf of Phryne. One who has not been admitted to the higher initiation (epopteia). What the higher initiation is, Philochorus shows in his tenth book: "this man wrongs all the sacred rites, both the mysteries and the rites of the higher initiation"; and again, "to Demetrius it fell, beyond all others, alone to be both initiated and admitted to the higher initiation, and the ancestral times of the ceremony to be altered."

[29588] Aneskeuasanto. What is called in life "to be made desolate," that is, to be ruined and, as it were, to renounce one's all.

[29712] Aneton. Used instead of "sacred and dedicated to some god" by Hyperides in the Deliac speech.

[29807] Anechaitise. Demosthenes in the Philippics, used instead of "checked" or "overturned," by metaphor from horses.

[29920] Anekei. In Antiphon, On Truth, book one, used instead of the simple "has come," or, as it were, "has been brought up and advanced."

[30053] Antheia. That she was a courtesan is clear; but perhaps it should be written "Anteia" with the tau, since we have found it so in Lysias.

[30191] Anthemokritos. Isaeus, in the speech Against Calydon: "the bath beside the statue of Anthemocritus," that is, by the Thriasian gates. This man was a herald of the Athenians, but was slain by the Megarians while forbidding them to encroach on the sacred land of the two goddesses.

[30472] Anthemous. A Macedonian city, and those from it are called Anthemountioi.

[30547] Anthesterion. This is the eighth month among the Athenians, sacred to Dionysus. Ister, in his Collection, says it was so called because at that time most things of the earth bloom (anthein).

[30739] Anthene. Lysias, in his speech on the indictment Against Aristodemus, if it is genuine. A city of Laconia.

[30847] Anthupomosan. Used instead of "they made a counter-affidavit to the postponement under oath" by Demosthenes Against Olympiodorus.

[30978] Anidrutos ("unsettled"). Used instead of "implacable" by Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristogiton.

[31083] Anoikos. Used instead of "uninhabited" by Lycurgus Against Lycophron.

[31154] Antepitithesin. Used instead of "he writes back in reply" by Isaeus in the speech Against Callippides.

[31258] Antiatais ("to the people of Antium"). To those from the city of Antium, which is three hundred stades distant from Rome.

[31381] Antibabthentos. Used instead of "having been dictated" by Dinarchus in the impeachment Against Pytheas.

[31486] Antigenidas. Lysias, in the speech Against Nicarchus the flute-player, if it is genuine. He was a son of Dionysius, a most renowned flute-player.

[31633] Antigrapheus ("counter-recorder"). The officer set over those who pay sums of money to the city, so as to record these sums in a counter-register; Demosthenes in his speech Against Androtion and Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon. There were two counter-recorders: one of the administration, as Philochorus says, the other of the Council, as Aristotle says in the Constitution of the Athenians.

[32036] Antigraphe ("counter-plea, register"). In a special sense, in the adjudications of estates it is called "antigraphe" when someone asserts that, since the deceased died childless, the estate belongs to himself by birth or by gift. In a general sense, in both public and private suits, it means the documents of the litigants which they submitted concerning the matter—both those of the prosecutor and those of the defendant—and the depositions of witnesses; Demosthenes Against Stephanus, and Hyperides. But Plato, in the Apology of Socrates, calls the same thing both "counter-oath" and "antigraphe."

[32638] Antithesis. Isocrates in the Panathenaicus. Antithesis is a figure of speech in which they set opposites against one another, either in parts or all together. In parts, as Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon: "you taught letters, while I attended school," and what follows. All together, the whole set against the whole, as the same Demosthenes in the speech Against Meidias, from the words "he, for his part, being supplied with a chorus by a friend," down to "while I was walking." This same figure is also called "antitheton," as Aeschines does in his Defense On the Embassy.

[33231] Antikyra. Lysias, in the speech Against Medon. Perhaps it is a personal name. Antiphanes, in his work On Courtesans, says: "they called her Antikyra because she used to drink with men deranged and mad." Others say it was because the physician Nicostratus left her a great quantity of hellebore when he died.

[33540] Antiochis. The name of a tribe.

[33573] Antiphon. One of the ten orators, son of Sophilus, of the deme Rhamnous.

[33647] Antipatros. Son of Iolaus.

[33675] Antissa. Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristocrates. One of the cities in Lesbos.

[33762] Antrones. A city in Thessaly; Demosthenes in a Philippic.

[33821] Antomosia ("affidavit on oath"). Both accusers and accused write out certain documents and submit them to the magistrate concerning the matters of the suit. It is so called because the prosecutors and defendants swore against each other (antomnyon), the one to prosecute truthfully, the other to defend truthfully.

[34137] Anorthiazon. Andocides. Used instead of "crying aloud in a high voice." Homer: "There the goddess stood and shouted, great and terrible, on high, to the Achaeans, and into the heart of each she cast great strength to war and fight unceasingly."

[34383] Axioi ("he thinks"). Used instead of "he holds" by Antiphon, in the speech Concerning the Outrage Against a Free Boy, and by Lysias.

[34517] Axiochos. A dialogue called the Axiochus was written by Aeschines the Socratic.

[34598] Axoni ("on the axon"). The laws of Solon were written on wooden axones; Demosthenes in the speech Against Aristocrates: "as it is stated on the axon." They were, as Polemon says in his work Against Eratosthenes, four-sided in shape, and they are preserved in the Prytaneum, inscribed on all their parts. They sometimes give the appearance of being three-sided, when they are tilted toward the narrow part of the angle.

[35018] Aopta ("unseen things"). Used instead of "invisible and unseen things, which only seemed to be seen," by Antiphon, On Truth, book one.

[35154] Apage ("away with it"). Used instead of "use the summary arrest"; "apagoge" (summary arrest) is a kind of suit; Demosthenes in the speech Against Conon. It is named from "leading away" (apagein), and the malefactors were "led away." They were led away to the Eleven.

[35422] Apagoreuein. Used instead of "to grow weary and unable" by Lysias in the Erotic speech.

[35511] Apathe. Used instead of "things that have not truly happened as experiences" by Antiphon, On Truth, book one.

[35622] Aparithmon. Used instead of "filling out a number" by Isocrates, in the speech To Philip.

[35713] Apartilogia ("a rounding-off of accounts"). Lysias, in the speech Against Aresandrus, and Herodotus, used instead of "a complete and full number."

[35861] Apatouria. Demosthenes, in the speech Against Boeotus. It is a festival among the Athenians, which they hold in Pyanepsion for four days, as those who have written about festivals say. Whence it was so named many others have said, including Ephorus in his second book: from the deception (apate) concerning the boundaries, when, during the war of the Athenians against the Boeotians over the territory of Melania, Melanthus the king of the Athenians, fighting in single combat, killed Xanthus the Theban by a trick.

[36378] Apeipein ("to give out"). Apeipein used instead of "to grow weary and fail" by Antiphon in his work Concerning the Tribute of the Lindians. And it is used instead of "to renounce" by the same author.

[36579] Apergasamenos. Used instead of "having paid back out of the works he had done" by Isaeus in the speech Against Apollodorus.

[36704] Apeschoinismenos. Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristogiton, book one, used instead of "shut off"; for when the Council fences itself off with a rope, as he himself says, then all the others are roped off (shut out).

[36926] Apeaoemenos ("threshed and gathered in"). The man who has been brought together from the threshing-floor after the threshing, that is, the treading out; Demosthenes in his speech Against Phaenippus.

[37126] Apecheia. Used instead of "hatred" by Lysias Against Medon and by Dinarchus Against Cephisocles.

[37224] Apillein. Lysias in the speech Against Theomnestus, if it is genuine, is taken to mean "to shut out."

[37327] Apistein. Used instead of "to disobey" by Antiphon Against Laispodias, and by Isocrates in his letter To Philip. They also use "apistia" for disobedience, as Demosthenes in the ninth book of the Philippics, and many others.

[37552] Aplas ("plain sandals"). Demosthenes Against Conon. Callistratus says that single-soled shoes are so called. Strattis in the Lemnomeda: "to buy yourself shoes of the plain sort."

[37732] Apobates kai apobainein ("the dismounter and to dismount"). Apobates and apobainein and apobatikoi trochoi ("dismounting-wheels"): Dinarchus Against Phormisius and in his Defense Against Antiphanes, and Lycurgus in his Defense Against Demades. The apobates is a kind of equestrian contest; "to dismount" is for the dismounter to compete; and the "dismounting-wheels" are those used in this contest. What takes place in it Theophrastus shows in the twentieth book of his Laws. He says that among the Greeks only the Athenians and Boeotians practice this.

[38287] Apographe ("registration"). When someone says that another holds something belonging to the city, the man charged makes a registration, showing whence he has the property and how much it is. Perhaps "apographe" is also a kind of suit; for if someone denied that he held it, he was tried for false registration, on the ground that the registration had not been rightly made; Demosthenes Against Androtion. What the risk was for the man making the registration becomes clear in the speech of Demosthenes Against Nicostratus, Concerning the Slaves of Arethusius, if it is genuine.

[38866] Apodektai ("the receivers"). The receivers are a magistracy among the Athenians, often mentioned by the orators and the comic poets. Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Athenians, has shown that they were ten in number, and that, taking over the registers, they cancel the sums paid in, in the presence of the Council in the council-chamber, and again hand back the registers to the public clerk; and he explains in plain terms what they do. That the receivers were appointed by Cleisthenes in place of the colacretae, Androtion shows in his second book.

[39424] Apodidomenoi. Antiphon, in his work Concerning the Tribute of the Samothracians, used instead of "those paying back." Further on he says "apodidometha," either instead of "we pay back" or instead of "we sell."

[39635] Apoikia ("colony-charter"). In a special sense they so named the documents according to which certain people go out as colonists; Hyperides in the Deliac speech.

[39798] Apoikodomeis. Used instead of "you wall off, shutting someone off by a building," by Demosthenes in the speech Against Callicles.

[39929] Apokeruttontes. Used instead of "selling by proclamation" by Demosthenes Against Aristocrates. Plato in the Ambassadors: "having stolen the little vessels, he carried them off and sold them by proclamation."

[40138] Apokrisis. The reply, the defense; Lysias. And Demosthenes Against Aeschines: "answer me, coming forward here." Eupolis in the Cities: "as I shall by all means answer you in reply to the accusations."

[40340] Apolachein. Used instead of the simple "to obtain by lot" by Antiphon in the speech Against Philinus, and by Lysias Against Posidippus. Aristophanes in the Frying-pan Men: "yet your brother, at least, did not get his share by lot."

[40573] Apoleloipotes ("those who have left behind"). Used instead of "the victors." The metaphor is from runners; for the victors leave behind those they defeat. Isocrates in the Panathenaicus and the Panegyricus.

[40781] Apolexis. One of the prose-writers, whom Plato ridicules in the Sophists.

[40856] Apomatton. Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. Some understand it more simply as "wiping off and cleansing"; others more elaborately, as "smearing the clay and bran upon the initiates," as we speak of "wiping over" a statue with clay; for they used to anoint the initiates with clay and bran, imitating the things told in myth among some peoples—namely, that the Titans defiled Dionysus, having smeared themselves with gypsum so as not to be recognized. This custom, then, fell out of use, and afterward they were smeared with clay for form's sake. Sophocles in the Captive Women: "a purifier of the army and skilled in cleansings," and again, "a most clever wiper-away of great misfortunes."

[41564] Apollon Pauroios ("Apollo Pauroios"). Apollo Pauroios, the Pythian: this is one title of the god, among many others that exist. The Athenians honor Apollo in common as ancestral (patroios), from Ion; for when he had settled Attica, as Aristotle says, the Athenians were called Ionians, and Apollo was named their ancestral god.

[41893] Apomisthoi ("the unpaid"). Those who receive no pay; Demosthenes in the Philippics and in his speech Against Aristocrates.

[42017] Apo misthomaton ("from rentals"). Didymus the grammarian says it is used instead of "from the revenues of the sacred precincts." For to each god they assigned plethra of land, from the renting of which the expenses for the sacrifices were met; for they did not sacrifice the victims out of piety, but from the rentals.

[42337] Aponome ("apportionment"). The share, as when the city takes a certain portion of the proceeds from the mines, or as when these are divided among several lessees, so that each receives some part; Dinarchus often, in his speech Against the Sons of Lycurgus.

[42595] Apopephasmenon. Used instead of "demonstrated and made manifest." So Dinarchus and Lysias, and Demosthenes Against Neaera: "they are sold openly (apopephasmenos)," instead of "publicly."

[42783] Apopompas. Isocrates, in the speech To Philip. Certain gods were called "apopompaioi" ("averters"), about whom Apollodorus has discoursed in the sixth book of his work On the Gods.

[42965] Aporrexantes. Having apportioned, having given a certain share; Isaeus in his Plea On Behalf of Nicias; the word is also found in comedy.

[43104] Aporreta ("forbidden things"). The things forbidden in the laws; Demosthenes On Behalf of Ctesiphon. What the things were that were forbidden to be said against one another, Lysias has shown in the speech Against Theomnestus, if the speech is genuine.

[43357] Aporotatos ("most resourceless"). Used instead of "one against whom no resource (poros) can be found" by Isaeus in the speech On Behalf of the Daughter of Mnesaeus.

[43523] Aposaxanta. Dinarchus used it instead of "having blocked up and filled in the hole."

[43609] Apostasiou ("of desertion"). A suit granted to those who have freed slaves, against the freedmen, if they desert them or register another as their patron, or fail to do what the laws command. Those convicted must be slaves again, while those who win their case are then wholly free. The word occurs often among the orators, in Lysias in the speech Against Aristodemus, and in Hyperides in the speech Against Demetria for Desertion. Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Athenians, writes thus concerning the polemarch: "this officer introduces suits of desertion and of being without a patron, and suits concerning estates and heiresses."

[44249] Apostesamenon. Used instead of "having received by weight" by Demosthenes in his speech Against Timotheus.

[44357] Apostoleis ("dispatchers"). Those appointed for the sending out of the triremes; Demosthenes On Behalf of Ctesiphon, and Philochorus in his seventh book. "Apostoloi" are the dispatchings of the ships; the same orator in the first book of the Philippics.

[44612] Apostrofen. Used instead of "refuge" by Demosthenes in the Philippics.

[44684] Apotaxis ("separate assessment"). The being assessed separately, of those who were formerly assessed together for paying the fixed tribute; Antiphon in his work Concerning the Tribute of the Samothracians.

[44891] Apotimetai kai apotimema kai apotiman ("valuers and security and to value"). Apotimetai and apotimema and apotiman and their cognates. Those who leased the estates of orphans from the archon furnished securities for the lease; and the archon had to send certain men to value the securities. The securities thus valued were called "apotimemata," those sent to value them "apotimetai," and the act "apotiman." It was also the custom in those times, when the relatives gave a dowry to a woman being married, to ask from the husband, as a kind of pledge worth the dowry, such as a house or a plot of land. The man who gave the security was said, actively, "to value" (apotiman), and the man who received it "to have valued for himself" (apotimasthai). The same account holds for other debts as well; Demosthenes in his second speech Against Onetor, and Lysias in the speech Against Diogenes, Concerning the Lease of a House, if it is genuine.

[45831] Apotafos. Used instead of "deprived of the ancestral tombs" by Dinarchus in the impeachment Against Agasikles.

[45943] Apoteichisai. To shut off by a wall and to cut off from the exit.

[46010] Apoteteichismenos de ho apeilemmenos kai apokekleismenos ("apoteteichismenos, the man cut off and shut in"). Apoteteichismenos is the man cut off and shut in by a wall; Antiphon in his Defense Against the Indictment of Demosthenes, and Thucydides.

[46259] Apo uou pragmatos ("from such a matter"). Used instead of "from afar" by Demosthenes Against Androtion.

[46364] Apofasis ("declaration"). The declaring in writing, item by item, how much property one has, which happens especially in the exchanges of property; Demosthenes often, in his speech Against Phaenippus. Once only he has called this same thing "apographe."

[46619] Apoforan. Used instead of "to carry away and to make an interval between" by Isaeus in the speech Against the Orgeones, in which he says thus: "if indeed they used to mark off, by these intervals (apophorai) of the feet, the land as belonging to another."

[46876] Apopsefizontai. Used instead of "they condemn him as not being a citizen" by Dinarchus in his speech Against Archestratus. Demosthenes, in the appeal Against Eubulides, calls the act "apopsephisis."

[47076] Aprobouleuton ("without prior resolution"). A decree brought not first to the Council, but directly to the people. In the speech Against Androtion a law is appended making this clear.

[47261] Aproskleton ("unsummoned"). The woman not summoned; Hyperides in the speech Against Athenogenes, book two.

[47369] Aprostasiou ("of being without a patron"). A kind of suit against metics who did not appoint a patron; for each of them chose for himself one of the citizens to act as his protector in all matters private and public. Hyperides in his speech Against Aristagoras for Being Without a Patron, book two.

[47669] Aproton. Dinarchus, in the speech Against Pytheas: "the orators having leapt in like aprotoi into the trading-place." Perhaps this is a scribal error, and one should write "like robbers" (lestoi). In some copies it is written "like parnopes"; the parnopes are a kind of locust.

[47948] Arafenios. Isaeus, in the speech Against Elpagoras and Demophanes. It is a deme of the tribe Aegeis.

[48050] Argas. Aeschines, in the speech Concerning the Restitution. It is more plausible to say that the Dorians, and especially the Argives, called the snake "argas," as Achaeus does in his Adrastus. But Timachidas of Rhodes says that the snake is not called "argas" as a dialect word, but that the "argai" are a particular kind of snake; and so it is likely that Demosthenes is being called a snake, because of his beastliness, since he was bringing suits against his guardians for maladministration of his guardianship. And he himself likens such men to snakes in the speech Against Aristogiton. In the Atticianus copies, however, it was written "harpax" ("rapacious"). Some say that "argas" is an epithet of the dragon.

[48767] Argoura. Demosthenes Against Meidias. It is a city of Euboea, situated in the Chalcidic region, as Aristotle of Chalcis says in his work On Euboea.

[48916] Arguriotheke ("money-chest"). Dinarchus, in the speech Against Proxenus for Damage. There were two kinds of writing-tablets which the Athenians used: some only for writing something in them, others also for depositing money, which they also called "little chests"; and others again were "double-doored."

[49221] Arguritis ge ("silver-bearing land"). Arguritis ge and chrysitis ("silver-bearing and gold-bearing land"): the land that yields gold and silver.

[49367] Argurokopeion ("mint"). Antiphon, in the speech Against Nicocles. The place where coin is struck; what some now call the "signet-house."

[49505] Arginousai. Islands lying opposite Lesbos, named after a certain Arginus.

[49580] Arguropous diphros ("the silver-footed stool"). The stool of Xerxes, which was called "captive," sitting on which he watched the sea-battle. It was dedicated in the Parthenon of Athena.

[49767] Argaios. Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristocrates. About him too Theopompus speaks in the first book of the Philippics: "they call him Archelaus and Argaeus and Pausanias."

[49947] Ariobarzanes. Appointed satrap of Phrygia by Artaxerxes, this man revolted; and the king, having sent an army to make war on him, overpowered and crucified him.

[50109] Ardettos. Lysias, in the speech Against Elpine. A place at Athens above the Panathenaic stadium, by the deme below Agryle. Here, they say, all the Athenians used to swear in public the juror's oath. It was named after Ardettus, an ancient hero, who first administered the oath to the Athenians. Theophrastus, in his work On Laws, shows that this custom had been abolished.

[50483] Arete ("virtue"). Used instead of "good repute" by Andocides and Thucydides in his first book.

[50579] Arthmios. A proper name, the slave of a certain king.

[50634] Aristeus. This too is a proper name.

[50672] Aristylla. She was a sister of Aristogiton.

[50717] Aristion. Hyperides, in the speech Against Demosthenes. This man is a Samian, or a Plataean, as Diyllus says, and from boyhood a companion of Demosthenes; he was sent by him to Hephaestion for the sake of a reconciliation, as Marsyas says in the fifth book of his work On Alexander.

[51001] Arkteusai ("to serve as a bear"). Lysias, in the speech On Behalf of the Daughter of Phrynichus, if it is genuine: the consecration of maidens before marriage to Artemis of Munychia or of Brauron. The matters bearing on the subject are stated by others and by Craterus in his Decrees. That the maidens who serve as bears are called "bears" (arktoi), Euripides shows in the Hypsipyle, and Aristophanes in the Lemnian Women and the Lysistrata.

[51444] Arktouros. Arcturus and "Bear-Watcher" (Arctophylax): the one named Boötes; Lysias in the speech Against Philip, Concerning a Guardianship. In a special sense it is the star beneath his belt; Aratus and Hesiod in the Works show this.

[51679] Arkuoros ("net-watcher"). Lycurgus, in the impeachment Against Menesaechmus. The man who watches the "arkyes," that is, the nets. "Arkys" is the general term for all hunting-nets; Xenophon in the Cynegeticus, Cratinus in the Thracian Women.

[51921] Harmostai ("harmosts"). The governors sent out by the Lacedaemonians to the subject cities, as Eratosthenes says in his work On Good and Evil Things; Demosthenes On Behalf of Ctesiphon.

[52108] Arreforein ("to serve as arrephoros"). Dinarchus Against Pytheas. Four were elected as arrephoroi on account of noble birth, and two were chosen, who began the weaving of the robe and the other things connected with it. They wore white clothing. If they put on gold ornaments, these became sacred property.

[52416] Artemisia. Demosthenes, in the speech On the Freedom of the Rhodians. There were two of this name, both Carian by birth and both queens. The first, in the time of the Persian Wars, was the daughter of Lygdamis, whom Herodotus mentions. The later one, whom Demosthenes means, was the daughter of Hecatomnos, the wife and sister of Mausolus, who, Theopompus says, was seized by a wasting disease and died from grief over her husband and brother Mausolus.

[52870] Artemision. In a special sense, the statue of Artemis; Hyperides in the Deliac speech. It is also the name of a promontory of Euboea, as Demosthenes says On Behalf of Ctesiphon.

[53049] Arubbas. Son of Alketas, king of the Molossians; Demosthenes in the Philippics.

[53130] Archairesiazein. To deem oneself worthy to be chosen as a magistrate; Dinarchus in his speech Against Polyeuctus.

[53245] Archaios ("in old-fashioned style"). Isocrates in the Panegyricus: "to go through old matters in a new way and to speak of recent events in an old-fashioned way." Some say it means "in an antique manner," that is, to use older words. Ephorus, in the first book of his Histories, explained it in a certain way; he says that the later writers treat of ancient matters. For concerning the events of our own time, he says, we hold those who speak most precisely to be most trustworthy, but concerning ancient matters we consider those who give such precise accounts least convincing, supposing that neither all the deeds nor most of the speeches are likely to be remembered over so long a time. But Demosthenes, in the Philippics, says: "they were so old-fashioned, or rather statesmanlike," instead of "simple."

[54055] Arche andra deichnusi ("office shows the man"). Demosthenes in the Prefaces to Public Speeches. Sophocles, in his Elegies, says it is a saying of Solon; Theophrastus, in his work On Proverbs, and Aristotle attribute it to Bias.

[54284] Archen iasthai polu loion ee teleuten ("to heal the beginning is far better than the end"). Another proverb. It shows that one ought rather to try to check evils as they begin than when they are at their height and fully grown.

[54513] Archidameios polemos ("the Archidamian War"). Lysias in the speech Against Androtion, and Dinarchus Against Pytheas for Alien Status. The first ten years of the Peloponnesian War were called the Archidamian War, as it seems, from the fact that Archidamus invaded Attica, as Thucydides and Ephorus and Anaximenes say.

[54831] Asemanta ("unsealed things"). What we call "unsealed"; for they called the seals "signs" (semeia); Hyperides in the speech Against Antias.

[54971] Aspasia. Lysias, in the speech Against Aeschines the Socratic, whose dialogue is entitled Aspasia. The other Socratics often mention her too, and Plato, in the Menexenus, says that Socrates learned the art of politics from her. She was Milesian by birth and skilled in speech; they say she was both teacher and beloved of Pericles. She is thought to have been the cause of two wars, the Samian and the Peloponnesian, as one may learn from Duris of Samos and from Theophrastus, in the fourth book of his Politics, and from the Acharnians of Aristophanes. Pericles is thought to have had by her the Pericles named after him, the bastard, as Eupolis too suggests in the Demes. Having afterward lived with Lysicles the demagogue, she bore Poristes, as Aeschines the Socratic says.

[55749] Astathmetotaton ("most unweighable"). Concerning whom no one could conjecture or weigh out what he ever intends or will do; Demosthenes in the speech On the Embassy.

[55916] Astikton chorion ("unmarked land"). Land not pledged to a creditor; for when it is pledged, the lender is accustomed to make this very fact known by inscriptions set upon the land. The same is done in the case of a house; Lysias in the speech Against Aeschines the Socratic.

[56192] Astrabe. The mule; Demosthenes in his speech Against Meidias. Perhaps every beast of burden on which men ride was so called.

[56318] Astunomos ("city-officer"). Demosthenes Against Timocrates. Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Athenians, says there are ten city-officers, five in the Piraeus and five in the city. He says these have charge of the flute-girls and harp-girls, and the refuse-collectors, and the like.

[56606] Asunthetotaton ("most inconstant"). Demosthenes, in the speech On the Embassy, applied the word to a crowd, either instead of "most untrustworthy and most unstable" and "putting no faith in promises because of its instability," or "inconsistent and discordant" (for agreements are "syntheseis"); or instead of "most uncomprehending," which is "most senseless"; or instead of "one whom one could least understand as to what he is thinking." Homer: "but do you attend (syntheo) and hear me."

[57097] Atarneus. A small town lying over against Lesbos; Isocrates in the Panegyricus, Herodotus in his sixth book.

[57207] Atechnos. With the circumflex, used instead of "clearly" or "surely" or "safely" or "openly"; with the acute on the penult ("atechnos"), used instead of "carelessly and without art."

[57391] Atimetos agon ("unassessed suit"). Atimetos agon and timetos: the "assessed" suit is one for which no penalty is fixed by the laws, but the jurors had to assess what one must suffer or pay; the "unassessed" is the opposite, for which a fixed penalty is laid down by the laws, so that the jurors need make no assessment. Aeschines Against Ctesiphon, Demosthenes Against Meidias.

[57770] Atimos ("disfranchised, outlaw"). Demosthenes applied this in a special sense in the Philippics, namely, to one whom anyone may kill without being subject to penalty. For, speaking of Arthmius, he says that the Athenians voted him to be an enemy and a foe of the people of the Athenians and of their allies, both him and his family, and to be "atimos"; then he adds, as if interpreting this: "this is not the disfranchisement one might so suppose; for what did it matter to the man of Zeleia if he was not to share in the common rights of the Athenians? But it is written in the laws on homicide, concerning those for whose murder it is not permitted to bring a charge of homicide: 'let him die atimos.'" By this, then, he says, the law means that the man who kills any such person is pure.

[58562] Atta. Used instead of "as many as" or "whatever things" by Antiphon in his work Concerning the Tribute of the Lindians, and instead of "certain things" or "things of some kind" by Demosthenes in the Philippics. In some places "atta" is merely expletive.

[58817] Attes. Demosthenes On Behalf of Ctesiphon. Attes is honored especially among the Phrygians as a servant of the Mother of the gods. The matters concerning him Neanthes has set forth; but the account is one of mystery.

[59035] Attikois grammasin ("with Attic letters"). Demosthenes Against Neaera, used instead of "ancient letters"; for the writing of the twenty-four characters was found only late among the Ionians. Theopompus, in the twenty-fifth book of the Philippics, says that the treaties with the barbarian were forged, since they were inscribed not in Attic letters but in those of the Ionians.

[59414] Aiphentes ("perpetrator"). Lysias in the speech On Behalf of Eratosthenes. In the speech Against Isodemus he used it in a special sense of the Thirty, who carried out the murders through others; for "authentes" always means the one who does the deed with his own hand.

[59684] Auleios ("courtyard-gate"). The first door of the house, the one from the street, as Menander shows.

[59786] Aulia. Lysias in the speech Against Diodotus, and Aeschines Against Ctesiphon: either used instead of "farmsteads" (epauleis), or instead of "small courtyards."

[59948] Aulizomenoi ("bivouacking"). Used instead of "sleeping" by Antiphon, On Concord.

[60030] Auuodikein ("to fix one's own rights"). Used instead of "to define justice for themselves" by Dinarchus in his speech Against Cleomedon.

[60168] Autokleides. Aeschines Against Timarchus: "Cedonides and Autocleides and Thersander." These were violent lovers of boys, as Aristogiton too says Against Timarchus.

[60333] Au. Demosthenes uses it instead of "again" in his speech Against Aphobus, book one.

[60418] Autolekuthoi. Demosthenes Against Conon. Either used of certain men who travel light and are ready to do and endure anything whatever; or instead of "the poor, who possess nothing else but oil-flasks"; or "those who do their own work"; or instead of "men ready for blows," as it were striking and scourging and committing outrage. Or it might mean those who readily hand out money and are ready for sexual encounters; for they used to keep money in their oil-flasks. The word occurs in Menander, in both the Charioteer and the Ring. That they sometimes kept money in their oil-flasks, Diphilus shows in the Dismounter; and that, having unfastened the flask, they used the strap for scourging, Menander shows in the Trophonius.

[61146] Auuolukos. There is a speech of Lycurgus Against Autolycus the Areopagite. This man, having secretly sent his household away during the events at Chaeronea, was caught, and the jurors condemned him, as the same orator shows in his speech Against Leocrates.

[61404] Automachein ("to plead in person"). To plead one's own case oneself, and not through another; as, for instance, if someone refers a claim to the seller, he shows that the suit lies against that man; and if someone produces a witness deposing that the suit is not admissible, he himself no longer contends, but the contest is against the man who made the deposition. Lysias in the speech Against Eucles, Concerning the Ejection from a Plot of Land.

[61853] Autochthones ("the autochthonous"). The Athenians. Demosthenes in the speech On the Embassy: "for you alone of all are autochthonous." Apollodorus, in his work On the Gods, says they were called autochthonous because they first worked the soil (chthon), that is, the earth, when it lay idle; others, because they were not immigrants. But Pindar and the author of the Danais say that Erichthonius and Hephaestus appeared from the earth. The Arcadians too were autochthonous, as Hellanicus says, and the Aeginetans and the Thebans.

[62384] Afairesis idios legetai he eis eleutherian ("aphairesis, said in a special sense of the claim to freedom"). Aphairesis is said in a special sense of the claiming of a person into freedom; Hyperides in the speech Against Aristagoras.

[62618] Afareus. This man was the son of Hippias, but was reputed the son of Isocrates.

[62699] Afanes ousia kai fanera ("unseen and visible property"). Unseen property is that consisting of money and slaves and furnishings; visible property is real estate; Lysias in the speech Against Hippotherses.

[62905] Afeis ("having released"). Apheis and apallaxas: "apheis" (having released) is when one frees another from the charges he was bringing against him; "apallaxas" (having discharged) is when one persuades the accuser to desist and bring charges no longer; Demosthenes in the special plea On Behalf of Phormio. It is also possible to put it thus: that one "releases" a man only from those charges he is bringing, but "discharges" him when he leaves himself no further ground of complaint against the accused. Demosthenes in the special plea On Behalf of Phormio: "that there may come to be for him a valid discharge from you."

[63529] Afeis ten uperan ton poda diokei ("letting go the brace, he chases the sheet"). Hyperides, in the speech On the Salt-Fish, book one. A proverb applied to those who let the more important things go and busy themselves about trifles. The "uperai" are the ship's ropes by which the yard-arm is shifted.

[63830] Af hestias mueisthai ("to be initiated from the hearth"). Isaeus, in the speech Against Calydon. The one initiated "from the hearth" was always an Athenian. He was chosen by lot and was initiated.

[64028] Aforme ("capital"). When someone gives money as an investment, it is called in a special sense "aphorme" among the Attic writers.

[64159] Afosio ("I purify"). Used instead of "I cleanse, I purify" by Aeschines Against Ctesiphon. To do a thing not fully, but as it were for form's sake, Isaeus called "to discharge as a matter of ritual" (aphosiosasthai) in the speech Against Hermon.

[64406] Afrodision. In a special sense, the seat of Aphrodite.

[64462] Afuas ("the Anchovies"). Hyperides Against Aristagoras. It is also the name of two courtesan-sisters.

[64565] Acharistein. Used instead of "not to show favor." So Antiphon.

[64629] 2. Balbisin ("at the starting-lines"). Antiphon, On Concord, used instead of "at the magistracies." It is taken from runners; for the line drawn beneath the starting-rope, because the runners stand upon it, is called "balbis."

[64857] Barathron ("the pit"). A chasm into which they threw those condemned to death. Demosthenes, in the Philippics, uses it not in its proper sense but by metaphor, as it were "into ruin."

[65042] Basanos ("touchstone, examination under torture"). Antiphon. A stone so called, by which gold is tested when rubbed against it. But Hyperides, in the speech Against Antias, called "basanoi" the statements made under torture by those examined and afterward recorded.

[65309] Basilike diadrome ("the king's procession"). The procession that took place in the presence of the king-archon—who is one of the nine archons at Athens—seems to have been called the "royal procession"; Dinarchus Against Pytheas.

[65539] Basileios stoa ("the Royal Stoa"). Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristogiton, book one. There are two stoas alongside one another, that of Zeus the Liberator and the Royal Stoa. There is also a third, formerly called the Stoa of Peisianax, but renamed the Painted Stoa.

[65814] Baskainei ("he disparages"). Used instead of "he blames and finds fault and calumniates" by Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. And in this passage: "a slanderous (baskanon) and bitter and malicious policy is no policy of mine," used instead of "fault-finding and calumnious."

[66106] Basanisas. Used instead of "having tested" by Dinarchus in the speech Against Proxenus. The word is frequent in this meaning among the Attic writers.

[66257] Batalos. Aeschines in the speech On the Embassy. The word was used in comedy of effeminacy. Eupolis calls the rump "batalos." Perhaps, then, it is from this that they call the lewd "bataloi."

[66450] Baubous. The name of a woman.

[66481] Bebaioseos ("of warranty"). It is the name of a suit, which those who have bought something bring against the seller, if another disputes the thing sold and the seller does not make good the warranty. Sometimes too, when only an earnest-money has been given, and then the seller disputes, the man who gave the earnest-money brought the suit of warranty against the one who received it. Lysias in two speeches.

[66892] Besaies ("of the deme Besa"). Lysias, in his Defense Against Philocrates Concerning a Contract. Besa is a deme of the tribe Antiochis.

[67028] Biaion ("of violence"). The name of a suit against those who do anything whatever by force. The one convicted pays to the public treasury a sum equal to what he pays the successful prosecutor. Demosthenes Against Meidias. There are also speeches "concerning acts of violence" current among the works of Lysias. And it is clear that neither the name nor the suit was used only for the violation of maidens, but for other matters too.

[67462] Blimazein. To press hard with the hands. And to squeeze the honeycombs is . . .

[67543] Blisai. It is called "blisai" ("to squeeze out honey").

[67600] Boedromia. Demosthenes in the Philippics. A festival at Athens so called, which Philochorus, in his second book, says was instituted because Ion son of Xuthus came with great zeal to the aid of the Athenians when they were being warred upon by Eumolpus son of Poseidon, in the reign of Erechtheus. For "to run to the rescue" (boedromein) was the term for helping, that is, running into battle.

[67995] Bothunos ("pit"). A place so called, in a special sense, on the Sacred Way. Isaeus, in the speech Against Hermon Concerning a Pledge, mentions the place, and so does Callisthenes.

[68176] Boleones ("dung-heaps"). The place where dung is thrown is called a "boleon." Nicander, in the third book of his Attic Dialect, speaks of "boleones" in the fields, into which they carry out the dung. So Dinarchus and Philemon and others.

[68415] Bombulios ("humming-bee"). A creature resembling a bee, named from its hum (bombos); Isocrates in the Encomium of Helen.

[68537] Boulaia ("of the Council"). Dinarchus, in his information Against Callisthenes: "I call to witness Hestia of the Council," that is, the one established in the council-chamber.

[68714] Bouleia ("council-membership"). The transacting, as a member of the Council, of what belongs to councillors; Dinarchus and Aristophanes in the Thesmophoriazusae.

[68877] Bouleuseos ("of plotting"). The name of a charge applied to two matters: one is when someone contrives death for another out of a plot, whether the man plotted against dies or not; the other is when a man, registered as owing money to the treasury, brings suit against the one who registered him, on the ground that the registration was unjust. Of the former, Isaeus is a witness, in his speech Against Eucleides, saying that such cases are tried at the Palladium; and Dinarchus in his speech Against Pistias, in the Areopagus. Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Athenians, agrees with Isaeus. Concerning the other charge, Demosthenes speaks in his speech Against Aristogiton, book one. Hyperides, in the speech Against Athenogenes, book one, uses the word in a special sense, of an ambush and plot directed against money.

[69704] Boutades. Bouteia is a deme of the tribe Oeneis, from which the demesmen are Boutadai.

[69792] Boutes. This man held the priesthood; and from him the descendants of Butes are called Boutadai and Eteoboutadai; for "eteon" means "true." Homer: "if truly (eteon) I am yours."

[69971] Boufonia. Hyperides in the speech Against Demades. It is a festival among the Athenians.

[70061] Boucheta. Demosthenes in the seventh book of the Philippics. It is a city of Epirus, named in the neuter plural, which Philostephanus, in his Epirotica, says was so named because Themis, riding upon an ox (bous), came there at the time of the flood of Deucalion.

[70325] Boones ("ox-buyer"). Demosthenes in his speech Against Meidias: that the ox-buyer was a man of distinction and that the highest officials were elected to this post.

[70491] Brutidai. The name of an Attic clan; Demosthenes in his speech Against Neaera.

[70571] Bomolocheuesthai ("to play the buffoon"). Properly, those were called "bomolochoi" who sat down beneath the altars at the sacrifices and begged with flattery; and further, the flute-players and seers taken on for the sacrifices. Pherecrates in the Tyranny: "and then, that we might not always be called altar-skulkers (bomolochoi), lurking everywhere by the altars, Zeus made a very great smoke-vent." By metaphor from these, certain easygoing and base men, who endure anything whatever for gain through jesting and mockery, were called "bomolochoi." Aristophanes in the Gerytades: "you make jokes and mock at us and play the buffoon (bomolocheuei).

[71222] 3. Galepsos. Antiphon Against Laispodias. A city of Thrace, as those who have written geographies say. It was named after Galepsus, the son of the man from Thasos and of Teleph, as Marsyas the younger says in the fifth book of his Macedonian History.

[71474] Gamelia ("marriage-feast offering"). Demosthenes in the appeal Against Eubulides, and Isaeus. Didymus the grammarian, in his commentaries on Isaeus, says that the "gamelia" is the offering given to the phratry-members on the occasion of marriages, citing a passage of Phanodemus in which nothing of the sort is written. But in his commentaries on Demosthenes the same man again says that the "gamelia" is the introduction of wives to the phratry-members, offering no proof of his explanation.

[71968] Ganos. Ganos and Ganiada: Aeschines Against Ctesiphon. They are Thracian places, as Artemidorus says.

[72071] Geisipous ("cornice-foot"). Geisipous and geisipodisma and geisipodizein: the projecting part of the beam, on which the cornice rests, is called "geisipous" and "geisipodisma," and "geisipodizein" is to do this; Isaeus in the speech Against the Orgeones.

[72327] Gennetai ("clansmen"). Those sharing in the same clan (genos). For when all the citizens had been divided into parts, the first and largest parts were called tribes; each tribe was divided into three, and each of these parts was called a "trittys" and a "phratry." Again, each of the phratries was divided into thirty clans, from which the priesthoods belonging to each were assigned by lot. The word occurs in many of the orators, as in Demosthenes in the appeal Against Eubulides. But Isaeus, in the speech Concerning the Estate of Apollodorus, called kinsmen "gennetai"; yet kinsmen, simply, and those of one blood, were not called "gennetai" and members of the same clan, but those who were from the beginning distributed into the so-called clans. Philochorus, in his fourth book, says that those whom they now call "gennetai" were formerly called "homogalaktes" ("milk-brothers").

[73214] Gerarai ("the venerable women"). The women consecrated to Dionysus; Demosthenes in his speech Against Neaera.

[73325] Geraneia. Lysias in the Funeral Oration. It is a mountain of the Megarid, as Dieuchidas says.

[73420] Gerra. Demosthenes On Behalf of Ctesiphon: "they shut out the men from the booths in the marketplace and burned the wicker-screens (gerra)." The "gerra" are certain Persian shields, as Herodotus too says; but already, by an extension of usage, every covering, whether of leather or of some other material, was called a "gerron." Now, then, Demosthenes says that the coverings and screens of the booths were burned, so that men should not gather about the goods for sale in the marketplace nor spend their time in other such pursuits. But in the speech Against Neaera, if the speech is genuine, he says thus: "the law bids the prytaneis set out the little urns and give the vote to the people as they come forward, before the foreigners enter and before they remove the wicker-screens." Either, then, this is the same as in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon, or one must suppose something of this sort: that the vote was given by the prytaneis to the citizens in assembly before the foreigners entered and before the barriers were removed—that is, before the assembly was thrown open to anyone who wished to speak.

[74535] Geofanion. A place in which there is a mine of earth. Concerning the geophanion in Samos, how it was discovered, Ephorus has shown in his ninth book.

[74686] Gepedon ("plot of land"). Dinarchus, in the speech Against Stephanus. "Gepedon" is the plot of land, just as "oikopedon" is the property made complete with land and dwellings. At any rate Plato, in the fifth book of the Laws, says: "of whatever house-plots (oikopeda) or land-plots (gepeda) he obtained by lot."

[74999] Glaukos. A proper name, Carystian by birth.

[75044] Glukera. A certain courtesan.

[75075] Gnosis ("decision"). Used instead of "judgment" by Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristogiton.

[75174] Gorgura. An underground excavation; Dinarchus, Aeschines. It is also found in Herodotus, in his third book.

[75283] Grammateus ("secretary"). Demosthenes On Behalf of Ctesiphon. How the secretary was appointed and what he did—that he has authority over the documents, guards the decrees that have been passed, makes copies of all the rest, and sits beside the Council—Aristotle has shown in the Constitution of the Athenians.

[75594] Grafeus ("painter"). Used instead of "painter" (zographos) by Demosthenes Against Meidias. And . . .

[75696] Grafein ("to paint"). They used "graphein" to mean "to paint" (zographein).

[75773] Grafe ("indictment"). The name of a certain public charge. Not only when someone accuses a decree or law is he said to bring and lodge an indictment "for illegal proposals," but also in many other wrongs, whenever one brings a charge either publicly or as if on public grounds. The word is frequent among the orators. Demosthenes Against Conon.

[76119] Grupanion. Antiphon, On Truth, book two: "for it scorches the earth and, melting it, makes it crumble." And Melanthius, in the second book of his Atthis, having said that an earthquake had occurred, says: "and the earth crumbled." Dionysius the son of Tryphon, in the fourth book of his work On Words, says that "grupainein" is "to be made to crumble," as when we bend soft pieces of wood and let them go. Perhaps, then, the historians indicate that during earthquakes a certain crumbling occurs about the earth.

[76633] Grullos. Hyperides, in the speech Against Epicles, Concerning a House. The sons of Xenophon the Socratic were Gryllus and Diodorus. This man died fighting at Mantinea.

[76802] Gulios. A plaited soldier's vessel, into which provisions were put, as Aristophanes too shows in the Peace.

[76911] Gulippos. A proper name, a Lacedaemonian.

[76954] Gulon. A proper name.

[76977] Goniasmos ("an angle, recess"). Lysias in the speech Against Lysitheus, if it is genuine: "and there is, members of the Council, as one turns the corner of the wall, a recess on the left and a very large open space." And Aristophanes in the Frogs: "inroads of slender rules and angles of words.

[77273] 4. Dalou poiemata ("the works of Daedalus"). [The entry stands without explanation.]

[77359] Daeira. A proper name.

[77383] Damon. A proper name, the teacher of Pericles.

[77431] Daochos. Demosthenes On Behalf of Ctesiphon. This man was one of those who betrayed the affairs of the Thessalians to Philip.

[77558] Dareikos ("daric"). Lysias in the speech Against Eratosthenes, one of the Thirty. The darics are gold staters; one of them was worth the same as what the Attic writers call a "gold piece." They were called darics not, as most think, from Darius the father of Xerxes, but from another, more ancient king. Some say that the daric was worth twenty silver drachmas, so that the five darics were worth a silver mina.

[77971] Dateisthai ("to divide among themselves"). To apportion; and the "datetai" are, as it were, dividers. The phrase "for the choosing of dividers" is a kind of suit; for whenever certain persons held property in common, and some wished to divide the common goods while others did not, those who wished sued those who did not, challenging them to the choosing of dividers; Lysias in the speech Against Alexidemus, if it is genuine, and Aristotle in the Constitution of the Athenians.

[78452] Datos. It is a city of Thrace, exceedingly prosperous; and from it a proverb too was current, "a Datos of good things." Writers have spoken both of it and of the neighboring country, sometimes calling it "Daton" in the neuter, sometimes "Datos" in the feminine, as Ephorus always does in his fourth book; once only Theopompus, in the third book of the Philippics, calls it "Datos" in the masculine. The city of the Datenoi was, however, renamed Philippi when Philip king of the Macedonians had taken it, as Ephorus says and Philochorus in his fifth book.

[79008] Deeseis ("needs"). Used instead of "wants" by Antiphon, On Truth, book one.

[79085] Deigma ("sample, the Sample-market"). Properly, the sample shown from each of the things for sale; but also a certain place in the trading-port at Athens, into which the samples were brought, was so called. It is an Attic custom to designate the places themselves from the things in the place. Demosthenes in the speech Concerning the Trierarchy, and Lysias.

[79445] Deipnoforos ("dinner-bearer"). Hyperides, in the speech Against Demeas. It is also said that the "dinner-bearers" are now enrolled, because the mothers of the children shut away used to send in food to them each day at the temple of Athena, in which they lived, and themselves came together to greet their own children.

[79766] Deiradiotes. Deirades is a deme of the tribe Leontis, from which the demesman is Deiradiotes.

[79861] Deinoi. Used instead of "he will treat harshly" by Antiphon, On Truth, book two.

[79943] Dekazon ("bribing"). Isocrates, in the speech On the Peace. What this is, is clear to all. But Eratosthenes, in his work On the Old Comedy, shows whence the term comes, saying thus: "Lycus is a hero by the law-courts at Athens, having the form of the beast; before him those who took bribes used to turn, gathering in groups of ten (kata deka), whence the saying 'the ten of Lycus.'" Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Athenians, says that Anytus first introduced the bribing of the law-courts.

[80442] Deka ("the Ten"). Deka and dekadouchos ("ten-holder"): Isocrates, in his special plea Against Callimachus: "for the Ten were in office, those established after the Thirty." Concerning the ten men elected at Athens after the dissolution of the Thirty, and what followed, Androtion has spoken in his third book. Each of these magistrates was called a "dekadouchos," as Lysias makes clear in the speech Concerning the Estate of Diogenes.

[80878] Dekadarchia ("rule of ten"). Isocrates. The historians constantly name the "decadarchies" established by the Lacedaemonians in the cities; but Isocrates, in the Panathenaicus, explained the word in a certain way, for he says that the Lacedaemonians made only ten men masters of each city. Philip, however, did not establish a decadarchy among the Thessalians, as is written in the sixth Philippic of Demosthenes, but a tetrarchy.

[81309] Dekateuein ("to tithe"). Demosthenes Against Androtion: "for not tithing them," instead of "exacting the tithe" and, as it were, "carrying off spoil"; for they used to tithe to the gods the things taken from the enemy. But when Demosthenes, in the speech Against Medon, speaking of a certain maiden, says thus, "not to tithe her nor to initiate her," Didymus the grammarian, who wrote a book about this, says that Lysias, in the speech On Behalf of the Daughter of Phrynichus, used "to tithe" for "to serve as a bear." "To tithe," he says, was properly used of "to consecrate," since it was a Greek custom to consecrate to the gods the tithes of the surplus. Perhaps, then, the orator used "to tithe" for "to serve as a bear," since the girls of ten served as bears.

[82077] Dekateutas ("tithe-collectors"). Used instead of "tax-farmers, those who collect the tithe," by Antiphon in his Defense Against the Indictment of Demosthenes. That the tithe was a customs-due, Demosthenes has shown in his speech On the Immunities.

[82326] Dekatelogous ("tithe-collectors"). Those who collect the tithe—the same, then, as the "dekateutai." Demosthenes Against Aristocrates.

[82461] Dekeleikos ("Decelean"). The Peloponnesian War, named from a part of its later stage.

[82548] Delfinion. A place in Chios, as Thucydides says in his eighth book. There is another Delphinium at Athens, a shrine of Apollo, where the law-court "at the Delphinium" was also located; Demosthenes in the speech Against Boeotus.

[82777] Derkulidas. A king of the Lacedaemonians.

[82820] Dermatikon ("hide-money"). Lycurgus in the work entitled An Account of His Public Administration. By "dermatikon" the orator would mean the money accruing from the hides that were sold.

[83007] Dermestes ("hide-eater"). Lysias, in the speech Against Eupeithes. Didymus, in the seventh book of his Doubtful Words, says that this is the term Sophocles uses in the Niobe for the worm; but Aristarchus, explaining the passage in Sophocles, took it to mean the snake. Perhaps, rather, the "dermestes" would be whatever eats hides, as is also suggested in the sixth book of the Milesian Tales of Aristides.

[83415] Deusopoios ("fast-dyeing"). Properly the word is used of purple that has a lasting and unfading bloom of dye; but by metaphor it is applied by the ancients to all other things that have a lasting and durable color, as Plato too makes clear in the fourth book of the Republic. Diphilus in the Foster-Brothers: "there is a good dyer in the child; for he has shown us these swaddling-clothes to be altogether fast-dyed."

[83834] Demainetos. A proper name.

[83862] Deliastai. Those who went out to Delos as sacred envoys; Lycurgus Against Menesaechmus.

[83951] Demarchos ("demarch"). Lysias, in the speech Against Moschus. The demarch was a kind of magistrate; these officials made the registrations of the lands in each deme. Further, the deme-registers were in their keeping, and they convened the demes whenever there was need, and gave the vote to them. Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Athenians, says these were established by Cleisthenes, having the same charge as the naucraries before them. That the demarchs took pledges, Aristophanes shows in the Women Seizing the Tents.

[84479] Demokoinos ("public torturer"). The public examiner under torture. Isocrates, in the Trapeziticus, has more or less explained the word.

[84616] Demopoietos ("made a citizen"). One who is a foreigner by nature but has been made a citizen by the people. In what manner some become "demopoietoi," Demosthenes has shown in his speech Against Neaera, if it is genuine.

[84837] Demosios ("public slave"). Demosthenes in the Philippics. They call the slaves of the city "demosioi." Aeschines Against Timarchus: "a public man, a household-slave of the city."

[85017] Demotele ("publicly maintained"). Demotele and demotika hiera ("public rites and deme rites"): these differed both from one another and from the rites of the orgeones and the clans, as Dinarchus shows in his speech Against Stephanus.

[85252] Demoteuomenos ("registered in a deme"). "To be registered in a deme" is to share in a particular deme and to conduct business from it; Antiphon in his Defense Against Philip, if it is genuine.

[85446] Demofanes. A proper name.

[85473] Diagoreuon ("speaking at variance"). Isaeus, in the speech Against Diocles, uses "diagoreuon" in a special sense, instead of "saying different and not the same things." For "diagoreuein" is the opposite, among these writers, of "synagoreuein" ("to agree"), just as "to be carried along with" is opposed to "to be at variance," and "to share in citizenship" to "to be at political odds," and "to be in harmony" to "to be in discord."

[85907] Diagramma ("schedule"). Hyperides, in the speech Against Epicles. The amount fixed in the symmories for how much each man must contribute. It was not the same amount for all, but according to the assessment of property. Concerning these matters Hyperides has shown most clearly in his speech Against Polyeuctus, Concerning the Schedule. The "diagrapheus," moreover, is the man appointed in the symmories to determine how much each man ought to contribute, as the same author again makes clear in his speech Against Polyeuctus.

[86435] Diagrafe ("specification"). The description of the mines being sold, showing by writing from what starting-point to what limit it is sold.

[86575] Diagrapsasthai ("to have the charge struck out"). Lysias, in the speech Against Nicides, if it is genuine, used instead of "to cancel the charge."

[86723] Diadoseis ("distributions"). The shares falling due from an equal division; Lysias.

[86808] Diakechremenon ("lent out in parts"). Used instead of "lent out piecemeal" by Demosthenes Against Aphobus.

[86916] Diastasis ("arrangement"). Antiphon, On Truth, book two: "concerning the arrangement (diastasis) now prevailing," instead of "the ordering of the whole."

[87071] Diagrapsantos ("having paid down"). Dinarchus Against Lycurgus. Perhaps instead of "having paid in and deposited." But some take it instead of "having reckoned out through the bank," as we say in common speech.

[87283] Diathesis ("disposal, arrangement"). Used instead of "sale" by Isocrates in the Busiris. Antiphon, in the speech Against the Information of Callias, said "diethemetha" instead of "we sold"; and the same author, in his work On Concord, uses it instead of "management": "but knowing the management (diathesis), they listen." Phrynichus, in the Tragic Actors, says "by the arrangement (diathesis) of the verses." For they also use the verb "diathesthai" for "to manage"; Antiphon, On Truth, book one: "but stripped of resources, it would manage (diathoito) many fine things badly." "Diathesthai" used instead of "to make an agreement," Hyperides Against Demosthenes.

[87948] Dialexis ("allotment-division"). "Dialanchanein" is to divide by lot, and "dialexis" is the act; Antiphon in the speech Against Philinus.

[88087] Dia mesou teichous ("through the middle wall"). Antiphon Against Nicocles. There being three walls in Attica, as Aristophanes too says in the Triphales—the northern, the southern, and the Phaleric—the southern was called the "middle" wall, since it lay between the other two; Plato also mentions it in the Gorgias.

[88403] Diacheirotonia ("voting by show of hands"). The decision of a vote taken by show of hands in a multitude; Demosthenes both in the speech Against Timocrates and Against Androtion.

[88583] Diamemetremene emera ("the measured-out day"). There is a measure of water flowing in proportion to a measured interval of the day; it was measured out in the month Posideon. To this the greatest men, and in the greatest causes, contended. The water was divided into three parts: one for the prosecutor, one for the defendant, and the third for the jurors. These matters the orators themselves have set forth most clearly, as also Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon; and Aristotle teaches about them in the Constitution of the Athenians. But one must consider the passage in Isaeus, in the speech Against Elpagoras and Demophanes, where, though the day was measured out, he says at one point that the trials took place without water, at another that they took place by the water-clock.

[89377] Diametron ("short measure"). The deficiency from the just measure; Dinarchus in the information Against Callisthenes.

[89496] Diaskeuasasthai. Used instead of "to equip oneself" by Isaeus in the speech Against Callicrates.

[89594] Diaseistous ("the shaken-down"). Aeschines Against Timarchus. They seem to be named from being moved and shaken down first, and then cast away, that they might be more free from harm; Menander in the Men for Sale.

[89809] Diapsefisis ("scrutiny by vote"). Used in a special sense of the examinations in the demes, which take place concerning each of the deme-members, whether he is truly a citizen and demesman, or has been smuggled in, being a foreigner; Aeschines Against Timarchus. Most fully Androtion, in his Atthis, and Philochorus, in the sixth book of the Atthis, have discoursed about the scrutinies, as they took place in the archonship of Archias.

[90247] Diamarturia ("counter-deposition"). Diamarturia and diamarturein: the "diamarturia" was a kind of special plea; for before the suit was brought into court, it was permitted to anyone who wished to depose that the suit was, or was not, admissible. It differs from the special plea in that the "diamarturia" is made not only by the defendants but also by the prosecutors. And formerly it was open to the prosecutor to put forward someone deposing that the suit was admissible, and the trial took place first concerning this, against the man who made the deposition, not against the original litigant; and if the prosecutor did not put forward a witness, then it was open to the defendant to bring forward someone deposing that the suit was not admissible, and again the contest was against the man who made the deposition. They were liable to charges of false testimony in the counter-depositions as well, just as in ordinary depositions; Lysias in the counter-deposition Against Aristodemus, if the speech is genuine. Isaeus, in the speech Against Python for Desertion, says that foreigners cannot make a counter-deposition; but Hyperides, in his speech Against Aristagoras for Being Without a Patron, book two, says that the laws bid anyone who wishes to make a counter-deposition in the indictments for being without a patron, foreigners and natives alike. Perhaps, then, in the suits of desertion foreigners are forbidden to make counter-depositions, but in those of being without a patron they are not forbidden. Dinarchus, however, has used "to make a counter-deposition" not of the man who himself deposed, but of the man who furnished someone to make a counter-deposition in the counter-deposition concerning the non-adjudicability of the daughter of Aristophon. And this orator, in the speech Against Hedyle, describes the manner of the counter-deposition.

[92112] Diaitetai ("arbitrators"). Demosthenes in his speech Against Meidias. The arbitrators are distinct from the jurors; for the latter gave judgment in appointed courts and decided the appeals from the arbitrators, while the arbitrators—either chosen by lot beforehand or appointed by the litigants who entrusted their case to them—arbitrated for the parties. And if it satisfied the litigants, the suit was at an end; but if not, then, having cast the charges, the challenges, the depositions, and also the laws and the other proofs of each party into urns and sealed them, they handed them over to the introducers of suits. Aristotle speaks about them in the Constitution of the Athenians.

[92801] Diasuesai. Used instead of "to throw into confusion" and, as it were, "to make impossible" by Antiphon in his speech Concerning the Revolution; Menander in the Widow: "let him with shouting make the city distracted (diastaton)."

[93031] Didaskalos ("teacher, producer"). In a special sense they call "teachers" the composers of dithyrambs or of comedies or of tragedies. Antiphon, in his speech Concerning the Chorus-Member, says: "I obtained Pantacles as producer"; for that Pantacles was a poet, Aristotle has shown in the Productions. The word is frequent also in the old comedy in this sense.

[93392] Diegguesin ("provision of sureties"). Used instead of "the furnishing of sureties" by Demosthenes Against Timocrates. But in the speech Against Neaera, if it is genuine, he says: "having been bailed (diegguetheisa) by Stephanus."

[93623] Diekodonise. Demosthenes, in the speech On the Embassy, used instead of "he tested and examined thoroughly." The metaphor is either from those who patrol the watches at night with bells, as Euripides in the Palamedes, or from those who test fighting-quails by the sound of a bell, as Aristarchus says.

[93926] Di eniautou ("through the year"). Used instead of "through the whole year" by Antiphon, Concerning the Tribute of the Lindians. Teleclides, in the Prytaneis, said "through the day" (di hemeras) instead of "through the whole day."

[94157] Diespeusamen. Used instead of "I made with zeal," or instead of "I accomplished," by Isaeus in the speech Against Hermon, Concerning a Pledge.

[94301] Dieskarifesametha. Isocrates in the Areopagiticus. "To scratch over" (skariphesasthai) is to do something carelessly and not with the proper precision.

[94454] Dieteinanto. In a special sense Antiphon applied this in his speech Concerning the Murder of Herodes, instead of "they denied with strained earnestness."

[94609] Diellaxen. Used instead of "he changed his life, he died," by Lycurgus in the speech Concerning the Priestess.

[94721] Dierxa. Used instead of "I held office continuously to the end" by Lysias in his Defense on the Indictment of Mixidemus.

[94843] Diipoleia. A certain festival at Athens, the Diipoleia; Antiphon in his speech Concerning the Chorus-Member.

[94953] Dikaiogenes. This man was a writer of tragedies. He also composed dithyrambs.

[95032] Dikaiopolis. Lysias, in the speech Against Thrasybulus, if it is genuine. A city in Thrace near Abdera. Perhaps there is also some other Dikaiopolis.

[95183] Dikaiosis ("a claim of right, a punishment"). Lysias, in the speech On Behalf of the Soldier, if it is genuine, says "and the claims of right (dikaioseis) very much," instead of "pleas of justice." But Thucydides often uses "dikaiosis" for "punishment."

[95438] Dike ("private suit"). The word has other meanings as well, but in a special sense it is used of private charges, as Demosthenes makes clear in his speech Against Conon.

[95609] Dioikiein ("to settle apart"). Used instead of "to separate, so that not all dwell in the same place, but apart and severally," by Demosthenes in the fifth book of the Philippics.

[95790] Diopeuon ("inspecting"). Demosthenes, in the speech Against Lacritus. "Diopos" is the term for the man who manages and oversees the affairs of a ship, the one we call the "supercargo."

[95976] Diotimos. A proper name, an admiral of the Athenians.

[96031] Diofantos. A proper name.

[96058] Dioaugion ("very great"). Isaeus, in the speech Against Stratocles: "very great matters (diolygia)," instead of "great." And Plato too uses it.

[96203] Diomosia ("oath of both parties"). Properly the oath taken by the litigants; Demosthenes Against Aristocrates.

[96315] Dokimastheis ("having been approved"). Used instead of "having been enrolled among the men" by Demosthenes in the speech Against Onetor. But "to be approved" (dokimasthenai) is also used of magistrates, as the same orator makes clear in the appeal Against Eubulides. It was also used of public men, even if they held no office at all; for their life was sometimes examined, as Aeschines says in the speech Against Timarchus. Lycurgus, in the speech On the Administration, says: "there are three scrutinies (dokimasiai) according to the law: one by which the nine archons are examined, another by which the orators, and a third by which the generals." He mentions also, in the same speech, the scrutiny of the cavalry.

[97034] Doriskos. A place in Thrace; Demosthenes On Behalf of Ctesiphon, and Herodotus.

[97115] Dosis ("gift, deed of gift"). In a special sense, among the orators, it is the contract drawn up when someone gives his own property to another through the magistrates, as in Dinarchus.

[97302] Drakontides. One of the Thirty. Hyperides.

[97346] Drakon. This man was a most distinguished lawgiver, as Aeschines says. There is another Draco whom Isocrates mentions in the Panegyricus.

[97485] Drggilon. A Thracian place; Demosthenes in the Philippics.

[97545] Dromokerukes ("running heralds"). Aeschines. Those called day-runners.

[97617] Drumos. A city between Boeotia and Attica; Demosthenes in the speech On the Embassy. Aristotle, in his Justifications, says thus: "then a Drymus, one Attic and the other Boeotian."

[97799] Drus. Demosthenes Against Aristocrates. A city in Epirus. There is also another in Thrace, which the orator now mentions; this one Theopompus, in his twenty-sixth book, says was settled by Iphicrates.

[98001] Dusanios ("hard to please"). Antiphon. The man vexed at everything, even at what is small and contemptible. Hippocrates too somewhere used the word, and Menander.

[98165] Dusaules. Dinarchus in the adjudication concerning the Priestess, if it is genuine. Asclepiades, in the fourth book of his Subjects of Tragedy, says that Dysaules was autochthonous, and that, having lived with Baubo, he had children, Protonoe and Nisa. But Palaephatus, in the ninth book of his Trojan History, says that he, together with his wife, received Demeter.

[98533] Dusopoumai ("I am abashed"). Used instead of "I fear" by Demosthenes in the Philippics, and by Xenophon in the second book of the Memorabilia.

[98677] Dorieus. The name of a pancratiast.

[98714] Doroxenia ("bribery for citizenship"). Lysias, in the speech Against Nicides. Hyperides explained the word in his speech Against Aristagoras, writing thus: "since the law on bribery-for-citizenship (doroxenia) too is fitting to be brought to bear on the present case; for if he has said that those acquitted of an alien-status charge may be indicted again by anyone who wishes, should they appear not to have been justly acquitted the first time, how is it not plain that the right lies against Aristagoras?" And Aristotle too, in the Constitution of the Athenians, speaking of the thesmothetai, writes thus: "there are also indictments before them, for which a deposit is laid down, of alien status and of bribery-for-citizenship, if someone, by giving bribes, escapes the charge of malicious prosecution."

[99523] Doron grafe ("indictment for bribery"). Whenever one of the public men was charged with taking bribes, the charge against him was expressed in two ways: "bribe-taking" (dorodokia) and "indictment for bribes" (doron graphe). Dinarchus, then, entitled one speech "Against Polyeuctus for Bribery," but in the speech "Against Pytheas for Alien Status" he often names the indictment for bribes.

[99914] 5. Ean tis grapsamenos me ("if anyone who has brought an indictment..."). If anyone who has brought an indictment does not obtain a fifth part of the votes, he incurs a fine of a thousand drachmas, and a certain loss of civic rights is added. Lysias, in the speech On Behalf of the Law Against the Orators, has discoursed about these matters, and Theophrastus in his work On the Laws.

[100300] Hebdomeuomenou ("when the seventh day was being kept"). Lysias in the speech Against Eteocles, Concerning Money, if it is genuine. For newborn children they used to keep the seventh and the tenth days, and they gave them their names—some on the seventh, as the orator too says, others on the tenth. Aristotle, in the ninth book of the History of Animals, writes thus: "most of them die before the seventh day; for which reason they then give the names, in the confidence that they will now survive."

[100801] Eggutheke ("a stand"). A certain speech is current, ascribed to Lysias, entitled Concerning the Stand. It would be a vessel suitable for setting mixing-bowls or basins or something of the sort upon it, as Callixenus suggests in the fourth book of his work On Alexandria, and Daimachus the Plataean in the second book of his work On India.

[101141] Hedoliasai ("to make benches"). Lycurgus in the work entitled An Account of His Public Administration, used of fitting out the benches. And the "hedolia" are the seats in the ships; Herodotus, book one.

[101345] Ethnos ("class, nation"). Not only the great and populous race, but in a special sense a certain part of the city. Demosthenes, in his speech Against Aristocrates: "if someone should ask you what you consider the most worthless of all the classes (ethne) in the city, you would name neither the farmers nor the merchants nor those from the silver-mines nor any of such men." And in the ninth Philippic he says: "but how does Thessaly stand? Has he not taken away their cities and their constitutions and set up tetrarchies among them, so that they may be enslaved not only by cities but also by nations (ethne)?"

[101959] Eiloteuein ("to be a helot"). To be a slave; Isocrates in the Panegyricus. For the "helots" are not the slaves of the Lacedaemonians by birth, but the first who were subdued of those inhabiting the city of Helos, as many others testify, and Hellanicus in his first book.

[102231] Eisaggelia ("impeachment"). It is the name of a certain public suit, and there are three kinds of impeachments. One concerns the greatest public wrongs that admit of no delay, and for which neither a magistracy has been established nor laws laid down for the magistrates to introduce them, but the first proceeding is taken before the Council or the people; and for which, if the defendant is convicted, the greatest penalties are imposed, while the prosecutor, if he does not win, suffers no penalty—except if he does not obtain a fifth part of the votes; for then he pays a thousand drachmas. In old times these men too were more severely punished. Another impeachment is for ill-treatment; these are brought before the archon, and they entail no penalty for the prosecutor, even if he does not obtain a fifth part of the votes. There is yet another impeachment against arbitrators; for if anyone was wronged by an arbitrator, it was permitted to impeach him before the jurors, and on conviction he was disfranchised. Isaeus, however, in his speech Concerning the Estate of Hagnias, called the same matter both an impeachment and an indictment.

[103379] Eis emfanon katastasin ("for the production of property in open view"). It is the name of a suit, for having the disputed property in the open; Isaeus in the speech Concerning the Estate of Philoctemon. Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Athenians, says that this suit is brought before the archon, and that the examining magistrate introduces it into court.

[103742] Eis en elthen ("it came to one"). Used instead of "it was brought into agreement."

[103826] Eisepodizon. Used instead of "they were entering the land on foot" by Isaeus in the speech Against the Orgeones.

[103940] Eis eo ("at dawn"). Used instead of "toward the breaking day" by Isaeus in the speech Concerning the Estate of Ciron.

[104059] Eisfresein. Used instead of "to bring in, to admit," by Antiphon and Demosthenes in the eighth Philippic. The word is frequent in the old comedy.

[104206] Ekalistroun. Demosthenes in the speech Against Euergus and Mnesibulus, if it is genuine. It is an Ionic word, and perhaps the speech may be by Dinarchus; for he too uses foreign words.

[104392] Hekates nesos ("the island of Hecate"). Lycurgus Against Menesaechmus. Before Delos lies a small island, which by some is called Psammetiche, as Phanodemus says in his first book. Semus, in the first book of his Deliaca, says it was called Psammetiche because the goddess was honored with offerings of meal-cakes (psammeta); the "psammeta" are a kind of cake.

[104753] Hekatombaion ("Hecatombaeon"). The name of a month. Hyperides. Ammonius, at any rate, says it was called so from the fact that most hecatombs were sacrificed in this month.

[104927] Hekatomnos. A proper name.

[104955] Hekatompedon ("the Hundred-Footer"). Lycurgus in the work entitled An Account of His Public Administration. The Parthenon was called by some "Hecatompedon" on account of its beauty and good proportion, not on account of its size, as Menecles or Callicrates says in the work On Athens.

[105241] Ekdeia ("deficiency"). Hyperides, in the speech Against Pasicles: "but if there be any deficiency," that is, "if there be any shortfall of the money previously available."

[105414] Ekdexamenos ("having taken up"). Demosthenes On Behalf of Ctesiphon: "having taken up and proposed." "To take up" (ekdexasthai) is, having received from another, to undertake the matter oneself in the second place. But one must consider how the passage in the fifth Philippic, spoken by the orator, stands: "and the seeming to have taken up the things done by those men."

[105787] Ekdikasasthai ("to exact by a fresh suit"). To exact afresh by means of a suit; Isaeus in the speech Against Callicrates.

[105910] Ekdosis ("a putting-out"). The maritime loan, as it were "a giving out" (exo dosis); Demosthenes Against Aphobus, book one.

[106035] Ekkleteuein ("to compel attendance"). To bring into court, that someone may be compelled to give testimony; Aeschines in his Defense on the Embassy.

[106185] Eklogeis ("collectors"). Those who collect and exact the debts owed to the public treasury. Antiphon, in his work Concerning the Tribute of the Samothracians: "for there were chosen among us as collectors those who seemed to have the most property." Lysias, in the speech Against Aresandrus: "but now we register everything with the collectors of the tribute."

[106547] Eklozete. Demosthenes Against Meidias. They called the noise made in the mouth a "klosmos," which they used for the driving off of the performances they did not gladly hear.

[106722] Ekmarturia ("deposition by proxy"). It differs from the ordinary deposition in that the deposition is of those present, but the "ekmarturia" is of those absent. Most clearly Demosthenes teaches about these matters in the speech Against Stephanus, and Dinarchus in the speech On Behalf of Aeschines Against Deinias.

[107038] Ek periousias ("out of abundance"). Demosthenes On Behalf of Ctesiphon: "but this man accuses me out of abundance." It is better to understand it thus: that I am in the utmost peril, but he accuses me out of his great superfluity—not concerning money, as some suppose.

[107308] Ekplintheusas. Used instead of "having dissolved and taken out the bricks" by Isaeus in the speech Against Diocles.

[107425] Ekpolemosai ("to provoke to war"). Demosthenes in the Philippics, used instead of "to bring into a state of war," as also often in Thucydides. In the Atticianus copies, however, it is written with an eta, as also in Xenophon in the sixth book of the Hellenica.

[107687] Ek proagoges ("from compulsion"). Used instead of "by necessity and not from nature nor simply." The metaphor is from those not at rest, but forced forward from their barriers by bonds. Demosthenes Against Aristocrates.

[107908] Ekfulloforesai ("to vote out by leaves"). If one of the councillors seemed to be doing wrong, the Council voted about him whether he ought no longer to be a councillor. Instead of voting-pebbles they used leaves, by which each marked his own decision. Dinarchus, in the speech Against Polyeuctus, "when he had been voted out by leaves."

[108246] Elaious. A city in the Thracian Chersonese.

[108291] Elateia. Demosthenes On Behalf of Ctesiphon; it was the greatest of the cities among the Phocians. From the orator again, in the seventh book of the Philippics, if it is genuine, these words: "in Cassopia, three cities, Pandosia and Bucheta and Elateia." It must be said that it is better written in some copies with a rho, "Elatreia"; for Theopompus, at any rate, in his forty-third book, says there are four cities of the Cassopaeans, and not three as Demosthenes says—Elatreia and Pandosia and Bitia and Bucheta.

[108808] Elafrotatous ("most light, gentle"). The ancients use the word in a good sense too, instead of "most gentle," as the opposite of "most grievous and most oppressive." Isocrates in the Panathenaicus: "rendering themselves as light and as moderate as possible to their associates."

[109088] Eleokopon ("marsh-cutters"). Lysias in the speech Against Demosthenes for Maladministration of a Guardianship: "spending five months in company with the marsh-cutters." By "marsh-cutters" the orator would mean those who cut the marshes (hele), with an epsilon inserted, as "marsh-grown parsley" in Homer. Perhaps, however, the name comes from the "eleon," which is a wooden vessel. Aristophanes in the Knights: "if he should take down the eleon against me."

[109547] Eleutherios Zeus ("Zeus the Liberator"). Hyperides: "to Zeus, then, gentlemen of the jury, the surname of being called 'Liberator' came because the freedmen built the stoa near him." But Didymus says the orator is mistaken; for he was called "Liberator" because the Athenians were delivered from the Persians. That he is inscribed as "Savior" but is also named "Liberator," Menander too makes clear.

[109948] Eleusinia. Hyperides in the speech On Behalf of Callippus. To the victors at the Eleusinia a prize was given. The city Eleusis was named after Eleusinus the son of Hermes. Others give other causes and say that the Eleusinia is only a festival.

[110193] Helikteres ("spiral earrings"). A kind of earring; Lysias.

[110253] Helixos. One of the distinguished men among the Megarians.

[110313] Hellanodikai ("the Hellanodikai"). Hyperides in the speech On Behalf of Callippus, against the Eleans. Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Eleans, says that the Eleans at first established one Hellanodikes, but after the passage of time two, and at the last nine. But Aristodemus the Elean says that those who conducted the contest at the last were ten Hellanodikai, one from each tribe.