WORK: Lexicon of the Ten Attic Orators  (slug: harpocration-lexicon-of-the-ten-attic-orators-a57385)

CHAPTER: 01-lexicon-of-the-ten-attic-orators



[221373] murtanon. MYRTANON Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. It was a fort in Thrace, as Marsyas the elder says in the seventh book of his Macedonian History, and Anaximenes in the Philippics.

[221575] murtis. MYRTIS Demosthenes, in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon, listing those who betrayed each city, says, "of the Argives, Myrtis, Teledamus, Mnaseas." But Theopompus, in his fifty-first book, names Paseas and Amyrtaeus as the Argives who took Macedon's side. One must therefore consider whether these are scribal errors.

[221902] muson_leian. THE BOOTY OF THE MYSIANS Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. It is a proverb so spoken, which Demon, in the first book of his work On Proverbs, says took its origin from the neighbours and brigands who overran Mysia during the absence abroad of Telephus the king. The proverb is used by others, among them Strattis in the Medea and Simonides in his iambics.

[222288] nais. NAIS A courtesan; Lysias in the speech Against Philonides, if genuine, and Aristophanes in the Gerytades. Perhaps too in the Plutus, where the comic poet says "Lais loves you, but not for your sake, Philonides," it should be written with an "n," "Nais."

[222549] nannion. NANNION Hyperides in the speech Against Patrocles, if genuine. Apollodorus, in his work On Courtesans, says this courtesan was called "Goat" (Aix) because she devoured Thallus the shopkeeper—for that goats delight in young shoots (thallos) Sophocles too shows in the Shepherds: "for early, before any of the herdsmen could see, bringing freshly plucked shoots to the she-goats, I saw an army marching along the seaside headland." There is mention of her also in comedy. And Antiphanes the younger, in his work On Courtesans, says that Nannion was nicknamed "Proscenium" ("Stage-front"), because from the outside she seemed more shapely.

[223196] naukleros. NAUCLERUS ("Shipmaster / Tenement-keeper") Hyperides, in the speech On the Salt-fish, uses the word not only as ordinary usage employs it, but also of the man who has rented a house or tenement-block for the purpose of collecting the rents, as the same orator shows in the speech Against Aristogeiton, and Sannyrion in the Laughter, and Diphilus in the Merchant.

[223571] naukrarika. NAUCRARIKA Demosthenes in the speech Against Timocrates. Perhaps, however, it is better to read in the Attic copies "Naucratitica," so that it refers to a Naucratite ship or to Naucratites sailing aboard; for Naucratis was of old the trading-post of Egypt. But if it is "naucrarika," it would mean the affairs of the magistrates; for of old they called the magistrates "naucrari," as Herodotus too shows in his fifth book. And Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Athenians, says: "They appointed demarchs having the same charge as the former naucrari."

[224139] nautodikai. NAUTODIKAI ("Sea-judges") Lysias in the speech Against Alcibiades, if the speech is genuine. The "nautodikai" were a magistracy at Athens; Craterus at any rate, in the fourth book of the Decrees, says: "if anyone born of two foreign parents enrols in a phratry, any Athenian who wishes, of those who have a right of action, may prosecute him, and the case shall be entered on the last day of the month before the nautodikai." Aristophanes in the Banqueters: "having dyed him, I want suddenly to bring the foreigner before the nautodikai . . ."

[224696] neales. NEALES ("Freshly caught") Demosthenes in the speech Against Aristogeiton, if genuine. The man recently caught was so described, by a metaphor drawn from fish.

[224864] nebrizon. NEBRIZON Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. Some take it of the celebrant putting on a fawnskin, or also girding those being initiated with fawnskins; others, of tearing fawns to pieces according to some unspeakable doctrine. The "nebrismos" is mentioned also in Arignote's work On the Mysteries.

[225187] neelata. NEELATA ("Freshly ground meal") Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon, by ellipsis for "freshly ground barley-meal," that is, meal recently milled, which they would moisten with honey, throwing in raisins and green chickpeas, and distribute to those performing the rites. Some called it ambrosia, others "the blessed food."

[225532] nemeas_charadra. THE RAVINE OF NEMEA Aeschines in the speech On the Embassy. A certain place in the Peloponnese was so called; Ephorus, in his twenty-third book: "near the Ravine of Nemea."

[225723] nemeas_auletridos_mnemoneuei_upereides_en. HYPERIDES MENTIONS NEMEAS THE FLUTE-GIRL IN Hyperides mentions Nemeas the flute-girl in the speech Against Patrocles, if genuine. But Polemon, in his work On the Acropolis, cites a decree by which it was forbidden at Athens to give to a female slave or freedwoman or prostitute or flute-girl the name of a quadrennial festival. It is worth puzzling, then, how the flute-girl came to be so named.

[226163] nemeseia. NEMESEIA Demosthenes in the speech Against Spudias. Perhaps there was a festival of Nemesis, at which they performed the customary rites for the departed.

[226329] neon. NEON Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. Concerning this man's friendship with Philip, Theopompus gives an account in the second book of the Philippics.

[226503] neoria. NEORIA ("Dockyards") NEORIA and NEOSOIKOI: Perhaps "neoria" is the whole place into which the triremes are hauled up and from which they are again launched, as Lycurgus indicates in the Account of His Public Acts and Andocides in the speech On the Peace, if the speech is genuine.

[226793] neosi. NEOS Demosthenes in the speech Against Aeschines. It is a city in Phocis, which Herodotus in his eighth book calls Neon, but Androtion in the sixth book of the Atthis calls Neones.

[226982] nikaia. NICAEA Aeschines in the speech On the Embassy. It is a city of Locris, lying by the sea.

[227080] nikanor. NICANOR Hyperides in the speech Against Demosthenes. There were three men named Nicanor: one the son of Balacrus, another the son of Parmenion, and a third a Stageirite by birth, whom the orator would now be mentioning.

[227310] nike_athena. NIKE ATHENA Lycurgus in the speech On the Priestess. That a wingless statue of Athena Nike, holding a pomegranate in the right hand and a helmet in the left, was honoured among the Athenians, Heliodorus the guide has shown in the first book of his work On the Acropolis.

[227595] notheia. NOTHEIA ("The bastards' portion") What is given to bastards out of the paternal estate is so called; it amounted to as much as a thousand drachmas. Lysias in the speech Against Calliphanes for usurpation of citizenship, if genuine; Isaeus in the speech Against Lysibius concerning an heiress. Aristophanes in the Birds: "And what if my father, dying, leaves me his property, the bastard's share? The law does not allow it." In what matters bastards were not allowed to share, Hyperides has shown in the second speech Against Aristagora. And Demosthenes, in the speech Against Aristocrates, says that they were enrolled in the Cynosarges.

[228243] nomofulakes. NOMOPHYLAKES ("Guardians of the laws") A magistracy at Athens was so called, distinct from the Thesmothetae; Deinarchus in the speech Against Himeraeus and in the speech Against Pytheas. Philochorus, in his seventh book, has discussed various matters concerning them, including that they used to compel the magistrates to abide by the laws.

[228598] notion. NOTION Lysias in the speech Against Mantias. That it is a place lying before the city of the Colophonians, Theopompus says in his fifteenth book.

[228753] numfaion. NYMPHAEUM Aeschines, in the speech Against Ctesiphon, speaks of the Nymphaeum in the Pontus. But Craterus, in the ninth book of the Decrees, says that the Nymphaeum paid a talent to the Athenians.

[228961] xenizein. XENIZEIN Demosthenes in the appeal against Eubulides, often. Some take it to mean "to use a foreign idiom," but perhaps it would rather mean "to spend time abroad."

[229137] xenikon_en_korinthoi. THE MERCENARY FORCE AT CORINTH Demosthenes in the Philippics, and Aristophanes in the Plutus. Conon first organized it; Iphicrates later took it over, and Chabrias; with it they cut to pieces the Lacedaemonian division, under the generalship of Iphicrates and Callias, as Androtion and Philochorus say.

[229463] xeniteuomenous. XENITEUOMENOUS ("Serving as mercenaries") For "serving for pay"; the mercenaries are called "foreigners" (xenoi). Isocrates in the address To Philip and in one of the Letters to Philip. Antiphanes in the Euthydicus: "I served as a soldier, living abroad as a mercenary."

[229751] xeraloifein. XERALOIPHEIN ("To anoint dry") Aeschines in the speech Against Timarchus. They used "xeraloiphein" of anointing oneself without bathing, as Didymus says in the twenty-eighth book of his Tragic Vocabulary and Nicander in the eighteenth book On the Attic Dialect, adding that perhaps what the trainers call "to be rubbed down dry" was also so described. Sophocles in the Peleus: "anointing oneself dry through the folds of the garment."

[230200] xupetaiones. XYPETAIONES Hyperides in the speech Against Archestratides. Xypete is a deme of the tribe Cecropis, from which the demesman is "Xypetaion," as Diodorus says.

[230372] xustis. XYSTIS Lysias in the speech Against Nicodemus and Critobulus. The "xystis" is a woman's garment, embroidered, as other comic poets make clear, and Antiphanes in the Euploea: "the man dressed in embroideries as in a xystis." There is also a tragic costume so called, as Cratinus in the Seasons shows; and there is also an equestrian garment, as Aristophanes in the Clouds.

[230753] obolostatoi. OBOLOSTATAI ("Petty usurers") For "they lend"; Lysias in the speech Against Nicides, if genuine. In the speech Against Lacrates, explaining it, he says: "not even if one were to reckon a far smaller interest than these petty usurers exact from the rest." They used to call moneylenders "obolostatai," as in Hyperides in the speech Against Polyeuctus and often in comedy.

[231138] hodos. HODOS ("Road") Demosthenes, in the speech Against Aristocrates, says "or having cut him down on the road," for "in ambush and in waylaying." They say the Homeric phrase "or to go upon the road" is of this kind too. But if the first vowel is left unaspirated ("odos"), it means a step or threshold, as in Lysias in the speech Against Philip, if the speech is genuine.

[231513] othneios. OTHNEIOS ("Alien") Isaeus in the speech Against Stratocles, for "belonging to another," as also in Plato in the first book of the Laws.

[231660] oiethen. OIETHEN Isaeus in the speech Against Elpagoras. Oie is a deme of the tribe Pandionis, as Diodorus says; "Oiethen" is an adverb of place ("from Oie"). Philochorus, in his third book, records Oie as a daughter of Cephalus and the wife of Charops.

[231915] oikeos. OIKEOS Lysias, in the speech Against Theomnestus, as if explaining the word, says that "oikeos" means "a servant."

[232039] oikema. OIKEMA For "prison," Deinarchus in the Tyrrhenian speech and in the speech Against Posidippus; for "brothel," Aeschines in the speech Against Timarchus.

[232201] oikiskoi. OIKISKOS For "a certain small house," Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. The Attic writers used to call what we call a "fowl-house" an "oikiskos"; Aristophanes in the Storks, Metagenes in the Breezes. From these passages Didymus seems to go astray in expounding the Demosthenic phrase as well.

[232521] oineis. OINEIS Hyperides in the speech Against Aristogeiton. One of the ten tribes among the Athenians.

[232626] oinoe. OINOE OINOE and OINAIOS: Hyperides in the speech Against Aristogeiton: "and they said they had heard at Oinoe that a battle had taken place." Oinoe is a deme of the tribe Hippothontis, near Eleutherae; another is of the tribe Aiantis, near Marathon; and from either deme the demesman is called "Oinaios." The orator would now be mentioning the one near Eleutherae, which Thucydides too mentions in his second book.

[233049] oion. OION Isaeus in the speech On the Adoption. There are two demes in Attica spoken of in the neuter, called Oion. Philochorus, in his third book, says they were so named because they had no inhabited place at all, but were left solitary; for the ancients called "solitary" (monon) "oion." The Ceramic Oion belongs to the tribe Leontis, and the Decelean Oion to the tribe Hippothontis, as Diodorus says. The demesmen from either were called "from Oion" (ex Oiou). There were others, however, called "from Oie" (Oiethen), as said above.

[233588] oios_ei. OIOS EI OIOS EI and OIOS TE EI: the phrase without "te" means "you wish" and "you have chosen"; the one with "te" means "you are able." Lysias used both in the speech Against Lysitheus, if genuine.

[233796] oisume. OISYME Antiphon in the speech Against Laispodias. It is a city of Thrace, as others say, including Ephorus in his fourth book.

[233932] hoti_diamartanei_demosthenes_en. THAT DEMOSTHENES IS MISTAKEN IN That Demosthenes is mistaken in the speech Against Neaera, when he says that the Plataeans were depicted in the Painted Stoa; for no one has said this, just as neither has Craterus in his collection of the decrees. THE LAW FROM BELOW: Demosthenes in the speech Against Aristocrates. Didymus says either that the orator means the Heliaea, because of the courts some were called "those above" and some "those below," or, on account of the form of the writing on the wooden tablets, which was written "as the ox plows" (boustrophedon), Demosthenes calls the law that begins from the left-hand side "the law from below"; for that the tablets and the wooden pillars were written boustrophedon, Euphorion has shown in the Apollodorus. Or because, as Anaximenes says in the Philippics, Ephialtes moved the tablets and the pillars down from the acropolis to the council-chamber and the agora.

[234883] hoti_exakischilia. THAT SIX THOUSAND That the assessed value of Attica was six thousand talents. Demosthenes, in the speech On the Symmories, says: "but for us the assessed value of the land, providing a fund of eight thousand talents, will be heard." Either, then, this is a scribal error, or perhaps the orator overstates it, so that the city may seem to have a greater fund for the war against the King. For that the assessed value of Attica was six thousand talents he both says in what follows in the speech, when the matter is resolved, giving the reckoning of it in detail, and Philochorus shows in the tenth book of the Atthis.

[235520] oligoresete. OLIGORESETE ("You will disregard") For "you will neglect," Demosthenes in the Philippics. "To disregard" (oligorein) means to have "little care" (oligen oran); and "little" here stands for "not even a little," as in the line "and Tydeus begot a son in little like himself"—and "ora" means care.

[235829] holoschoinoi. HOLOSCHOINOS Aeschines in the speech On the Embassy. Theophrastus, in the fourth book On Plants, having said that there are three kinds of rush, says that the third, differing in size and fleshiness, is called "holoschoinos."

[236070] homereuontas. HOMEREUONTAS ("Serving as hostages") Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon, of the Lacedaemonians sent up to Alexander. Cleitarchus, in his fifth book, says the hostages given by the Lacedaemonians were fifty. Hostages (homeroi) are those given as a pledge of an agreement; for "homeresai" means "to make a compact": Homer, "a messenger came to me from my companions in agreement." But Theopompus says that among the ancients "homerein" meant "to follow"; those, then, given to follow up the things agreed are from this called hostages.

[236626] homeridai. HOMERIDAI Isocrates in the Helen. The Homeridae are a clan in Chios, which Acusilaus in his third book, and Hellanicus in the Atlantis, say was named after the poet. But Seleucus, in the second book On Lives, says that Crates errs in supposing, in the Hieropoiiai, that the Homeridae are descendants of the poet; for they were named after the hostages (homeroi), since once the women of the Chians, driven mad at the Dionysia, came to blows with the men, and when they had given one another bridegrooms and brides as hostages they ceased, and their descendants are called Homeridae.

[237221] homoerkes. HOMOERKES Deinarchus in the speech against the special plea of Callippus, for "under one enclosure," that is, within the same wall.

[237365] homose_ienai. HOMOSE IENAI ("To come to close quarters") Hyperides, in the speech Against Athenogenes, says "but I wish to come to close grips with this argument," for "to set myself against it." It is said by a metaphor from going up against spears, that is, advancing from the opposite side to the same point and neither turning nor fleeing.

[237710] homou. HOMOU ("Together / nearly") Demosthenes, in the speech Against Aristogeiton, says "the Athenians altogether are nearly twenty thousand," for "approximately." It is common among the Attic writers. And Menander somewhere: "for now she is near to giving birth."

[237977] onetor. ONETOR Isocrates in the speech On the Antidosis. To this man would belong the speeches written by Demosthenes concerning ejectment. That he was one of those who served as choregos, see Heliodorus's work On the Tripods at Athens.

[238215] onomazon. ONOMAZON ("Naming") For "expressing," "using interpretation," Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon.

[238338] oxuthumia. OXYTHYMIA Hyperides, in the speech Against Demades, says: "concerning whom the monument would far more justly be set up among the oxythymia than in our sacred places." Some, among them Aristarchus, say "oxythymia" are the trees on which some hang themselves, from "using one's anger sharply (oxeos)"; these they cut down, banish, and burn. But Didymus, citing a phrase of Autocleides from the works of the exegetes, says that "oxythymia" are the refuse and offscourings; for these are carried off to the crossroads when they cleanse the houses. In the commentary on the speech Against Demades he says they are the shrines of Hecate at the crossroads, where some carried the things of purification, which are called "oxythymia." Eupolis in the Demes: "whom it were fitting to be burned, gibbering, at the crossroads and among the oxythymia, as a scapegoat for the city." The word is also found in Pytheas in the speech Against Adeimantus.

[239288] opisthodomos. OPISTHODOMOS ("Back chamber") Demosthenes, in the speech On the Organization, says: "Some people, you know, opened the back chamber the other day." The chamber behind the temple of Athena is so called, in which they stored the moneys.

[239538] orgas. ORGAS Demosthenes in the speech On the Organization. "Orgades" are called the bushy and mountainous tracts that are not cultivated, whence the Megarian Orgas, being such a tract, got its name—the one over which the Athenians went to war with the Megarians.

[239803] orgeonas. ORGEONES There is a speech of Isaeus Against the Orgeones; the orgeones are those who come together in honour of gods or heroes; for "to celebrate orgia" (orgiazein) is to sacrifice and perform the customary rites—either from "stretching out the hands" (oregein to cheire), or from the "orgia," or because they performed the rites in the "orgades" (groves) and in the sacred groves. The poets, however, applied the word simply to priests, as Antimachus somewhere and Aeschylus in the Mysians do. Perhaps later it became customary for some to assemble in honour of certain of the dead, and these were likewise called orgeones, as may be gathered from the will of Theophrastus.

[240490] orgeon. ORGEON For "of the orgeones," Lysias in the speech On the Estate of Theopompus.

[240579] orika_zeuge. ORIKA ZEUGE ("Mule-teams") The teams of mules ("orees," that is, half-asses), Aeschines in the speech On the Embassy; for that they called mules "orees," both Homer and Aristophanes in the Frogs show.

[240794] orignethenai. ORIGNETHENAI For "to desire," Antiphon in the first book of the Truth.

[240880] orkane. ORKANE Lycurgus in the second speech Against Lycophron. Perhaps the fence, that is, the enclosure and the dry-stone wall, is so called, from "warding off" (erykein) or from being a "fence" (herkos). Homer: "having said that the dry-stone walls were a fence for the threshing-floor."

[241172] ornitheutes. ORNITHEUTES ("Fowler") The bird-catcher; Deinarchus in the speech Against Proxenus, Plato or Cantharus in the Symmachia. There is also in the New Comedy a play, the Fowler, by Nicostratus.

[241375] horos. HOROS ("Boundary marker") The Attic writers so called the inscriptions placed upon mortgaged houses and lands, showing that they were pledged to a creditor; Demosthenes in the speech Against Spudias, and Menander in the Deposit.

[241612] oron. ORON A certain agricultural implement, as Isaeus indicates in the speech Against Diocles. Perhaps, however, "oron" in Aeschylus in the Cercyon and in Menander in the second Heiress means a certain wooden press, with which they press the trodden grapes.

[241872] orrodein. ORRODEIN For "to fear," Andocides in the speech On the Indemnity. The word is common among them. ORRODIA means fear; Demosthenes in the prefaces to his public speeches.

[242052] orugma. ORYGMA ("The pit") This was the special name for the place at Athens where malefactors were punished; Lycurgus in the speech Against Aristogeiton.

[242208] hosion. HOSION ("Profane / secular") Hyperides, in the speech Against Aristogeiton, says "both the sacred and the secular moneys"; and Isocrates in the Areopagiticus, "both the sacred and the secular." That "the secular" (hosia) means "the public" Demosthenes clearly teaches in the speech Against Timocrates concerning these matters: "and the sacred moneys—the tithes of the goddess and the fiftieth parts of the other gods—they have plundered," and a little later, "and the secular moneys, which were ours, they have stolen." But Didymus says they used "hosion" in two senses, both for the sacred and for the private.

[242829] oschoforoi. OSCHOPHOROI Hyperides in the speech Against Demeas, if genuine. Concerning the oschophoroi others have spoken, including Philochorus in his second book. But Ister, in the thirteenth book speaking of Theseus, writes thus: that for the sake of the common safety it was ordained to enrol as the so-called oschophoroi two of those pre-eminent in birth and wealth. The "osche" is a vine-branch with the clusters hanging from it; some call this "oreschas."

[243293] hoti_nomos_estin_uper. THAT THERE IS A LAW THAT ONE OVER That there is a law that a man over forty years old may serve as choregos for boys, both Aeschines says in the speech Against Timarchus and Aristotle in the Constitution of the Athenians.

[243539] hoti_xenous_tinas. THAT CERTAIN FOREIGNERS That Satyrus begged from Philip certain foreign prisoners of his own, who were digging in Philip's vineyard and were kept bound during the drinking, Aeschines says in the speech On the Embassy; but Demosthenes, in the speech Against Aeschines, says that he begged off the daughters of Apollophanes, and he seems to be nearer the truth; for Aristotle too, in one of the letters to Philip, says that he released the daughters of Apollophanes to Satyrus the actor.

[244045] hoti_oi_alontes_ep. THAT THOSE CONVICTED OF That those convicted of involuntary homicide retained the power to administer their own property, Demosthenes indicates in the speech Against Aristocrates, and Theophrastus shows in the thirteenth book of the Laws.

[244305] hoti_oi_poietoi. THAT ADOPTED SONS That adopted sons had no authority to return to the paternal household unless they left legitimate sons in the household of the adopter, Antiphon shows in the guardianship-speech Against Callistratus, and Solon in the twenty-first book of the Laws.

[244590] hoti_ta_epikeruttomena_tisi_chremata_epi. THAT THE MONEYS PROCLAIMED FOR CERTAIN PERSONS WERE PLACED UPON That the moneys proclaimed for certain persons were placed upon the altars, Isaeus has said in the speech Against Eucleides the Socratic, if the speech is genuine.

[244861] hoti_pros_ten_fulen. THAT TO THE TRIBE That suits against slaves were entered before the tribe of the owner, Isaeus shows in the defence in a desertion suit Against Apollodorus.

[245040] hoti_paidi_kai_gunaiki_ouk. THAT WITH A CHILD AND A WOMAN IT WAS NOT That with a child or a woman it was not permitted to make a contract beyond a medimnos of barley, Isaeus says in the speech On the Estate of Aristarchus.

[245264] hoti_chilias. THAT A THOUSAND That women who behaved indecently in the streets were fined a thousand drachmas, Hyperides has said in the second speech Against Aristagora. And Crobylus the comic poet says that the law laid down concerning these matters is that of Philippides.

[245541] ouk_epi_tes_autes_ormei_tois_pollois. HE DOES NOT RIDE AT THE SAME ANCHOR AS THE MANY Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. It is a proverb spoken elliptically; one must therefore supply from outside the word "anchor."

[245773] ousias_dike. SUIT FOR PROPERTY Those who went to law over lands or houses against those holding them tried, as their second action, the property-suit; the first action being, for houses, for the rent, and for lands, for the produce; and the third, after these, the ejectment-suit. The winners were allowed to take possession of the properties even if they lost the suit for the produce or the rent and even if they lost the second suit, that of the property; but if they were also convicted in the ejectment-suit, they were no longer allowed to keep possession, but had then to withdraw from the properties in favour of those who had won the judgment against them. These matters are found in other orators too, but are stated most precisely by Isaeus both in the speech Against Timonides concerning land and in the speech Against Dorotheus concerning ejectment. Theophrastus too has discussed the suit in the eighteenth book On the Laws.

[246712] ofrunion. OPHRYNION Demosthenes in the speech Against Apaturius. It is a city of the Troad, as Androtion shows in the third book of the Atthis.

[246857] ocheion. OCHEION For "vehicle," Deinarchus in the defence Against Antiphanes concerning the horse; but for "appointed for covering," the same author in the same speech; for he says, "they buy the horse from me for covering." Lycurgus, in the speech On the Organization, says "the neighbours of the ocheion." Perhaps it refers to a certain place in which the covering of beasts takes place, or vehicles are let out for hire.

[247282] pagasai. PAGASAE Demosthenes in the Philippics. Pagasae is the seaport of the Pheraeans, as Theopompus shows in the fifth book of the Philippics.

[247429] paianieis. PAIANIEIS PAIANIEIS and PAIONIDAI: Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon: "when he indicted before the Areopagus Demomeles of Paeania, who was his cousin." Didymus says it should be written "Paeanea," without the "i." There are two demes of the Paianieis of the tribe Pandionis, which Diodorus says are called Upper Paeania and Lower Paeania; and from either deme alike the demesman, he says, is called "Paianieus." These differ from the Paionidai, as Ister indicates in the Disorderly Miscellany. The orators mention these too, as Deinarchus does in the speech Against Stephanus concerning the conduit. This is a deme of the tribe Leontis, as the same Diodorus shows.

[248114] palinairetos. PALINAIRETOS ("Re-elected") Deinarchus in the indictment of Polyeuctus after he had been expelled by ballot. Perhaps the orator calls Polyeuctus "re-chosen," since, after bringing malicious charges against certain men, he then took bribes and came to the aid of those very men, as is shown in the speech itself; or because, convicted as a malicious prosecutor, he was fined, and was therefore barred from speaking until he had paid the fine he incurred, and then, having paid it, he spoke again, as this too is shown in the speech. For that they called such men "palinairetoi," and also those who had been voted out of office and then voted in again, both Eupolis in the Baptae shows and Archippus in the Fishes, who says: "choosing managers of affairs and rejecting them, then approving them again—if then we do this, there is a danger that all of us alike may come to be 're-chosen.'" Of buildings demolished and rebuilt, Pindar uses it in the Dithyrambs.

[249087] palinskion. PALINSKION Isaeus, in the speech Against the Orgeones, "nor that the place become shaded over," for "thick-shaded"; Archilochus in trimeters, "they leaned against the wall in shadow," for "in the dark"; and Sophocles in the Inachus, "with shadowing storm," for "gloomy."

[249371] palimbolon. PALIMBOLON ("Shifty") Aeschines in the speech On the Embassy. The man often turned over and over in trafficking, "re-sold," is called "palimbolos," as is clear from Deinarchus's speech Against Polyeuctus and from Menander's Sicyonian.

[249619] palleneus. PALLENEUS Hyperides in the defence On Behalf of Chaerephilus. Pallene is a deme of the tribe Antiochis. The adverb of place Deinarchus, in the speech Against Stephanus, gives as "from Pallene" (Pallenethen), and the demesman is "Palleneus." That there is also a Pallene in Thrace is well known.

[249926] palamnaios. PALAMNAIOS Hyperides in the speech Against Demades. Those who slew people with their own hand (palame) they called "palamnaioi," as Autocleides too indicates in his exegetical work.

[250121] pambotades. PAMBOTADES Demosthenes in the speech Against Nicostratus. Pambotadae is a deme of the tribe Erechtheis.

[250238] pandaisia. PANDAISIA Isaeus in the speech Against Medon. The word occurs often also in the Old Comedy; "pandaisia" is to have everything in abundance and to lack nothing at the feast. For Didymus's explanation is over-elaborate.

[250468] pandemos_afrodite. APHRODITE PANDEMOS Hyperides in the speech Against Patrocles, if genuine. Apollodorus, in his work On the Gods, says that at Athens the Aphrodite established around the old agora was called "Pandemos" ("of all the people"), because there in old times all the people used to gather in the assemblies, which they called "agorai." Nicander, in the sixth book of his Colophonian History, says that Solon, having purchased comely persons, set them up in a house for the sake of the young men, and out of the moneys thus accruing founded a temple of Aphrodite Pandemos. "Pandemos" means "common to all."

[251086] pandia. PANDIA A festival at Athens held after the Dionysia.

[251148] pandosia. PANDOSIA Demosthenes in the Philippics. Concerning the capture of the cities in Cassopia, among which is Pandosia, Theopompus has given an account in his third book.

[251325] pandionis. PANDIONIS Demosthenes in the speech Against Meidias. It is one of the ten tribes among the Athenians, named after Pandion the son of Erichthonius, as many others say and Hyperides in the speech On Behalf of Phormisius.

[251556] panathenaia. PANATHENAEA Demosthenes in the Philippics. Two Panathenaea were held at Athens, the one each year, the other every fourth year, which they also called the Great Panathenaea. Isocrates, in the Panathenaicus, says "a little before the Great Panathenaea." Erichthonius the son of Hephaestus first held the festival, as Hellanicus and Androtion say, each in his first book of the Atthis. Before him it was called the Athenaea, as Ister has shown in the third book of his Attic History.

[252052] panaktos. PANACTUS Demosthenes in the speech Against Conon. It is a city between Attica and Boeotia, as Euripides too mentions in the Aegeus. Thucydides calls the place in the neuter, both elsewhere and in his fifth book, but Menander in the Psophodees (The Timid Man) uses the masculine.

[252342] pandrosos. PANDROSOS A woman's name.

[252380] paragrafe. PARAGRAPHE ("Special plea / marginal mark") The orators use the word not only in the common and familiar sense, but Isocrates, specially, in the speech On the Antidosis says, "read, beginning from the paragraphe," meaning from the line which to this day we call a "paragraph"; and the sense is, "from where I made a marginal note"—that is, "from where I set it down." But Hyperides, in the speech Against Demosthenes, says "not even up to the paragraphe," for "not even up to some fixed and marked-off time"—that is, a bounded time.

[252925] paraggelia. PARANGELIA ("Canvassing") Demosthenes, in the speech Against Aeschines: "how great the zeal and canvassing has been concerning this contest." Aeschines too used the same notion in a way in the speech Against Ctesiphon: "you see the preparation, men of Athens, and the array, how great it has become, and the solicitations in the marketplace which certain people have employed." Deinarchus, in the impeachment Against Polyeuctus: "both the private canvassings that have taken place and the solicitations."

[253443] parakaesis. PARAKLESIS For "exhortation." Isocrates in the Precepts: "wherefore we, having devised not an appeal (paraklesis) but having written a precept (parainesis)." It is set down, however, rarely, also for "entreaty"; Lycurgus, in the speech On the Priestess, having said earlier "if the contest were over some private matter, I would beg you to hear me with goodwill," a little later says "but as it is, I think you yourselves will do this even without any appeal from me."

[253925] paralos. PARALUS Demosthenes in the Philippics. One of the triremes dispatched by the Athenians for public services, taking its name from a certain hero, Paralus. Those who served aboard her were called "Paraloi," who for this service received four obols and stayed at home for the greater part of the year, and certain other privileges were theirs from the city, as Hyperides says in the speech Against Archestratides. Phylarchus too, in his twenty-first book, mentions the hero Paralus.

[254415] parabuston. PARABYSTON A certain one of the courts at Athens was so called, in which the Eleven gave judgment; Antiphon in the speech Against Nicocles concerning boundaries. Others of the comic poets mention it, including Timocles in the Orestautocleides. There was also, in bridal chambers, a couch called "parabystos," which Hyperides mentions in the speech Against Patrocles. These things seem to be said by metaphor from the stuffings (parabysmata)—that is, the packings—in cargoes.

[254903] parapeptokos. PARAPEPTOKOS For "subject to," Demosthenes in the speech Against Stephanus.

[254994] parakataboae. PARAKATABOE PARAKATABOE and PARAKATABALLEIN: those disputing over certain moneys confiscated to the city, and those contending with private persons over inheritances or heiresses, used to deposit a sum of money; and they had to forfeit this if they lost the suit. Now in disputes with the public treasury it is clear that a fifth part of the amount in dispute was deposited. Concerning the public cases this has often been said by Lysias, as in the speech Against Alcibiades concerning a house and in the speech Against Asopodorus concerning a house; and concerning the inheritance cases other orators again have spoken, including Hyperides in the second speech On the Estate of Hippeus. Demosthenes, however, in the special plea against Pantaenetus, concerning a private suit, says: "and after this he summons me to trial again, since he had quickly taken back the deposits."

[255886] parabaloito. PARABALOITO For "he should pass it on," Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon.

[255983] paredros. PAREDROS ("Assessor") Lycurgus in the speech On the Priestess. The word is common both among the orators and in the Old Comedy. Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Athenians, says: "Both the archon and the polemarch take assessors, two each, whomever they wish; and these are examined in the court before they sit as assessors, and they render account when they have served as assessors."

[256385] pareiai_ofeis. PAREIAI OPHEIS ("Cheek-snakes") Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. Certain snakes are called "pareiai" from having larger cheeks (pareiai), as Cratinus too indicates in the Trophonius. But Hyperides, in the speech Against Demades, writes thus: "that the orators are like snakes; for all snakes are hateful, but of the snakes themselves the vipers harm men, while the cheek-snakes devour the vipers themselves."

[256827] parresias. PARRESIAS For "abuse and reviling," Isocrates in the Busiris.

[256901] parakrouetai. PARAKROUETAI ("He cheats") For "he deceives." It is common both among the other Attic writers and in Demosthenes in the Philippics. The word is transferred from the practice of those who weigh or measure something striking the measures and shaking them down for the sake of gaining advantage, as Sophocles somewhere: "so that you neither strike short nor pour over the brim."

[257292] paraskenia. PARASKENIA Demosthenes in the speech Against Meidias. It seems that "paraskenia" is, as Theophrastus too indicates in the twentieth book of the Laws, the place appointed beside the stage for the preparations for the contest. But Didymus says that the entrances on either side of the orchestra are so called.

[257613] parasemos_retor. PARASEMOS RHETOR ("Counterfeit orator") Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. It is said by a metaphor from coins, which they call "parasema" ("counterfeit"), either because they are marked underneath by the money-changers with a certain sign that shows their baseness, or because they are struck and stamped falsely. For that "parasemos" is said of coins, the orator has shown in the speech Against Timocrates.

[258055] parastasis. PARASTASIS ("Court-fee") Isaeus in the speech On the Estate of Pyrrhus. The word is found in many of the Attic writers; it is a drachma paid by those bringing private suits. Menander in the Misogynist: "and there one draws out a two-leaved tablet, and one parastasis, a drachma." Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Athenians, speaking of the Thesmothetae, says thus: "there are indictments brought before them, for which a parastasis is paid: for usurpation of citizenship and for fraudulent acquisition of citizenship, if anyone by giving bribes escapes the charge of usurpation, and for false registration and false summons and conspiracy and non-registration and adultery." But Demetrius of Phalerum, in his work On Legislation, says that the arbitrators received the drachmas: one from the entering of the suit, which they called the parastasis, and another at each adjournment on oath.

[258962] parafruktorein. PARAPHRYKTOREIN Deinarchus in the indictment Against Deinias. To use the beacon-fires contrary to what is fitting—that is, to the advantage of the enemy and to the harm of one's friends—was so expressed, as the orator himself explained it in the speech.

[259233] paregguesen. PARENGYESEN PARENGYESEN and PARENGYETHENTOS: Isaeus, in the defence in the guardianship-suit Against Diophanes, says "the one being present, and the other taking it over from others, he handed it on (parengyesen)," for "he delivered it, charging each, the one to take and the other to give." And again he says "of the sums I had settled, two talents and thirty minas, and the part taken over by the farmer," for "received."

[259671] parelthein. PARELTHEIN For "to win," Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon.

[259759] parousia. PAROUSIA For "abundance," or "a cause of wealth, substance"; Demosthenes in the speech On the Organization, and Deinarchus in the speech On Behalf of the Ship. And Crates in the Beasts: "having a life of ease and an abundance of money."

[260007] parrasios. PARRHASIUS Isocrates in the speech On the Antidosis. That Parrhasius was a painter is plain to all; Juba, in the eighth book On Painters, goes through the man's career, and says he was the son and pupil of Euenor, and an Ephesian by birth.

[260259] pasinos. PASINOS Isocrates in the Aeginetic speech. A proper name.

[260327] pasion. PASION A proper name; a banker.

[260368] pataikion. PATAIKION A proper name; a thief and house-breaker.

[260432] pediaka. PEDIAKA Lysias in the speech Against Philip concerning a guardianship, if the speech is genuine. It is a district of Attica, which from its character was called "the Plain" (Pedion); it had pastures for sheep, and the things from there, it seems, were called "pediaka." The word is found in other orators too.

[260752] pedaritos. PEDARITUS Isocrates in the Archidamus. He is one of those sent out from Lacedaemon, a man of harmost rank, of noble birth, as Theopompus says in the second book of the Hellenica.

[260943] pezetairoi. PEZETAIROI ("Foot-companions") Demosthenes in the Philippics. Anaximenes, in the first book of the Philippics speaking of Alexander, says: "Then, having accustomed the most distinguished to ride, he called them Companions (hetairoi); the greater number and the foot-soldiers he divided into companies and squads and the other commands and named them 'foot-companions,' so that each group, sharing in the royal companionship, might remain most loyal."

[261407] pelanos. PELANOS Lycurgus in the speech On the Priestess. The word occurs often in many of the ancients. Apollonius of Acharnae, in his work On Festivals, writes thus: "and likewise the so-called pelanos." It is said to be certain cakes made for the gods from the grain taken off the threshing-floor. Sannyrion, in the Laughter, says: "a pelanos . . . which you mortals solemnly call barley-meal." Didymus says it is properly the cake made from fine flour (paipale), from which they make cakes, or from "being flattened out," or because they are white—Homer, "when snow has whitened the fields"—or from being bright, that is, white. Euripides, however, in the Orestes uses it in a special sense: "and wipe the foaming pelanos from his wretched mouth," which means the foam upon the mouth.

[262197] pentakosiomedimnon. PENTAKOSIOMEDIMNOI ("Five-hundred-measure men") Lysias in the speech On the Daughter of Onomacles. That Solon made four classes of all the Athenians, among whom were the five-hundred-measure men, Aristotle has shown in the Constitution of the Athenians.

[262472] pepirethos. PEPARETHUS Demosthenes, in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon, says "and the ravaging of Peparethus." This is an island not far from Euboea.

[262625] peison. PEISON Lysias in the speech Against Eratosthenes. One of the Thirty who held tyrannical power among the Athenians.

[262749] penestai. PENESTAI Demosthenes in the speech Against Aristocrates. The "Penestai" among the Thessalians are those who among the Lacedaemonians are the Helots; Xenophon at any rate, in the third book of the Hellenica, says of a certain person that "he also armed the Penestai against their masters." Staphylus has discussed them more fully in the third book On the Thessalians. He says they are called not only "Penestai" but also "Thessalictae."

[263196] pentekontarchos. PENTECONTARCHUS The commander of the fifty-oared ship, as Demosthenes shows in the speech On the Trierarchic Crown. That the ship rowed by fifty men was called a "penteconter" is evident.

[263402] pentekoste. PENTECOSTE ("The fiftieth") PENTECOSTE and PENTECOSTEUESTHAI and PENTECOSTOLOGOI: the "pentecoste" is a certain tax, and the "pentecostologoi" are those who collect this tax, and "pentecosteuesthai" is to be made to pay the fiftieth. These may be found both in the speech Against Meidias and in the special plea Against Lacritus of Demosthenes, and in Hyperides in the speech On the Gifts of Eubulus.

[263816] peplos. PEPLOS ("Robe") Isaeus in the speech On What Was Said in Macedonia. Concerning the robe carried up to Athena at the Great Panathenaea there is mention not only among the orators but also among the comic poets.

[264035] pergasethen. PERGASETHEN Isaeus in the speech Against Thoutimus. Pergase is a deme of the tribe Erechtheis; the demesman, they say, is named in two ways, "Pergaseus" and "Pergasethen."

[264221] periandros. PERIANDER A proper name.

[264259] peri_tes_en_delfois_skias. CONCERNING THE SHADOW AT DELPHI Demosthenes in the Philippics. Didymus says that the proverb "about the shadow of an ass" has been altered by the orator, who says "concerning the shadow at Delphi"; and it is said of those who quarrel about things of no worth.

[264547] perithoidai. PERITHOIDAI Demosthenes in the speech Against Polycles. It is a deme of the tribe Oineis.

[264651] perilaos. PERILAUS Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. It is a proper name.

[264742] periodos. PERIODOS ("Cycle") Demosthenes, in the Philippics, says "since indeed it is like the cycle or onset of a fever." Doctors call "periodic" those diseases that remit at fixed times and again grow more severe, such as tertian and quartan fevers; for in these the sick seem, on the days of remission, to suffer no illness at all, but to be well.

[265094] perioikion. PERIOIKION Isaeus in the speech Against Menecrates, "both the perioikion and the house." Perhaps it is what we call an "epoikion" (a farmstead).

[265252] peripolos. PERIPOLOS ("Patroller") Aeschines in the speech On the Embassy. Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Athenians, speaking of the ephebes, says thus: "In the second year, an assembly having been held in the theatre, after they have given the people a display in regard to their drill and have received a shield and a spear from the people, they patrol the country and pass their time in the guard-posts." It must therefore be observed that Aristotle says the ephebes spend one year among the patrollers, but Aeschines two; and perhaps for this reason the orator mentioned the matter, though all the ephebes of necessity patrol, namely because he himself spent two years among the patrollers; wherefore in giving testimony he made it clear.

[266003] peristatoi. PERISTATOI Isocrates in the speech On the Antidosis: "by feats of jugglery that are of no benefit, but by the foolish are crowded round (peristatoi)," for "round which the spectators stand in a circle." The word is also in the Archidamus and in Eupolis in the Flatterers.

[266288] peristasin. PERISTASIN Deinarchus in the Tyrrhenian speech: "after this, when I was already about to put to sea, Damon, having made a crowd around me and demanding that I bear witness," and so on. Perhaps what is meant is this: "he himself and those present with him stood around me in a circle and compelled me to bear witness," so as to have the same sense as "they made me hemmed in." In some copies it is written PARASTASIN.

[266718] peristoichizetai. PERISTOICHIZETAI ("He hems in") Demosthenes, in the Philippics, says "he hems us in while we delay and sit idle," by a metaphor from hunters; for in the sallies of wild beasts they set up upright stakes, which they call "stoichoi" or "stochoi," spreading nets out over them, so that if the beasts escape these they may fall into the nets, as Xenophon indicates in the treatise On Hunting. In some copies, however, it is written PERISTOICHIZETAI, in others PERISCHOINIZETAI.

[267211] peristoichoi. PERISTOICHOI Demosthenes, in the speech Against Nicostratus concerning the slaves of Arethusius: "he broke off the olive-saplings set in rows (peristoichoi)." Didymus calls a certain kind of olives "peristoichoi," which Philochorus named "stoichades." But perhaps the orator has called "peristoichoi" those planted in a row in a circle around the field.

[267580] pefasmenes. PEPHASMENES Lycurgus, in the speech Against Lycophron, for "having come to pass." But Lysias, in the speech Against Theomnestus, if genuine, says that "pephasmenos" means "openly."

[267774] peforiosthai. PEPHORIOSTHAI Lysias, in the letter to Polycrates against Empedus, if genuine, says "that one eye is greyer, or has grown filmed over," of an eye that is closed up, just as Euphorion uses the word; for there are certain eyes that have the lids relaxed and as it were half-closed. But if it is written PEPHORINOSTHAI, it would mean "to be thickened," from "phorine" (hide); for that they apply "phorine" to human beings too, Antiphon makes clear in the second book of the Truth.

[268267] pegai. PEGAE Andocides in the speech On the Peace, if genuine. Pegae is a place in Megara, as Hellanicus says in the fourth book of the Atthis.

[268412] pelex. PELEX Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon. Peleces is a deme of the tribe Leontis, as Diodorus the guide says.

[268537] pinakia. PINAKIA ("Tablets") The tablets let down in place of lots by those drawing lots. They seem to have been of bronze, as Demosthenes indicates in the speech On the Name. But in the Philippics, when he says "a small tablet, men of Athens, a small tablet is everything there," perhaps he means the tablet on which are inscribed the charges against those impeached, as is also shown in Deinarchus in his support of Aeschines.

[268967] pittheus. PITTHEUS Pitthos is a deme of the tribe Cecropis.

[269028] pleisteriasantes. PLEISTERIASANTES For "having bid higher in the price of things being sold," Lysias in the speech Against Andocides, if genuine. Plato the comic poet too uses the word in the Gryphons.

[269231] plerotes. PLEROTES Demosthenes in the speech Against Aristogeiton. They called "plerotai" those who paid up the loan-fund contribution to those who had either drawn it by lot or purchased it. These would be those we call "managers of loan-clubs." The word "plerotes" is also in the speech Against Meidias, and in Deinarchus's speech Against the Children of Patrocles.

[269600] plintheion. PLINTHEION The place in which the brick is moulded; Lysias in the speech Against Lysitheus.

[269705] paunteria. PLYNTERIA Lycurgus in the speech On the Priestess. A festival among the Athenians.

[269800] plotheus. PLOTHEUS Demosthenes in the appeal against Eubulides. Plotheia is a deme of the tribe Aegeis, whence the demesman is "Plotheus."

[269940] podostrabe. PODOSTRABE Hyperides both in the speech Against Athenogenes and in the speech Against Autocles. They called "podostrabai" certain devices contrived by hunters, into which the wild beasts, stepping, were caught. Xenophon has discussed their construction and use in his work On Hunting.

[270238] podokakke. PODOKAKKE ("Foot-stocks") Demosthenes in the speech Against Timocrates. The wooden frame in the prison was so called, either with the second "k" inserted, being a "torment of the feet" (podon kakosis), or by syncope, as Didymus says, as it were "a holding fast of the feet" (podokatoche). Lysias, in the speech Against Theomnestus, if genuine, explains the word; for he says, "the podokakke is what is now called 'to be bound in the stocks.'"

[270693] politeia. POLITEIA The orators are accustomed to use the word in a special sense for democracy, as both Isocrates in the Panegyricus and Demosthenes in the Philippics.

[270862] polemarchos. POLEMARCHUS Isaeus in the defence in a desertion-suit Against Apollodorus. There was a magistracy at Athens so called; it is one of the nine archons. Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Athenians, having gone through all that the polemarch administers, adds: "and he himself introduces the suits both of desertion and of want of a patron and of inheritances and of heiresses pertaining to the metics, and all the other matters that the archon handles for the citizens, the polemarch handles for the metics." Fittingly, then, the orator in the aforesaid speech says that Apollodorus was bound over before the polemarch; for Apollodorus was a metic, a Samian by birth. That Polemarchus is also a proper name—the brother of Lysias—both Lysias himself in the speech Against Eratosthenes and Plato both in the first book of the Republic and in the Phaedrus say.

[271735] poliochos. POLIOCHUS POLIOCHUS and POLYALCES: proper names.

[271796] pompeias. POMPEIAS ("Abuse") POMPEIAS and POMPEUEIN: for "abuse" and "to abuse," Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. He transfers it from those who at the Dionysiac processions abuse one another from the wagons. Menander in the Perinthia: "from the wagons come certain very abusive jeerings."

[272104] pompeia. POMPEIA ("Procession-gear") POMPEIA is the name for the implements prepared for the processions, as the same orator indicates in the speech Against Androtion. Philochorus says that the Athenians formerly used as procession-gear the things made from the property of the Thirty. Late, he says, Androtion too had other things made.

[272443] porios. PORIOS Demosthenes in the appeal against Eubulides. Porus is a deme of the tribe Acamantis; the demesman is "Porios."

[272570] porthmos. PORTHMOS Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. It is a city of Euboea.

[272664] polugnotos. POLYGNOTUS Lycurgus in the speech On the Priestess. Concerning Polygnotus the painter—a Thasian by birth, son and pupil of Aglaophon, who obtained Athenian citizenship either because he painted the Painted Stoa for nothing, or, as others say, the paintings in the Theseum and the Anaceum—others have given accounts, including Artemon in his work On Painters and Juba in his works On Painting.

[273070] polustratos. POLYSTRATUS Lysias in the speech Against Thrasybulus, if genuine. Polystratus, charged with mutilating the Hermae, was put to death by the Athenians. There would be another Polystratus, concerning whom there is a speech of Lysias entitled "Defence on Behalf of Polystratus on a charge of subverting the democracy." And there would be yet another Polystratus, whom Demosthenes mentions in the Philippics, saying that he once maintained a mercenary force at Corinth. Perhaps, however, here one ought to write "Polytropus" instead of "Polystratus"; for Didymus says that in no author has he found Polystratus commanding the mercenary force at Corinth. Polytropus, indeed, I found in the sixth book of Xenophon's Hellenica; but Xenophon neither said that this force was maintained by the Athenians, nor was Polytropus himself an Athenian.

[273919] poseideon. POSEIDEON Hyperides in the speech Against Mantitheus. The sixth month among the Athenians is so called.

[274035] potamos. POTAMOS Lysias in the speech Against Nicides for idleness. Potamos is a deme of the tribe Leontis, of which the demesman is "Potamios." They were ridiculed in comedy for readily admitting men fraudulently enrolled, as others show and Menander in the Twins.

[274302] proballomenous. PROBALLOMENOUS For "putting forward as a basis," as it were casting before the mind prior to the action, as Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. In the speech Against Aeschines he said "the policy of the state put forward and held in distrust," for "kept cautiously and on guard." But in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon he says "thus put forward as Pylagoras even with three or four electing him." And in the speech Against Meidias, "and I lodged a complaint that this man did wrong concerning the festival," for "I employed the customary and lawful complaint (probole) against those who do wrong concerning the festival." But in the Philippics he says "to ward off, or to look the enemy in the face, he neither knows how nor wishes," for "to extend the hands as if for battle."

[275113] probolas. PROBOLAS For "defences" made out of cities or walls or some other forces for safety and mastery, Demosthenes in the speech On the Treaty with Alexander, if genuine. But in Aeschines, in the speech On the Embassy, the word "probole" arises from "lodging a complaint" (proballesthai) that someone does wrong.

[275431] probouleuma. PROBOULEUMA What is decreed by the Council before it is brought before the people; Demosthenes in the speech Against Aeschines.

[275573] probolion. PROBOLION A kind of spear, which hunters use for the hunting of boars. Hyperides, in the speech On the Guarding of the Tyrrhenians, used the word figuratively, by metaphor. That it often means a kind of spear can be learned from Xenophon's work On Hunting.

[275842] proboloi. PROBOLOI The rocks jutting out into the sea, like certain headlands; Demosthenes in the Philippics.

[275953] proedroi. PROEDROI ("Presidents") They were chosen by lot by the prytaneis for each assembly, one from each tribe except the one holding the prytany, and they managed matters concerning the assemblies. They were called "proedroi" because they presided (proedreuon) over all the rest. The word is common among the orators, as in Demosthenes in the speech Against Androtion and in Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon. That the so-called epistates chooses them by lot, Aristotle has said in the Constitution of the Athenians.

[276483] proerosia. PROEROSIA Hyperides in the Delian speech. The name of a sacrifice.

[276562] prothesmias_nomos. THE LAW OF LIMITATION Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Phormio. The orator would mean the five-year limitation, as he indicates in the speech, and Lysias in the speech Against Menestratus, if the speech is genuine.

[276803] proklesis. PROKLESIS ("Challenge") When people were going to law, they were accustomed sometimes to demand maidservants or servants for examination by torture or for testimony in the matter, and this was called "to challenge" (prokaleisthai), and the document written concerning it was named a "proklesis." It is found in many orators. Demosthenes, in the speech Against Stephanus, also shows in what matters a "proklesis" is made.

[277236] prokonia. PROKONIA Lycurgus in the speech Against Menesaechmus. Didymus says "prokonia" are wheat-grains smeared with honey. But Aristophanes the grammarian and Crates say that the things made from unroasted barley are so named. It seems to be made both from wheat and from barley, as Autocleides indicates in his exegetical works. And Demon, in his work On Sacrifices, says "prokonia" are parched grains crushed up with spices.

[277666] prometretas. PROMETRETAS ("Measurers-out") Hyperides in the speech On the Salt-fish. Deinarchus, in the speech Against Agasicles: "He was the son of Scythes the measurer-out, and he himself became a demesman and has continued measuring out grain in the marketplace."

[277934] pronaia. PRONAEA Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon. At Delphi a certain Athena was called "Pronaea" because she was established before the temple (pro tou naou). Herodotus, in his eighth book, calls her "Pronaie." Others have given accounts of her, including Staphylus in his work On the Aeolians.

[278241] propempta. PROPEMPTA Lysias in the speech against the indictment of Mixidemus, if genuine, and Demosthenes in the speech On the Estate of Hagnias. Didymus says perhaps these are certain penalties before the deposit; for there are some who say that the fifth parts of the valuations were deposited, as Lysias indicates in the speech Against Apollodorus. Unless indeed "propempta" means, as in Demosthenes, "five days before"; for in the great suits a single day did not suffice for the trial.

[278734] propepokotes. PROPEPOKOTES For "having betrayed beforehand." It is said by metaphor. Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. At the beginning of the Myrmidons, Aeschylus: "These things you behold, glorious Achilles, the spear-wasted toils of the Danaans, whom . . . within the tent."

[279029] propulaia_tauta. THESE PROPYLAEA Demosthenes in the Philippics. It may be said with a gesture of pointing, since the Propylaea are visible from the Pnyx; but it is better to understand it referentially; for in speaking of very well-known things they are accustomed to speak thus. At any rate, in the speech Against Aeschines Demosthenes himself says "he asked Satyrus here, this comic actor." Concerning the Propylaea of the acropolis—that in the archonship of Euthymenes the Athenians began to build them, with Mnesicles as architect—others have given accounts, including Philochorus in his fourth book. And Heliodorus, in the first book of his work On the Acropolis at Athens, says among other things this: "in five years it was wholly completed, and two thousand and twelve talents were spent; and they made five gates, through which they enter the acropolis."

[279894] prosepoiesato. PROSEPOIESATO For "he laid claim against," Isaeus in the speech Against Nicodemus: "no one ever yet laid claim or disputed with him the inheritance."

[280060] prosklesis. PROSKLESIS ("Summons") The summons to court, and PROSKALESASTHAI means to give notice to appear for trial; Demosthenes in the speech On the Estate of Hagnias, Hyperides in the speech Against Damippus.

[280274] prospaltioi. PROSPALTIOI Lysias in the speech On the Estate of Macartatus. Prospalta is a deme of the tribe Acamantis.

[280394] prostates. PROSTATES ("Patron") Those who stood as patrons of the metics at Athens were called "prostatai"; for it was necessary for each of the metics to assign a certain Athenian citizen as his patron; Hyperides in the speech Against Aristagora. Menander too mentions it at the beginning of the Perinthia.

[280703] prostasia. PROSTASIA Demosthenes, in the speech Against Onetor: "is this not an acknowledged protection?" for "help from one who stands forth as champion and comes to the aid of the wronged man." Aeschines, in the speech On the Embassy: "that the Propylaea of the Athenian acropolis must be removed to the defence (prostasia) of the Cadmea." Didymus says that "prostasia" here stands for "prostasis," that is, what some call a "prostas" (porch).

[281150] pros_tei_pulidi_ermes. THE HERMES BY THE LITTLE GATE Demosthenes in the speech Against Euergus. Philochorus, in the fifth book of his Athenian History, says that when the Athenians began to fortify the Piraeus the nine archons dedicated this Hermes and inscribed: "These men, the first to begin to fortify, set it up, obeying the decrees of the Council and the people."

[281521] prostimemata. PROSTIMEMATA ("Additional penalties") There are certain penalties fixed in the laws against wrongdoers, such as the "epobelia" in Isaeus in the speech Against Diocles; and there are others which the court assesses in addition, as Demosthenes shows in the speech Against Timocrates.

[281818] prostropaion. PROSTROPAION Aeschines in the speech On the Embassy: "will you then permit him, such a prostropaion," for "such a pollution and defilement." And PROSTROPE is said in relation to this; at any rate, in the speech Against Ctesiphon the orator sets the words side by side. This word is found also in Deinarchus in the speech Against Phormisius for impiety.

[282186] proteleia. PROTELEIA Lycurgus in the speech On the Priestess. The things done or given before something referred to the divine is accomplished are called "proteleia" (preliminary offerings).

[282378] profereis. PROPHEREIS Those who, being young, appear older; Aeschines in the speech Against Timarchus.

[282482] prosfora. PROSPHORA For "revenue," Antiphon in the speech On the Tribute of the Lindians. The word is also in other writers.

[282608] procheirotonia. PROCHEIROTONIA At Athens something of this sort seems to take place: whenever, the Council having framed a preliminary decree, the proposal is brought before the people, first there is a show of hands in the assembly as to whether it seems good that the people deliberate concerning the matters preliminarily decreed, or whether the preliminary decree suffices. These things are indicated in Lysias's speech against the indictment of Mixidemus.

[283070] proschaireteria. PROSCHAIRETERIA Lycurgus in the adjudication of the Croconidae. A festival held among the Athenians when the Maiden is thought to depart.

[283226] prutaneia. PRYTANEIA ("Court-deposits") Isocrates in the special plea against Callimachus. The "prytaneia" are also in the other Attic writers; it was a sum of money which both litigants deposited, both the defendant and the prosecutor.

[283464] prutaneias. PRYTANEIAS Antiphon in the speech Against Nicocles. The "prytaneia" is a number of days, either thirty-six or thirty-five, during which each tribe holds the prytany. Aristotle has discussed these matters in the Constitution of the Athenians.

[283719] prutanepsonta. PRYTANEPSONTA Properly for "being prytanis"; but for "administering," Demosthenes in the Philippics. In another Philippic he says "being made subject to prytany," for "being administered and maintained."

[283939] prutaneis. PRYTANEIS The tenth part of the Council of five hundred, fifty men from one tribe, who administered all the business transacted by the Council, were called "prytaneis." The ten tribes held the prytany in succession to one another, drawn by lot, as Aeschines says in the speech Against Ctesiphon.

[284247] ptoiodoros. PTOEODORUS Demosthenes. A proper name.

[284299] puanopsia. PYANOPSIA Lycurgus in the speech Against Menesaechmus: "and we call this festival Pyanopsia, but the other Greeks call it Panopsia, because they saw all the fruits with the eye." Apollonius and almost all who have written about the festivals at Athens say that the Pyanepsia are held for Apollo on the seventh of Pyanepsion. They say one ought to say "Pyanepsia," and the month "Pyanepsion"; for they boil beans (pyana) at it, and the harvest-wreath is carried.

[284773] ppsgela. PYGELA Lysias in the speech On Behalf of Bacchius, if genuine. Pygela is a city in Ionia, which Theopompus says, in his sixth book, got its name because certain of the companions of Agamemnon stayed there on account of a disease about the buttocks (pygai).

[285040] ptomata_elaion. THE FALLINGS OF OLIVE-TREES Lysias in the speech Against Nicides. He would mean either the fruit fallen from the trees, or the trees themselves fallen by some chance.

[285224] puelida. PYELIDA What we call a seal-case; Lysias in the speech Against Euphemus, and Aristophanes in the Heroes.

[285339] puthaea. PYTHAEA Hyperides in the speech Against Apellaeus. It is hard to see how in Didymus it has been formed from this; for in fact, by the passages the grammarian cites, he called the Pythia a festival, not Pythian Apollo.

[285567] pukni. PNYX Hyperides, in the first speech On Behalf of Chaerephilus, says "and the Pnyx finding so much." The assembly of the Athenians was so called. There is much mention of it among the Attic writers. Cleidemus, in the third book of the Protogonia, says that they used to come together "to the Pnyx, so named because the place of meeting was densely packed (pyknoumene)."

[285944] puaai. PYLAE PYLAE and PYLAIA and PYLAGORAS: "Pylae" is the name for Thermopylae; Demosthenes in the Philippics. They were so called because of the narrowness of this entrance for those journeying from Thessaly into Phocis. "Pylaia" was the name for the assembly of the Amphictyons at Pylae; Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. That a certain assembly of the Amphictyons took place at Pylae, both Hyperides in the Funeral Oration and Theopompus in his thirtieth book have said. From the cities sharing in the Amphictyony certain men were sent who were called "Pylagorai"; many mention these too, as Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon and Aristophanes in the second Women at the Thesmophoria.

[286665] purilampes. PYRILAMPES Antiphon in the speech On the Peacocks. A proper name.

[286744] purra. PYRRHA Lysias in the speech Against Thrasybulus, if genuine. Pyrrha is one of the cities in Lesbos, as those who have written geographies testify.

[286899] poletai. POLETAI ("Sellers") POLETAI and POLETERION: the "poletai" are a magistracy at Athens, ten men in number, one from each tribe; they manage all the things sold by the city—taxes and mines and leases and confiscated property; Hyperides in the second speech Against Aristagora. Aristotle has discussed them in the Constitution of the Athenians. The "poleterion" is the name for the place where the sellers hold their sessions; Isaeus in the speech Against Elpagoras, often.

[287379] polas. POLAS For "sales," Hyperides in the speech Against Apellaeus. The word is also in Sophron's Andreioi.

[287489] polosi. POLOSI Demosthenes, in the speech Against Neaera: "or who sell something openly in the marketplace." Didymus says it stands for "prostitute themselves openly"; for "to sell" (polein) is to offer oneself to those who wish, whence also "to play the prostitute" (porneuein), which is "to traffic" (pernanai). But I say that the orator has here used "to sell" in its proper sense; for he says the law does not allow a paramour to be taken in the case of such women as sit in a workshop or sell something openly in the marketplace.

[288025] pomala. POMALA For "by no means," Demosthenes in the speech Against Aeschines. The "po" is Doric, set for "whence" (pothen); and "mala" either is redundant or is used in measure: "pomala," as it were "not much," "not at all." It is common in the Old Comedy; Aristophanes: "Was there some quarrel between you?" "By no means—I said nothing at all."

[288373] hraisas. RHAISAS For "being easier from the illness," Demosthenes in the Philippics.

[288459] hrenaia. RHENAEA Hyperides in the Delian speech. It is an island near Delos.

[288537] hretorike_grafe. RHETORICAL INDICTMENT Isaeus in the speech Against Eucleides. The "rhetorical indictment" seems to be the one against an orator who has written or said or done something unlawful, just as the "prytanic" is called the one against a prytanis and the "epistatic" the one against an epistates. Perhaps too they are called "rhetorical indictments" in this respect, that under different laws the indictments against the orators are brought, as Antiphon in the speech Against a Prytanis, if genuine, indicates.

[289059] hrinon. RHINON Isocrates in the special plea against Callimachus. A proper name.

[289141] hrodogotne. RHODOGUNE The wife of Hystaspes, and mother of Xerxes and Darius.

[289220] hrodonia. RHODONIA Demosthenes in the speech On the Slaves of Arethusius. A "rhodonia" is a planting of roses, just as an "ionia" is a planting of violets, as Hecataeus shows in the first book of his Description of the World.

[289447] hrothion. RHOTHION Hyperides in the speech On the Generalship of Polyeuctus. "Rhothion" is named from the rushing sound (rhothos) heard from the oars when they row vigorously. The word is in many writers, both in Aristophanes in the Knights and in Thucydides in his fourth book.

[289727] hroptron. RHOPTRON Lysias in the speech Against Andocides for impiety: "he tied the horse to the sacred door-ring." Here he means the ring of the door, as others do too: Aristophanes in the Amphiaraus, Xenophon in the sixth book of the Hellenica.

[289975] hruta. RHYTA With short pronunciation, it is a kind of drinking-cup; Demosthenes in the speech Against Meidias. With long pronunciation, the things called by that name among us, likewise; Cratinus in the Seasons.

[290189] saboi. SABOI Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. Some say the "Saboi" are those initiated to Sabazius, that is, to Dionysus, just as those initiated to Bacchus are called Bacchi. That Sabazius and Dionysus are the same, others say, including Nymphis in the second book On Heracleia. So too some say that the Greeks call the Bacchi "Saboi." But Mnaseas of Patara says that Sabazius is the son of Dionysus.

[290609] seirina. SEIRINA Lycurgus in the speech On the Organization. They called "seirion" a thin, undressed garment, like a summer wrap, as the glossographers say. And SEIREN is the thin and transparent tunic, suitable for the season when the Dog-star (Seirios) is up. There is also an Italian city, Seiris, and perhaps the orator meant the textiles from there, or some other "seirina." In some copies, however, it is written "seirina" without the "e."

[291056] semnai_theai. THE AUGUST GODDESSES Thus the Athenians call the Furies.

[291128] serreion_teichos. SERREION TEICHOS SERREION TEICHOS and SIRION: names of places.

[291210] sesemasmenoi. SESEMASMENOI For "sealed," Demosthenes in the speech On the Name, Hyperides in the speech Against Antias concerning an orphan.

[291352] seuthes. SEUTHES Lysias in the speech Against Thrasybulus. He is one of the kings in Thrace.

[291446] sekos. SEKOS ("Enclosure") A certain speech of Lysias is entitled "Defence on a charge of impiety concerning the sacred olive (sekos)," in which it is clear that the speech concerns an olive-tree that had been cut down. The orator writes also this: "who for two years farmed the land, having taken over neither a private olive nor a sacred one (moria) nor a sekos." Perhaps, then, they call the private olives just "olives," the public ones "moriai"; and "sekos," it seems, and "moria" they name the same thing.

[291959] seraggion. SERANGION Lysias in the speech Against Androtion. A certain place in the Piraeus was so called. Aristophanes too mentions it in the Farmers.

[292112] semeia. SEMEIA ("Seals") Thus they call the seal-impressions. Demosthenes in the speech Against Phaenippus.

[292221] sthenelos. STHENELUS Lysias in the speech Against Diogenes. In the Records of Dramatic Performances Sthenelus too is found as a tragic poet. The author of the Spartans attributed to Plato satirized him as appropriating other men's verses.

[292461] sigeion. SIGEUM Demosthenes in the Philippics. It is a city of the Troad, not far from Ilium.

[292556] simos. SIMUS Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. This man is one of the Aleuadae, of those thought to have aided the Macedonian.

[292700] simulos. SIMYLUS Demosthenes, in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon, says "but having hired himself out to the deep-groaning actors Simylus and Socrates."

[292855] simon. SIMON A proper name.

[292884] sinope. SINOPE Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. Herodicus, in the sixth book of the Persons Satirized in Comedy, says that Sinope the courtesan was called "Abydus" because she was an old woman.

[293096] sipua. SIPYA Lysias in the speech concerning the half-share of the property of Macartatus. The "sipya" is a grain-vessel; it occurs often in the ancient comic poets: Eupolis in the Golden Race, Aristophanes in the Telmessians.

[293324] siteresion. SITERESION What is given to certain persons for sustenance; Demosthenes in the speech On the Trierarchy.

[293442] sitos. SITOS ("Maintenance") Demosthenes in the first speech Against Aphobus. "Sitos" is the name for the allowance given for the sustenance of women or orphans, as may be learned from other sources and from the first axon of Solon and from Aristotle's Constitution of the Athenians. Timachidas thinks that among the Attic writers "sitos" means interest, but he is unaware that never among them, one term for the other, is interest called "sitos."

[293891] sitofulakes. SITOPHYLAKES ("Grain-wardens") Deinarchus in the impeachment Against Callisthenes. There was a magistracy at Athens which took care that the grain should be sold justly, and the barley-meal and the loaves. They were ten in number, five in the city and five in the Piraeus, as Aristotle says in the Constitution of the Athenians.

[294234] skambonidai. SCAMBONIDAE Lycurgus in the adjudication of the Croconidae. It is a deme of the tribe Leontis.

[294343] skafeforoi. SKAPHEPHOROI ("Trough-bearers") Deinarchus, in the speech Against Agasicles, says "who instead of trough-bearers will go up as ephebes to the acropolis, owing no thanks to you for their citizenship, but to this man's money"—for "as metics"; for these used to bear the troughs at Athens. Demetrius, at any rate, in the third book of his Legislation says that the law commanded the metics, in the processions, themselves to carry the troughs, and their daughters water-jars and parasols. Theophrastus too has discussed these matters in the tenth book of the Laws.

[294918] skafion. SKAPHION Antiphon in the defence against the indictment of Demosthenes. That "skaphion" is a kind of haircut, Aristophanes too shows in the Old Age.

[295077] skeuopoiounta_to_pragma. CONTRIVING THE MATTER Hyperides in the speech Against Mantitheus, for "scheming and fabricating and fashioning."

[295216] skenites. SKENITES Isocrates in the Trapeziticus: "for Pythodorus, called the tent-man (skenites)." It seems to be a nickname. Perhaps he is called "skenites" as a man of the market, since many of the goods were sold in tents (skenai).

[295453] skenen_de_en_echousin_oude_gar_tauten_labontes_anaferousi. AND THE SKENE WHICH THEY HAVE—FOR NOT EVEN THIS, WHEN THEY HAD TAKEN IT, DO THEY RENDER UP Demosthenes in the speech Against Spudias. It seems to be a certain article, which some say is a kind of woman's ornament, others a parasol.

[295745] skepsis. SCEPSIS Demosthenes in the speech Against Aristocrates. It is a city in the Troad, which others mention, including Ephorus in his fifteenth book.

[295901] skiathos. SCIATHOS Demosthenes in the Philippics. It is an island near Euboea.

[295981] skiapodes. SKIAPODES ("Shade-foots") Antiphon in the work On Concord. It is a Libyan people. Ctesias, in the Circumnavigation of Asia, says: "above these are the Shade-foots, who have their feet very broad, like those of geese; and when it is hot, lying back on their backs and lifting their legs, they shade themselves with their feet."

[296320] skiron. SKIRON Lycurgus in the speech On the Priestess. The Skira is a festival among the Athenians, from which the month Scirophorion is named. Those who have written about the months and festivals at Athens, among them Lysimachides, say that the "skiron" is a large parasol, under which, as it is carried from the acropolis to a place called Skiron, there go the priestess of Athena and the priest of Poseidon and the priest of Helios; and the Eteobutadae carry it. This becomes a sign that one ought to build and make shelter, this being the best time for building. The Athenians also honour Athena Skiras, whom Philochorus, in the second book of the Atthis, says was named after a certain Skiros, an Eleusinian seer, but Praxion, in the second book of the Megarian History, after Sciron.

[297113] skirafia. SKIRAPHIA Deinarchus in the speech Against Proxenus. They called the gambling-dens "skiraphia," since the gamblers spent their time at Skiron, as Theopompus indicates in his fiftieth book.

[297313] skuthikai. SCYTHIANS Lysias in the speech On Behalf of Bacchius and Pythagoras, if genuine. The "Scythians" are a kind of footwear. And Alcaeus in his eighth book: "and having put on Scythian shoes."

[297514] smikuthion. SMICYTHION Demosthenes in the speech Against Aristocrates. A proper name.

[297601] soloi. SOLI Isocrates in the Evagoras. Soli is partly the Cyprian city, partly the one in Cilicia, as others record, including Ephorus in his fifth book.

[297756] spartolos. SPARTOLUS Antiphon in the speech entitled "Guardianship-speech for Timocrates." Spartolus is a city of Bottice.

[297880] spermologos. SPERMOLOGOS ("Seed-picker") Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. A certain small bird, like a jackdaw, is called "spermologos," named, it seems, from gathering up seeds, which Aristophanes mentions in the Birds. From this, then, the worthless and contemptible man is called "spermologos," and perhaps one who lives off others' goods is a "spermologos."

[298260] stasiotes. STASIOTES Antiphon, in the speech On the Revolution: "now concerning the charges Apolexis has brought, that I was a partisan (stasiotes), and my grandfather too." It seems the orator has here used the word in a special sense for a bodyguard; at any rate in what follows he says that "their ancestors would not have been able to punish the tyrants, while finding the bodyguards beyond them."

[298663] stafuloboleion. STAPHYLOBOLEION Isaeus in the speech Against Diocles. It is what is called the wine-press (pateterion), as Androtion or Philippus says in the Georgicon.

[298833] stefaneforos. STEPHANEPHORUS Antiphon in the speech Against Nicocles. There was, it seems, a hero-shrine of Stephanephorus at Athens. Stephanephorus would be either one of the sons of Heracles born from the daughters of Thestius, whom Hellanicus mentions in the tenth book of the Phoronis; or perhaps the shrine belonged to the Attic Stephanephorus, whom again the same Hellanicus mentions in the second book of the Atthis.

[299258] stefanon_tous_nenikekotas. CROWNING THE VICTORS Demosthenes in the speech Against Aeschines, for "honouring." And Lycurgus, in the speech On the Organization, says "but indeed you also crowned Callisthenes with a hundred minas." Others too use "to crown" in this sense, as Theopompus in his fifty-seventh book and Menander in the Self-Mourner.

[299603] steirieus. STEIRIEUS Hyperides in the speech Against Archestratides. Steiria is a deme of the tribe Pandionis.

[299715] strateia_en_tois_eponumois. THE CAMPAIGN BY THE EPONYMI Aeschines in the speech On the Embassy. What the campaign "by the eponymi" was, Aristotle has shown in the Constitution of the Athenians, saying: "for there are eponymi, ten of the tribes, and forty-two of the age-classes. The ephebes when first enrolled used formerly to be enrolled on whitened tablets, and there were inscribed over them both the archon under whom they were enrolled and the eponymus who had served the year before; but now they are recorded in the Council." And a little later: "They use the eponymi also for the campaigns, and whenever they send out an age-class, they post up from what archon-eponymus to what one men must serve." Philochorus too has discussed these matters in the fourth book of the Atthis.

[300503] strategoi. STRATEGOI ("Generals") Demosthenes in the Philippics. The generals elected each year were ten, as may be learned both from Hyperides' speech Against Autocles and from Aristotle's Constitution of the Athenians.

[300725] strabax. STRABAX A proper name.

[300758] strepsa. STREPSA Aeschines in the speech On the Embassy. It is a city of Thrace, as Hellanicus indicates in the second book of the Persica. The citizens of Strepsa are called "Strepsaioi."

[300948] streptous. STREPTOUS Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. The "streptoi" are a kind of cake, as in other writers too.

[301080] strombichides. STROMBICHIDES Lysias in the speech On Behalf of Dexius for desertion. A proper name.

[301181] strouthes. STROUTHES Lysias in the speech Against Thrasybulus. He was a certain satrap of the King.

[301282] strofades_nesoi. THE STROPHADES ISLANDS Deinarchus in the Tyrrhenian speech. They are certain islands lying between Zacynthus and Elis.

[301419] strume. STRYME Demosthenes in the speech On the Trierarchy. Heracleides or Philostephanus, in the work On Islands, says: "there are colonies of the Thasians upon the Thracian coast, Galepsus and Stryme the island." It is a trading-post of the Thasians. Philochorus, in his fifth book, mentions the dispute between the Thasians and the Maronites over Stryme, bringing in Archilochus as a witness.

[301816] sturax. STYRAX Lysias in the speech Against Lysitheus. The "styrax" is the little neck at the bottom of the spear, which they are accustomed to fix into the ground, as Thucydides somewhere says, "using the butt-spike (styrakion) of a javelin instead of a peg for the bolt."

[302091] stroter. STROTER Lycurgus in the speech Against Ischyrius. The small beams placed above the joist-supports they called "stroteres," as Didymus says. The word is also in the Babylonians of Aristophanes.

[302294] suaas. SYLAI ("Reprisals") Demosthenes in the speech On the Crown of the Trierarchy. And in the special plea Against Lacritus: "having excepted the case when there are not reprisals against the Athenians." And in what follows, as if explaining it, he says "but we have been plundered of our own goods by the Phaselites, as though reprisals had been granted to the Phaselites against the Athenians. For when they will not give back what they took, what other name could one give to such a thing than that they are seizing others' goods?" They used "sylai" for "seizures."

[302866] sulloges. SYLLOGES The name of a magistracy. Isaeus in the metic-speech shows it most clearly.

[302962] sumbola. SYMBOLA ("Conventions") The agreements which the cities, having made with one another, enjoin upon their citizens, so as to give and receive justice. Often in the seventh of the Philippics of Demosthenes, and in Isaeus in the speech Against Elpagoras.

[303224] summoria. SYMMORIA ("Tax-group") Demosthenes in the first speech Against Aphobus. Not the whole multitude, as among us, was divided into the tax-groups at Athens, but only the rich and those able to contribute to the city. At any rate Demosthenes, in the speech On the Symmories, speaking of the twelve hundred wealthiest men, says: "out of these, then, I think we ought to make twenty tax-groups, as there now are, each containing sixty persons." But Hyperides, in the speech Against Polyeuctus, says: "for in each tax-group there are fifteen men." One ought not to wonder how Demosthenes says the tax-group has sixty men, but Hyperides fifteen; for in the speech Against Pasicles he gives the reason, writing this: "as long as the wealthiest, cheating the city, performing the trierarchy five and six together, spent moderate sums, these men kept quiet; but when Demosthenes, perceiving this, made laws that the three hundred should perform the trierarchy, and the trierarchies became burdensome, now Phormio is filching himself away." That those made citizens by decree were also enrolled in the tax-groups Hyperides has shown often in the speech Against Polyeuctus. The "symmoritai" are those sharing in the same tax-group with one another, as Hyperides shows in the same speech. The Athenians were first divided into tax-groups in the archonship of Nausinicus, as Philochorus says in the fifth book of the Atthis.

[304644] suggrafeis. SYNGRAPHEIS ("Drafting commissioners") Isocrates in the Areopagiticus. It was customary among the Athenians, whenever there was need, to choose a body of men to bring proposals before the people by a fixed day. This happened also before the establishment of the Four Hundred, as Thucydides says in his eighth book: "at this juncture the party of Peisander, on arriving, at once set about the rest, and first, having gathered the people together, proposed a motion to choose ten men as drafting commissioners with full powers, and that these, having drawn up a proposal, should bring it before the people on a fixed day, as to how the city might best be governed." The drafting commissioners then chosen were thirty in all, as Androtion and Philochorus say, each in his Atthis; but Thucydides mentioned only the ten, the preliminary councillors.

[305502] sundikoi. SYNDIKOI ("Public advocates") Isaeus, in the speech Against Elpagoras and Demophanes, says: "who after the return from the Piraeus, as I hear, were syndikoi, before whom the confiscated property was brought." And Lysias, in the speech Against Dexippus, if genuine: "and where else is this man brave? Bringing indictments before the Thesmothetae, registering inventories before the syndikoi." Perhaps, then, it was a magistracy established after the return from the Piraeus.

[305987] sunegoroi. SYNEGOROI ("Advocates") Antiphon both in the defence against the indictment of Demosthenes and in the speech On the Tribute of the Lindians. It seems that among the Athenians certain men were elected as advocates for the purpose of pleading.

[306241] sugkletos_ekklesia. EXTRAORDINARY ASSEMBLY Of the assemblies, some took place by custom and monthly; but if anything pressed suddenly so that an assembly had to be held, this was called an "extraordinary assembly"; Demosthenes in the speech Against Aeschines.

[306502] suntaxis. SYNTAXIS For "an organized administration"; Demosthenes in the Philippics: "and that there be one and the same arrangement (syntaxis) both of receiving and of doing what is needful." They also called the tributes "syntaxeis," since the Greeks bore the name "tribute" with difficulty, Callistratus having so named them, as Theopompus says in the tenth of the Philippics. Hyperides in the Delian speech: "giving a contribution at present to no one, though we once thought it right to receive one."

[307009] sunteleis. SYNTELEIS Those who jointly bear expense and jointly contribute; and the matter is . . .

[307110] sunteleia. SYNTELEIA . . . is called SYNTELEIA, as may be found in Antiphon's speech On the Tribute of the Samothracians. Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon.

[307283] sfettos. SPHETTUS Isaeus in the speech Against the Demesmen concerning land. Sphettus is a deme of the tribe Acamantis.

[307404] sfodrias. SPHODRIAS Isaeus in the speech Against the Megarians, if genuine. Sphodrias was a general of the Lacedaemonians. Callisthenes, in the second book of the Hellenica, says that he was too simple and rash in his hopes.

[307630] taureas. TAUREAS A proper name.

[307663] tamiai. TAMIAI ("Treasurers") Isaeus in one of the inheritance speeches. There was a magistracy at Athens, the treasurers, ten in number. These take over the statue of Athena and the Victories and the rest of the adornment and the moneys, in the presence of the Council, as Aristotle says in the Constitution of the Athenians. There are also certain treasurers of the sacred triremes, as the same philosopher says. That treasurers also accompanied the trierarchs, Eupolis has shown in the Maricas.

[308162] tamunai. TAMYNAE Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon. There is a city in Euboea, in the territory of the Eretrians, Tamynae, where there is also a temple of Apollo, as those who have written the Euboean histories testify, and Simonides in the dirge for Lysimachus the Eretrian.

[308447] ta_ton_foron_kreitto. THE THINGS OF THE THIEVES ARE TOO MANY Hyperides in the second speech Against Athenogenes. It is a proverb spoken against those who carry off more than the wrongs they have suffered.

[308653] tetartemorion. TETARTEMORION ("Quarter-obol") Deinarchus in the impeachment Against Callisthenes. The "tetartemorion" is the fourth part of an obol, that is, two coppers.

[308825] tetrakosioi. THE FOUR HUNDRED Antiphon in the speech On the Revolution. The Four Hundred were established seven years before the Thirty Tyrants among the Athenians, and they ruled the city for four months, as Aristotle says in the Constitution of the Athenians.

[309088] tetrarchia. TETRARCHY Demosthenes in the Philippics. Thessaly being in four parts, each part was called a "tetras," as Hellanicus says in the Thessalica; and he says the names of the four parts are Thessaliotis, Phthiotis, Pelasgiotis, Hestiaeotis. Aristotle too, in the common Constitution of the Thessalians, says that in the time of Aleuas son of Pyrrhus, Thessaly was divided into four portions. Demosthenes, then, would be speaking of the tetrarchy. That Philip set up a ruler over each of these portions, others have shown, including Theopompus in his forty-fourth book.

[309666] tetrupemene. TETRYPEMENE ("Pierced") Aeschines in the speech Against Timarchus. Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Athenians, writes this: "the ballots are two, of bronze, having a little tube in the middle, half of them pierced and half solid. When the speeches have been made, those appointed to the ballots give to each juror two ballots, a pierced and a solid one, in plain view of the litigants, so that no one may take two solid or two wholly pierced ones."

[310134] tetufomai. TETYPHOMAI Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. For "I am dazed, I am out of my senses," either from "thunder" (bronte), or from the lightning-bolts referred to Typhon, or from the so-called Typhonic winds, which when they burst all at once also derange men; for Alcaeus too says, "and the whirlwind utterly took your wits away."

[310489] telefanes. TELEPHANES A flute-player; Demosthenes in the speech Against Meidias. A proper name.

[310586] tenos. TENOS One of the Cyclades islands.

[310629] tetes. TETES For "this year," Lysias in the defence Against Pythodemus, if genuine, Aristophanes in the Old Age, and the others.

[310759] tilfossaion. TILPHOSSAEUM Demosthenes in the speech Against Aeschines. It is a mountain a little distance from Lake Copais, as Theopompus says in the Philippics.

[310922] timema. TIMEMA ("Assessment") For "pledge" and as it were "security," Lysias in the speech On Behalf of Callias: "these men, claiming that they would lease it for more and would establish a security (timema)." This in what follows he calls "apotimema." It is also set for "capital sum," as in the speech On the Symmories of Demosthenes. The amount contributed from each man's property is also called "timema" by the same author in the speech Against Aphobus. But in the speech Against Meidias it is used of the penalty.

[311443] titakidai. TITACIDAE Isaeus in the speech Against Nicocles. The Titacidae are a deme of the tribe Aiantis, as Nicander of Thyateira shows in his work On the Demes. Perhaps they were named after Titacus, whom Herodotus mentions.

[311672] topeion. TOPEION Isaeus in the speech Against Diocles. They call ropes "topeia." Strattis in the Macedonians: "and this robe countless men haul, working the windlass with ropes, to the top, like the mast of a ship." Archippus in the Ass: "with pulleys and ropes they set these up, not without toil." As for what is in Demosthenes' Philippics, and that once notorious "secret," Theopompus has shown in his thirty-first book. For he says: "and he sends to Philip as ambassadors Antiphon and Charidemus to treat also of friendship, who on arriving tried to persuade him secretly to cooperate with the Athenians so that they might take Amphipolis, promising Pydna in return. But the ambassadors of the Athenians reported nothing to the people, wishing to keep the Pydnaeans in ignorance, since they meant to betray them, but acted secretly together with the Council."

[312537] torone. TORONE Isocrates in the Panathenaicus. A city in Thrace, as Ephorus records in his fourth book.

[312642] tous_eterous_tragoidous_agonieitai. HE WILL CONTEND WITH THE OTHER TRAGEDIANS Lycurgus in the speech Against Demades. Didymus says it is a proverb applied to those who array and exalt themselves against their opposites.

[312863] tous_choris_oikountas. THOSE LIVING APART Demosthenes in the Philippics: "and after this it was resolved that the metics should embark, and those living apart from their masters." Yet even without the addition the meaning would be plain, namely that the freedmen lived by themselves, apart from those who freed them, whereas in the meantime, while still slaves, they lived together with them.

[313257] tragikos_pithekos. TRAGIC APE Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. The orator seems to mean by this that Aeschines was unsuccessful in his acting too, imitating tragic actors rather than being able to act tragedy.

[313485] trapezoforos. TRAPEZOPHORUS ("Table-bearer") Lycurgus, in the speech On the Priestess, that the "trapezophoros" is the name of a priestly office. That both she and the Kosmo jointly administer everything with the priestess of Athena, both the orator himself has shown in the same speech and Ister in the thirteenth book of the Attic Collections.

[313832] triakas. TRIAKAS ("The thirtieth day") For the dead the thirtieth day after death was observed, and was called "triakas," as Hyperides shows in the speech On the Estate of Hippeus, calling the day "triakad" in the singular and "triakadas" in the plural.

[314087] triboneuomenoi. TRIBONEUOMENOI Antiphon in the speech On the Tribute of the Lindians. Either for "causing delays (tribai)," or for "playing tricks," from being old hands (tribones) at affairs.

[314281] trigonon_dikasterion. TRIANGULAR COURT Lycurgus in the speech Against Aristogeiton. It is the name of a court, perhaps also triangular in shape. Others mention it, including Menander in the . . .

[314478] trierarchema. TRIERARCHEMA The expenditure for the trierarchy; Demosthenes in the speech On the Trierarchy. EPITRIERARCHEMA is what is spent after the term of the trierarchy.

[314654] trikaranon. TRICARANON Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of the Megalopolitans. It is a fort of the Argive territory so called.

[314785] trikefalos. TRICEPHALUS ("Three-headed") Isaeus in the speech Against Eucleides: "a little above the three-headed one, along the road by the Hestia." The full phrase is "the three-headed Hermes." Philochorus, in his third book, says that Eucleides dedicated this at Ancyle.

[315060] triptera. TRIPTER Isaeus in the speech Against Diocles. Nicander, in the sixteenth book of the Attic Dialect, says that the "tripter" is a wide, shallow jar, like the vats by the wine-press. It would be used in this sense here in the orator; for the word means many other things besides.

[315349] tritemorion. TRITEMORION ("Third-part") Deinarchus in the speech Against Callisthenes. That the "tritemorion" is six coppers, Philemon teaches at the beginning of the Sardius.

[315526] triton_emidrachmon. TRITON HEMIDRACHMON ("Two and a half drachmas") Deinarchus in the speech Against Lycurgus. The ancients were accustomed thus to name two and a half drachmas.

[315705] tritopatores. TRITOPATORES Demon, in the Atthis, says the Tritopatores are winds. But Philochorus says the Tritopatores were the first of all to come to be; for the men of that time knew the earth and the sun, whom they also called Apollo, to be their parents, and those born from these the "third fathers." Phanodemus, in his sixth book, says that only the Athenians sacrifice and pray to them for the birth of children, when they are about to marry. In the Physica of Orpheus the Tritopatores are named Amalkeides and Protocles and Protocreon, being doorkeepers and guardians of the winds. But the author of the Exegeticon says they are sons of Uranus and Ge, and that their names are Cottus, Briareus, and Gyges.

[316422] tritomenis. TRITOMENIS Lycurgus in the speech On the Priestess. They called the third of the month "tritomenis." Athena seems to have been born then; Ister says she is also called Tritogeneia for this reason, being considered the same as Selene.

[316669] trittus. TRITTYS ("Third") Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon. The "trittys" is the third part of a tribe; for the tribe is divided into three parts—trittyes and clans (ethne) and phratries—as Aristotle says in the Constitution of the Athenians.

[316923] turmeidai. TYRMEIDAI Hyperides in the speech On Behalf of Xenophilus. The Tyrmeidai are a deme of the tribe Oineis, as Diodorus says.

[317058] turtaios. TYRTAEUS Lycurgus in the speech Against Leocrates. The poet of the elegies.

[317145] huakinthides. HYACINTHIDES Lycurgus in the impeachment Against Lycophron. They are the daughters of Hyacinthus the Lacedaemonian.

[317276] hubadai. HYBADAE Lysias in the speech On the Daughter of Onomacles. It is a deme of the tribe Leontis.

[317380] hugieia_athena. ATHENA HYGIEIA Lycurgus in the speech On the Priestess. It is an epithet of Athena; for she is called both Hygieia (Health) and Nike (Victory) and Hippia (of horses) and Ergane (the Worker).

[317588] hupagousin. HYPAGOUSIN For "they lead forward," Demosthenes in the Philippics.

[317668] huperbolos. HYPERBOLUS Antiphon in the speech Against Nicocles. He was a demagogue, whom Thucydides, in his eighth book, says was ostracized.

[317811] huperemeroi. HYPEREMEROI ("Defaulters") Those who, having lost any suit and not paying the penalties to the winners within the appointed time-limits, were called "hyperemeroi," and the matter HYPEREMERIA, as Isaeus indicates in the speech Against Aristocles, if the speech is genuine.

[318097] hupo_gen_oikountes. THOSE DWELLING BENEATH THE EARTH Antiphon in the work On Concord. He would mean those called by Scylax in the Circumnavigation "Troglodytes," and those named by Hesiod in the third book of the Catalogue "Underground-dwellers" (Katoudaioi).

[318358] hupokudeis_gar_eisin_oi_topoi. FOR THE PLACES ARE WATERY Deinarchus in the speech Against Stephanus. "Hypokudes" means "moist through," as is clear from the third book of Ctesias. Euphorion: "as of a watery (hypokudes) water-meadow." In some of the copies, however, in the orator it is written "hypokoiloi" (hollow underneath).

[318687] hupologon. HYPOLOGON Lysias in the speech On Abortion, if genuine, "not being reckoned (hypologon)," for "not taken into account." Deinarchus in the speech Against Pytheas: "no allowance has been made to the Council," for "no pardon, no excuse."

[318934] huponomeuontes. HYPONOMEUONTES For "digging underground passages (hyponomoi)," Deinarchus in the speech Against Callippus.

[319058] hupostesas. HYPOSTESAS For "having suborned," Hyperides in the speech Against Antias.

[319145] hupofonia. HYPOPHONIA ("Blood-money") The moneys given on account of murder to the relatives of the slain, so that they may not prosecute; Deinarchus both in the speech Against Callisthenes and in the speech Against Phormisius, Theophrastus in the sixteenth book of the Laws.

[319422] hupomosia. HYPOMOSIA The deferring of a suit on the plea of absence abroad or illness or some similar cause, on oath, was so called, and to do this was HYPOMNYSTHAI, as is clear both from other sources and from Demosthenes in the speech Against Olympiodorus.

[319682] husiai. HYSIAE Hyperides in the speech On Behalf of Xenophilus. Hysiae is a city of Boeotia, which Euripides too mentions in the Antiope.

[319821] falaggia. PHALANGIA Hyperides in the second speech Against Aristagora, that the "phalangion" is one of the biting creatures. Xenophon too makes this clear in the first book of the Memorabilia.

[320015] faleron. PHALERUM Lysias in the speech Against Lysitheus. Phalerum is a deme of the tribe Antiochis, from which the demesman is "Phalereus."

[320157] fanias. PHANIAS A proper name; one of those who had served as general.

[320229] fanostrate. PHANOSTRATE Demosthenes in the speech Against Androtion. Apollodorus, in his work On the Courtesans at Athens, says she was nicknamed "Phtheiropyle" ("Louse-gate"), since, standing at the door, she would pick off her lice.

[320465] farmakos. PHARMAKOS ("Scapegoat") Lysias in the speech Against Andocides for impiety, if genuine. They used to lead out two men at Athens to be purifications for the city at the Thargelia, one on behalf of the men, one on behalf of the women. That "Pharmacus" is also a proper name—and that, having stolen the sacred bowls of Apollo and being caught, he was stoned to death by the followers of Achilles, and that the rites performed at the Thargelia are imitations of these—Ister has said in the first book of the Epiphanies of Apollo. Since Demosthenes, in the speech Against Aristogeiton, says "this scapegoat (pharmakos), then, will get him off," Didymus thinks the word should be accented with the circumflex on the penultimate; but we have not found the usage so anywhere.

[321244] farmakonta. PHARMAKONTA Demosthenes in the speech Against Stephanus. The "pharmakon" is the man harmed by drugs (pharmaka), as Theophrastus too indicates in the fifteenth book of the Laws.

[321434] fasis. PHASIS ("Information") It is said both of a public charge, when someone informs that a person holds public property without having bought it, and also in the matter of orphans' estates. For when the guardians did not lease out the estate of their wards, anyone who wished informed against them before the archon, so that it might be leased; and he also informed if it had been leased for less than its worth. Of the former kind the testimonies may be found in Deinarchus and Demosthenes; of the information concerning orphans' estates, in Lysias in the speech "On the Information concerning an Orphan's Estate."

[322054] faskolon. PHASKOLON A kind of pouch was so called among them; Isaeus and Lysias in the speech Against Dion, Aristophanes in the Women at the Thesmophoria.

[322210] faullos. PHAYLLUS Demosthenes in the speech Against Aristocrates. Onomarchus was tyrant of the Phocians; with him, while he lived, his brother Phayllus shared the rule.

[322380] fellea. PHELLEA Isaeus in the speech On the Estate of Ciron. They called the rocky tracts, grazed by goats, "phelleae"; Cratinus in the Seasons, Aristophanes in the Clouds.

[322554] fegaieusi. PHEGAIEIS Lysias in the speech On His Own Public Services. Phegaea is a deme of the tribe Aiantis, as Diodorus says.

[322683] felomata. PHELOMATA Antiphon in the work On Concord: "deceptions"; for "to phelo" is to deceive.

[322781] fegousion. PHEGUSIUM Lysias in the speech On the Murder of Batrachus. Phegus is a deme of the tribe Erechtheis.

[322894] fthoen. PHTHOE Demosthenes in the speech Concerning the Children of Lycurgus, and Isocrates in the Aeginetic speech. What is now called "phthisis" (consumption) they called "phthoe."

[323078] filammon. PHILAMMON Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon: "Philammon the Athenian boxer."

[323181] filepsios. PHILEPSIUS Demosthenes in the speech Against Timocrates. The poets of the Old Comedy mention Philepsius for telling tales between the public speeches; he is also satirized for knavery.

[323378] filiskos. PHILISCUS Demosthenes. A proper name.

[323427] filosofein. PHILOSOPHEIN For "to labour and to train," Isocrates in the speech On the Peace. Menander in the Thrasyleon: "he philosophizes about this, how he may accomplish the marriage."

[323616] filotesia. PHILOTESIA Demosthenes in the speech Against Aeschines. The cup which they drank to their friends in friendship was called "philotesia," as Hyperides says, and Alexis.

[323796] fimoi. PHIMOI Aeschines in the speech Against Timarchus: "and dice-boxes and other gaming implements." The "phimos" is what is called the "kemos" (funnel), into which the dice were thrown, as the glossographers say. Diphilus in the Synoris: "draw the dice-box into the middle, so that he may throw."

[324097] fluea. PHLYA Isaeus in the speech On the Estate of Ciron. Phlya is a deme of the tribe Cecropis. From this deme was Euripides the tragic poet.

[324241] forbanteion. PHORBANTEION Hyperides in the speech Against Patrocles. That the Phorbanteion at Athens was named after Phorbas, who reigned over the Curetes and was slain by Erechtheus, Andron has shown in the eighth book of the Kinships; and Phorbas was a son of Poseidon, as Hellanicus says in the first book of the Atthis.

[324566] forine. PHORINE Antiphon in the second book of the Truth. That "phorine" (hide) was said also of human skin, Aristomenes in the Sorcerers makes clear.

[324718] frateres. PHRATERES Demosthenes in the speech On the Name. The "phratry" is the third part of a tribe, and the "phrateres" are those sharing in the same phratry, and PHRATRIZEIN is to share in the same phratry; the PHRATRIARCHOS is the ruler of the phratry.

[324977] frearrios. PHREARRHIUS Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. It is a deme of the tribe Leontis.

[325086] froudos. PHROUDOS Antiphon in the speech On the Murder of Herodes, for "gone away." The word is common among many writers.

[325210] fruktoron. PHRYKTOROI "Phryktorein" properly means to signal anything by beacon-fires held aloft; Deinarchus in the speech supporting Aeschines against Deinias.

[325372] frunondas. PHRYNONDAS Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon. He was notorious among the Athenians for villainy, no less than Eurybatus.

[325513] frunon. PHRYNON Demosthenes in the speech Against Aeschines. This man was one of the ten ambassadors, those who went with Aeschines and Demosthenes.

[325663] fularchos. PHYLARCHUS Demosthenes in the Philippics. The "phylarch" is the commander of the cavalry of each tribe, subordinate to the hipparch, as Aristotle says in the Constitution of the Athenians.

[325864] fule. PHYLE Isocrates in the speech On the Peace. Phyle is a deme of the tribe Oineis; Menander in the Dyscolus: "they hold the place to be Phyle of Attica, and the Nymphaeum, whence I come, belongs to the Phylasians." Philochorus, in the seventh book of the Atthis, says it is a fortress.

[326155] charaka. CHARAX ("Palisade") Demosthenes. The palisade which some throw around a camp for safety. Menander in the Aspis: "for many, having abandoned the palisade, plundered the villages."

[326344] chalkeia. CHALKEIA Hyperides in the speech Against Demeas for usurpation of citizenship. The Chalkeia is a festival among the Athenians held for Athena on the last day of Pyanepsion, common to all craftsmen but especially to bronzeworkers, as Apollonius of Acharnae says. But Phanodemus says the festival is held not for Athena but for Hephaestus. There is also a play of Menander called Chalkeia.

[326743] charikles. CHARICLES One of the Thirty; Lysias.

[326792] chernibon. CHERNIBON ("Lustral waters") Demosthenes in the speech Against Androtion: "and about to touch the lustral waters and the baskets." It would be from the nominative "chernips," the genitive plural "chernibon"; for the comic poets too mention the "chernips" as employed in the sacrifices. Aristophanes at any rate, in the Birds, says: "Boy, boy, take up the basket and the lustral water."

[327190] chilioi_diakosioi. THE TWELVE HUNDRED Isaeus, in the speech Against Ischomachus, says "no one named Lysides is among the twelve hundred." The wealthiest of the Athenians were twelve hundred, who performed the public services. Other orators mention them too, and Philochorus in his sixth book. But Lysias, in the speech Against Cleinias, and Isaeus, in the speech supporting Nicias, used the round number, saying "a thousand."

[327617] chiliothenta. CHILIOTHENTA Lycurgus in the speech Against Aristogeiton, for "fined a thousand drachmas." The same orator, in the speech Against Cephisodotus, also says "to have been fined a thousand."

[327819] chilon. CHILON A proper name; Aeschines.

[327861] chledos. CHLEDOS ("Rubbish") Demosthenes in the speech Against Callicles concerning damage to land: "and then, having thrown the rubbish (chledos) into the road, by which it has come about that the same road is made higher and narrower." Any heap is called "chledos," and it is like a kind of pile, especially of sweepings and refuse, and the alluvial deposit of rivers, and still more of torrents, which is also called "cherados." Here the orator seems to mean that Callicles has thrown into the road a heap of earth and brushwood from the field, as he himself indicates in what follows. Many use the word. Aeschylus in the Argives: "casting both javelins and curved darts and rubbish."

[328550] choes. CHOES Demosthenes in the speech On the Name. It was a festival held among the Athenians on the twelfth of Anthesterion. Apollodorus says that the whole festival held for Dionysus is called in common "Anthesteria," but in its parts "Pithoigia," "Choes," "Chytroi."

[328822] cholargeus. CHOLARGEUS Isaeus in the speech On the Estate of Ciron. Cholargia is a deme of the tribe Acamantis.

[328935] cholleidai. CHOLLEIDAE Lysias. A deme of the tribe Leontis.

[328996] chrestai. CHRESTAI The word means two opposite things; for it means creditors, as in Isaeus in the speech Against Calydon and in Aristophanes in the Clouds—for he says "by harsh interest and most troublesome creditors I am hauled, I am carried off, my goods are taken in pledge"—and it is used of the borrower by others, including Demosthenes in the special plea On Behalf of Phormio. And in the special plea Against Zenothemis he says "but the lenders, deceived from the first, seeing that they had, instead of their money, a worthless debtor (chrestes) and nothing else."

[329571] chrusis. CHRYSIS The bowl; Demosthenes in the speech Against Androtion, Aristophanes in the Peace.

[329671] chrusochoein. CHRYSOCHOEIN ("To smelt gold") Deinarchus in the speech Against Pytheas: "for again, having gone off from Aeschines and studied under this man, he clearly was learning to smelt gold, but not to do or suffer the matter before him." Plato too uses the proverb, in the first book of the Republic, saying: "What? said Thrasymachus; do you think these men have now come here to smelt gold, and not to hear arguments?" They say the proverb arose from this: a rumour once fell among the Athenian multitude that on Hymettus much gold-dust had appeared and was being guarded by warlike ants. Taking up arms, they rushed out against them; but returning empty-handed, having toiled in vain, they mocked one another, saying, "And you thought you would smelt gold," which means, "you thought that, having gathered much gold-dust and smelted it, you would grow rich." They were ridiculed too by the comic poets; Eubulus at any rate, in the Glaucus, says: "we once persuaded the sons of Cecrops to take up arms and go out to Hymettus with three days' provisions against the ants, since gold-wrought dust had appeared."

[330790] chutroi. CHYTROI Lysias in the speech Against Aeschines concerning the confiscation of the property of Aristophanes: "since, then, Demaratus was convicted of betraying Chytroi." It is a city in Cyprus so called, as Xenagoras says in the Islands. There is also a certain Attic festival, the Chytroi, which Deinarchus mentions in the speech Against Pytheas. The festival was held on the thirteenth of Anthesterion, as Philochorus says in his work On Festivals.

[331250] pseudeggrafe. PSEUDENGRAPHE ("False registration") It is the name of a suit, which those entered as owing money to the public treasury bring in on the ground that the man who registered them has falsely entered them on the tablet placed beside the goddess, as having been unjustly registered as owing money to the treasury. Lycurgus in the speech Against Aristogeiton and Isaeus in the speech Against Medon mention the name.

[331676] pseudokleteia. PSEUDOKLETEIA ("False summons") It is the name of a suit, which those entered as owing money to the public treasury bring in, when they charge that certain men have falsely produced witnesses to a summons against them, in regard to the suit through which they incurred the debt. It is found in other orators, and in Isaeus in the speech Against Nicocles concerning land.