WORK: Lexicon of the Ten Attic Orators  (slug: harpocration-lexicon-of-the-ten-attic-orators-a57385)

CHAPTER: 01-lexicon-of-the-ten-attic-orators



[110704] Hellenotamiai ("the Hellenic treasurers"). Andocides in the speech On the Peace, if it is genuine. That the Hellenotamiai were a magistracy who administered the moneys, Aristotle too makes clear in the Constitution of the Athenians. Thucydides too mentions them in his first book.

[110986] Embeblemena ("grafted things"). Used instead of "things grafted in" by Demosthenes in his speech Against Nicostratus. And Aristotle calls such pears "grafted ones."

[111152] Hembios ("living"). Antiphon, On Truth, book one: "and the rot of the wood may become living (embios)," instead of "in life," that is, "may live and not be dried up nor die."

[111328] Embrachu ("in brief"). Used instead of "simply and in summary" by Antiphon.

[111405] Emmenoi dikai ("monthly suits"). Both the commercial suits and those concerning loan-clubs; Demosthenes and Hyperides.

[111525] Empodon ("in the way"). Antiphon, in his speech Concerning the Revolution: "and you punished those in the way (empodon)," instead of "those who fell in," as also Andocides in the speech Against Alcibiades.

[111732] Empousa. Demosthenes On Behalf of Ctesiphon. They say it is a certain apparition of Hecate, which appeared to the unfortunate. The comedy is full of the word.

[111892] Henai archai ("the bygone magistracies"). The past ones; Demosthenes Against Aristogiton.

[111983] Endeixis ("information"). A kind of public suit, under which they brought those debarred by the laws from certain places or actions, if they did not keep away from them. There are many speeches of information, but the best known are those of Demosthenes Against Aristogiton.

[112259] Endekazontas. Used instead of "celebrating, holding the tenth-day feast among themselves," by Demosthenes in his speech Against Theocrines.

[112400] En Diomeiois Erakleion ("the Heracleum in Diomeia"). Hyperides Against Conon. The comic poets too mention the festival held in honor of Heracles in Diomeia.

[112558] Enepiskemma ("counter-claim"). Enepiskemma and enepiskepsasthai: Demosthenes in the speech Against Timotheus. Whenever someone's property was confiscated, it was permitted to the man claiming to be a creditor of that person to come forward and say that a debt was owed him in the property. There is also a certain speech entitled Of Demosthenes, Against Critias, Concerning the Counter-Claim, which Callimachus records as genuine, but Dionysius of Halicarnassus as falsely ascribed.

[113042] Eneskeuasmenen. Isaeus, in the speech Against Aristogiton and Archippus, used instead of "fitted out and forged."

[113157] Enetimato. Demosthenes in the speech Against Spudias. "Apetimato" differs from "enetimato": for when someone takes a security against a certain sum of money, he is said "to value back" (apotimasthai); but when someone reckons a part of the money in certain articles, this is said as "he valued it in" (enetimesato).

[113474] Hene kai nea ("the old and new day"). Hyperides in the speech Against Hygiaenon. The day we call the thirtieth, the Athenians call "old and new," from its having the end of the former month and the beginning of the latter. Polemon says that the Athenians once called it "Demetrias" in honor of Demetrius the Macedonian. "Enen" and "eis enen" they use for "the day after tomorrow." And in general "enon," with the rough breathing, means the former and bygone.

[113934] Enthrupta ("crumb-cakes"). Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. Didymus the grammarian, in his commentary on the speech, having said that "enthrypta" are something obvious and well known from the very word, sets out a more elaborate and unattested explanation; the "enthrypta" are things made of pastry, or foods broken in (enthrybomena). Some associate them with the mysteries; and Apollo too among the Athenians is called "Enthryptos."

[114386] En limnais Dionusion ("the Dionysium in the Marshes"). Isaeus, Concerning the Estate of Ciron. There is a place at Athens called Limnae ("Marshes"), in which Dionysus is honored.

[114566] Enneakrounon ("the Nine-Spouts"). Isocrates in the speech On the Exchange of Property. A certain spring at Athens; it was formerly called Callirrhoe.

[114717] Ennea odoi ("Nine Ways"). Aeschines in his Defense on the Embassy. A place in Thrace near Amphipolis.

[114820] En parabustoi ("in a corner"). Used instead of "secretly and not openly" by Hyperides in the speech Against Archestratides.

[114945] Ensemainomenos. Used instead of "showing and revealing" by Isocrates.

[115016] En freattoi ("at Phreatto"). Demosthenes, in his speech Against Aristocrates, has gone through accurately the court at Phreatto, speaking thus: "Consider, then, yet a fifth court, of what sort, surpassing that at Phreatto. Here, men of Athens, the law bids one stand trial if a man, having gone into exile for an involuntary act, before those who banished him have relented, is charged with another, voluntary, homicide." And a little later he says: "he brought the judges to a place where it was possible to approach that man, having appointed a certain spot of the country at Phreatto, called so, on the sea; then the one comes sailing in a boat and speaks, not touching the land, while the others listen and judge on the land. And if he is convicted, he has paid the just penalty for voluntary homicide; but if he is acquitted, he is let off from this charge, but undergoes exile for the other homicide." The court seems to have been named after a certain hero Phreatto, as Theophrastus says in the sixteenth book of his Laws.

[116047] Exagistos ("accursed"). Used instead of "exceedingly polluted and full of curse." Aeschines, in the speech Against Ctesiphon, used the word of a certain harbor.

[116209] Exaireseos dike ("suit for removal"). Whenever someone led another off as a slave, and then someone removed him as a free man, it was permitted to the man laying claim to the person as a slave to bring a suit for removal against the man removing him into freedom; Isaeus in the speech On Behalf of Eumathes, for the Recovery of Freedom.

[116547] Exarasasthai ("to fulfill the prayers"). Aeschines Against Ctesiphon: "that he dedicated golden shields to the new temple before fulfilling the prayers (exarasasthai)." "Exarasasthai" is to complete the "arai," that is, the prayers, which they were accustomed to make at the foundations of temples.

[116847] Exegguesis. The releasing of someone through the provision of sureties; Demosthenes in his speech Against Timocrates.

[116966] Exenize ("he spoke as a foreigner"). Demosthenes in the appeal Against Eubulides: "for they have slandered my father as though he spoke as a foreigner (exenize)." Perhaps it means "he was a foreigner," and not, as Didymus says, "he did not speak in the Attic way, but in a foreign manner."

[117257] Exepremnizon. Used instead of "they cut down the stumps," that is, the trunks down to the roots, by Demosthenes in his speech Concerning the Estate of Hagnias.

[117418] Exetazesthai. Used instead of "to be seen" by Demosthenes Against Stephanus. And in the speech Against Androtion he says "you were examined (exetasthes)," instead of "you were seen, you were beheld."

[117619] Exegetes ("expounder"). Isaeus, in the speech Concerning the Estate of Ciron. The man who expounds sacred matters. There were also things, customary toward the departed, which they expounded to those who needed them. Demosthenes too, in the speech Against Euergus and Mnesibulus, makes this clear, often naming the expounders in the plural.

[117961] Exekestos. A proper name; Demosthenes Against Aristocrates.

[118022] Exorchesamenos ("having danced it away"). Used instead of "having fled and run off" by Demosthenes in his speech Against Androtion, who said it in jest at the same time, on account of the procession of the Dionysia.

[118239] Exoules ("of ejectment"). The name of a suit which those who say they are kept from their own property bring against those who keep them out. The name comes from "exillein," which is "to thrust out and cast out." Suits of ejectment are brought, with the penalties, by those who do not recover their own within the proper term, when the condemned have become overdue. Those convicted of ejectment gave to the successful party what they had taken from him, and paid to the treasury the value assessed. A creditor too was sued for ejectment if he tried to hold a piece of property of his debtor and was prevented by someone. And if anyone was kept from cultivation, the law grants a suit of ejectment against the one keeping him out. And concerning a slave too, and everything of which one says it belongs to him. These matters Isaeus teaches clearly, and Lysias in the speech Against Stratocles for Ejectment. Dinarchus, however, in the adjudication of the Croconidae, has used the term "ejectment" in a special sense, of the priestess who would not perform her own duties. That the name is applied to everything from which one is cast out of his own property, and not, as Caecilius thinks, only to those owing in consequence of a condemnation, Phrynichus too makes clear in the Grass-Cutters.

[119532] Exomosia ("oath of disclaimer"). The denying of some action on oath, on account of sickness or some other pretext, as Demosthenes makes clear in the speech On the Embassy.

[119705] Epaggelia ("notice, denunciation"). It has other meanings too, but in a special sense it is used of those who charge another with speaking and taking part in public life when it is not permitted, and it is, as it were, a "notice"; Aeschines Against Timarchus. Among these writers "to give notice" (epaggellesthai) is also used instead of "to command" or "to demand," as in Antiphon, in his work Concerning the Tribute of the Lindians, and in Demosthenes, in the speech On the Embassy.

[120191] Epaktos orkos ("the imported oath"). One which a man voluntarily takes upon himself, that is, chooses; but others say the opposite, that it is one imported from elsewhere, and not self-chosen. Lysias in the speech Against Chaerestratus, and Isocrates of Apollonia in his Exhortations to Demonicus. There are three kinds of oath: the oath of denial, the oath of affirmation, and the so-called "imported" oath. This last is not simple; for the man put forward by the one administering the oath must answer back to him in the very same words.

[120732] Epaktrokeles. Aeschines in the speech Against Timarchus. It is a kind of boat, having its construction compounded of a fishing-skiff (epaktris) and a yacht (keles). It was generally a pirate-craft, as Dinarchus too says in the scrutiny Against Polyeuctus.

[120989] Epallaxeis ("interchanges"). Used instead of "dealings or minglings" by Antiphon, On Truth, book one.

[121092] Epanafora ("reference"). The referring and communicating to the multitude.

[121168] Epairomenos ("raising himself"). Used instead of "stretching himself up against" by Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. But in the speech Against Aphobus he uses it in another sense: "or those roused up by gains because of want."

[121413] Epedikase ("he adjudged"). Epedikase and epedikasanto: Demosthenes in the speech Against Olympiodorus. "Epedikasen" is, as it were, "he adjudged"; "epedikasanto" is, as it were, "they persuaded the jurors to assign the estate to them." [On bringing a spear at the funeral and proclaiming at the tomb:] Demosthenes Against Euergus and Mnesibulus says these things concerning the man who died by violence. Ister, in his Collection of the Atthides, having spoken about Procris and Cephalus, writes thus: "but some say that Erechtheus was represented with a spear fixed on the tomb, sitting beside it and signifying the deed, because it was customary for the kinsmen to pursue the murderers in this fashion."

[122119] Epeskepsato. Used instead of "he charged with false testimony." It is sometimes, though rarely, also used of charging with homicide, as Antiphon in his speech Concerning the Revolution. But the active "epeskepsen," used instead of "he enjoined," Isaeus uses in the speech On Behalf of Eumathes, for the Recovery of Freedom. And "episkepto," used instead of "I speak with some adjuration and, as it were, put under oath," both Andocides in the speech On the Mysteries and Lysias in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiarchus have used.

[122648] Epibates ("marine"). Demosthenes in the speech Concerning the Supplementary Trierarchy. They so called those serving on the triremes who did not row, but were fit only for fighting. Aristophanes in the Babylonians: "well did the marine dive out, so as to carry off the . . ."

[122925] Epibaetas. Lysias in the speech Against Micinus for Homicide, if it is genuine. The "epibles" is, as Timachidas says, a beam; but as Cleitarchus the glossographer says, a certain kind of beam.

[123119] Epiboion ("supplementary offering"). Lycurgus in the speech Concerning the Priestess. Philochorus, in his second book, says thus: "if anyone sacrifices an ox to Athena, it is necessary to sacrifice a sheep also to Pandora," and the offering was called "epiboion." Likewise Staphylus too, in the first book of his work On Athens.

[123449] Epibole ("penalty"). The fine. The word is frequent among them, as also in Lysias in the speech Against Nicomachus, if the speech is genuine.

[123592] Epignomonas. Used instead of "overseers" by Lysias in the speech Concerning the Sacred Olive-Stump.

[123693] Epigrafeas ("assessors"). Those appointed to write down how much men owe to contribute to the public treasury; Lysias in the speech Concerning the Property-Tax.

[123855] Epiguion. Lysias in the speech Against Andocides for Desertion, if it is genuine. They called the stern-cables "epigyia." The poets of the old comedy too have used the word; Aristophanes in the Cargo-Ships.

[124063] Epidekaton ("the tenth in addition"). The tenth; Isaeus in the speech Against Elpagoras. And . . .

[124163] Epipempton eiothasi legein ("they are accustomed to say epipempton"). They are accustomed to say "epipempton" for "the fifth," as also Eupolis in the Autolycus.

[124325] Epi Delfinioi ("at the Delphinium"). It is a court so called at Athens. Here those are tried who admit they have killed but say they did so justly, as Demosthenes makes clear in his speech Against Aristocrates, and Aristotle in the Constitution of the Athenians.

[124589] Epidiatithesthai. Lysias in the epilogue of the speech Against Theopeithes Concerning a Guardianship. "Epidiatithesthai" is to make certain agreements, depositing a fixed sum of money with one of the intermediaries, who guarantees to each party that, if the transaction takes place, the agreed money shall by all means be paid to the other. The matter itself is called "epidiatheke," as the same orator makes clear in the speech On Behalf of Nesocles.

[125042] Epi Delioi mache ("the battle at Delium"). Lycurgus in the speech Against Lysicles. Delium is a place in Boeotia; here the Athenians, fighting, were defeated by the Boeotians, as Thucydides says in his fourth book.

[125258] Epidietes ebesai ("to have come two years past puberty"). Demosthenes in his speech Against Stephanus. Didymus says it means "if they become sixteen years old"; for "to reach puberty" is up to fourteen. But the ephebes among the Athenians are eighteen years old, and they remain among the ephebes two years, and then they are enrolled in the deme-register, as Hyperides says in the speech Against Chares Concerning a Guardianship: "but when I was enrolled, and the law restored to my mother the recovery of what had been left—the law which bids the children be masters of the heiress and of all the property, when they are two years past puberty."

[125907] Epidikos kai epikleros kai epiproikos ("subject to adjudication, heiress, dowered"). Epidikos and epikleros and epiproikos and epiklerotis: an "epikleros" is the orphan left over the whole estate, there being no brother to her (and she is the same as the "epiklerotis"); an "epiproikos" is one left over a certain part of the estate, so as to have a dowry, there being brothers to her; an "epidikos" is the disputed heiress, as to whom she must be married to. These things Isaeus shows in the speech Against Satyrus, On Behalf of an Heiress, and Dinarchus in the work entitled A Counter-Deposition Concerning the Non-Adjudicability of the Daughter of Aristophon; in which speech it is also shown that the nearest of kin used to give in marriage the destitute maidens, adding a dowry of five minas. Isaeus, in the speech Against Lysibius, called the "epikleros" an "epiklerotis."

[126787] Epi Thrasulloi ("at Thrasyllus'"). Demosthenes in the special plea Against Pantaenetus says "at Thrasyllus'." It is an Attic idiom, instead of "at the monument of Thrasyllus."

[126964] Epithetous eortas ("added festivals"). Isocrates in the Areopagiticus. They called festivals not ancestral, but otherwise voted in, "added" (epithetoi). Among them certain other things were also called "added," all those not ancestral, on which the Council of the Areopagus gave judgment, as Lysias makes clear in his speech on the indictment Against Mixidemus. Lysias, in the speech Against Thrasybulus, names certain "added letters," and he would mean those given to certain persons to carry across; for it was customary to say "he added a letter" instead of "he handed over," as Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Chrysippus, against the special plea of Phormio. Cratinus, in the Trophonius . . .

[127669] Epikekeruchenai ("to have set a price"). Demosthenes in the speech On the Embassy. Whenever a city or magistrate wished one of those not under their power to be killed, it proclaimed it would give money, so much and so much, if anyone should kill him—just as the Greeks proclaimed a price on Xerxes, that they would give a hundred talents to anyone who should bring him, alive or dead, to Athens.

[128067] Epikerukeia ("herald-overtures"). The sending of heralds about friendship and reconciliation; Demosthenes in the fifth book of the Philippics.

[128211] Epi korres ("on the cheek"). Demosthenes in his speech Against Meidias. Different men have rendered it differently, but it is better to understand "on the cheek" (epi korres) as being "on the jaw," what we call in life a "slap." Hyperides, at any rate, or Philinus, in the speech Against Dorotheus, having first said that the man who struck Hipponicus on the cheek was indicted for outrage, in what follows explains the word, as it were, saying: "then Hipponicus was merely slapped on the jaw by Autocles, but I was dragged by these hairs, and received blows of the fist."

[128785] Epikrates. Isaeus in the speech Concerning Matters Spoken in Macedonia. This is the demagogue of the Athenians surnamed "the shield-bearer," whom Demosthenes too mentions in the speech On the Embassy. There is another Epicrates whom Lycurgus mentions in the speech On the Administration, saying that he was set up in bronze on account of the law about the ephebes, and that he is said to have possessed an estate of six hundred talents. There is yet another Epicrates, the brother-in-law of Aeschines the orator, as is shown by him in his Defense on the Embassy; this man, however, had the nickname "Cyrebion," as Demosthenes says in the speech Against Aeschines.

[129450] Epilachon ("having drawn a second lot"). Aeschines Against Ctesiphon: "neither having drawn the lot nor drawn the second lot, but having bought the place by intrigue." The matter seems to be of this sort: those aspiring to be councillors or magistrates were chosen by lot, and then to each of those allotted another was allotted as substitute, so that if the first man allotted should be rejected or die, the substitute should become councillor in his place. These things are suggested in the Hyperbolus of Plato.

[129965] Epimeletes ton musterion ("superintendent of the mysteries"). Among the Athenians, the so-called king-archon; Demosthenes Against Meidias. Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Athenians, says thus: "the king-archon first has charge of the mysteries, together with the superintendents, whom the people elect, two from all the Athenians, one from the Eumolpidae, and one from the Heralds."

[130355] Epimeletes emporiou ("superintendent of the trading-port"). Dinarchus in the speech Against Pytheas. Aristotle: "they choose by lot ten superintendents of the trading-port, and to these it is assigned to have charge of the merchants and to compel the merchants to bring up to the city two-thirds of the grain that comes by sea into the Attic port."

[130705] Epimenia ("monthly offerings"). Lycurgus in the speech Concerning the Priestess. The "epimenia" seem to be either the things sacrificed each month, or the offerings made once for the whole month.

[130902] Epiorkesanta ("having sworn"). Lysias, Against Theomnestus, explained that "having sworn falsely" (epiorkesanta) means "having sworn (omosanta)."

[131049] Epi Palladioi ("at the Palladium"). Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristocrates. It is a court so called, as Aristotle too says in the Constitution of the Athenians, in which the ephetai try cases of involuntary homicide and of plotting. The court got the name "of the Palladium," and the judges the name "ephetai," from this: when Agamemnon, with the Argives, had been brought to Athens from Ilium with the Palladium, Demophon seized the Palladium and killed many of the pursuers. Agamemnon, indignant, demanded justice from the man who had seized it, and a court was set up of fifty Athenians and fifty Argives, whom they called "ephetai" because the matters of the trial had been referred (epheicthenai) to them by both parties.

[131785] Epipempton. Lysias in the speech Against Critodemus, and Plato, used instead of the simple "fifth." Aristophanes in the Banqueters: "let him not get the fifth part; let him weep."

[131966] Epiplon ("furnishings"). Isaeus in the speech Against Diocles. They call the household goods "epipla," the property that is, as it were, superficial and able to be carried about. Sophocles in the Athamas.

[132172] Epi prutaneioi ("at the Prytaneum"). This too is a homicide court; it judges if any inanimate thing, falling, kills someone—that is, if a stone or a piece of wood or iron or some such thing—and the man who threw it is unknown, but the thing itself is known and is held to have done the murder.

[132467] Episemainesthai. Used instead of "to praise" and, as we say in common speech, "to acclaim," by Isocrates in the Panathenaicus; but instead of "to set one's seal upon" by Isaeus in his defense for ejectment, Against Hagnotheus, on behalf of Calydon.

[132717] Episitia ("provisions"). The things given for food and sustenance; Lysias in the speech Against Demosthenes for Maladministration of a Guardianship. These they sometimes also called "sition."

[132910] Episkopos ("inspector"). Antiphon in his work Concerning the Tribute of the Lindians and in the speech Against Laispodias. Certain men seem to have been sent out by the Athenians to the subject cities to inspect the affairs among each. Theophrastus, at any rate, in the first book of his Politics Adapted to Occasions, says thus: "for it is far better, at least as regards the choice of name—as the Laconians, who say they send 'harmosts' to the cities, not 'inspectors' or 'guards,' as the Athenians do."

[133417] Epistates ("president"). Isaeus in the speech Against Elpagoras and Demophanes. There are two presidents established, one chosen by lot from the prytaneis, the other from the proedroi, of whom each administers what administration, Aristotle has shown in the Constitution of the Athenians. In public affairs, the man set over any matter whatever was also called "president," as Hyperides in the speech Against Demosthenes and Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon make plain.

[133897] Epistathmos ("billet-master, overseer"). Isocrates in the Panegyricus: "Hecatomnos, the overseer (epistathmos) of Caria"—which was nothing else than being master of the satrapy of Caria.

[134085] Epiteleoun ("completing"). Epiteleoun and epiteleoma: both words occur often in the speech Concerning the Priestess of Lycurgus, and "epiteleoma" seems to mean the sacrifice made after all the rest, for the sake of bringing the former sacrifices to completion. At any rate the orator himself, in the speech, says: "further, he said that these were sacrificed last of all and were the completion (epiteleomata) of the other offerings."

[134521] Epitimetas ("re-assessors"). Those first assessing anything were called "assessors" (timetai), those in the following years assessing the same things "re-assessors" (epitimetai); Lysias in the speech Against Diogenes.

[134740] Epiteichisma ("a fortified outpost"). A place fortified against certain persons, from which the fortifiers, setting out, will be able to harm those fortified against; Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. They also call the act "epiteichismos," as is in the same speech.

[135024] Epitrepein ("to entrust, to refer"). Demosthenes, in his speech Against Aphobus, book one, began thus: "if Aphobus had been willing, men of the jury, to do what is just concerning the matters in dispute between us, and to entrust them to our relatives," instead of "to choose them as arbitrators"; whence also the play of Menander, The Arbitration. Lysias, in the speech Against the Guardians of the Sons of Boeon, said "he entrusted to men," instead of "he appointed guardians."

[135505] Epitritais ("at a third in addition"). Isaeus in the speech Against Calliphon: "six hundred drachmas at a third in addition (epitritais)," instead of "at eight obols," since the eight obols are a third of the four-drachma piece.

[135735] Epichares. Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. A proper name, a Sicyonian traitor.

[135833] Epicheirotonia ("election by show of hands"). The appointment of those chosen by show of hands; Hyperides in the speech On Behalf of Simias against Pytheas and Lycurgus.

[136004] Epipsefizon ("putting to the vote"). Used instead of "ratifying"; Demosthenes in his speech Against Androtion. The word is frequent among the Attic writers in this meaning, as also in Xenophon in the first book of the Memorabilia.

[136236] Epogdoon ("an eighth in addition"). Demosthenes in the speech Against Polycles, Concerning the Supplementary Trierarchy. "Epogdoon" would be money lent in such a way that an eighth part of the principal is given to the lender, as three obols on the four-drachma piece.

[136506] Epobelia ("the obol-penalty"). Demosthenes in his speech Against Stephanus. The "epobelia" is a penalty, the sixth part of the assessment, which the prosecutors paid to the defendants if they did not win. It was so called because for each drachma there was an obol, which is a sixth, the drachma being reckoned at six obols. From many instances one may learn that this is so.

[136883] Eponia ("sale-tax"). It is a tax given on the purchase, and would perhaps be a fifth; Isaeus in the speech Against Elpagoras and Demophanes and in the counter-oath Against Tlepolemus.

[137068] Eponumoi ("the eponymous"). Demosthenes in his speech Against Timocrates. The "eponymous" are of two kinds: the ten, after whom the tribes are named, and the forty-two others, after whom the age-classes of the citizens are named each year, from eighteen years to sixty.

[137339] Epopteukoton ("of those initiated into the higher mysteries"). Hyperides in the speech On Behalf of Phryne. Those initiated at Eleusis in the second initiation are said "to behold" (epopteuein), as is clear both from the speech of Demosthenes and from the tenth book of Philochorus.

[137623] Eranizontes ("contributing to a loan-club"). Demosthenes, in the letter concerning the sons of Lycurgus, said "having contributed (eranisas)" instead of "having asked for a loan-club"; but in the speech Concerning the Name he says: "but what if, expecting to be convicted of false testimony for the things in which he contributes (eranizei) to these men about himself, he repays in kind, rendering them equal aid to that which they once furnished, having borne false witness for him?" The "eranistes," however, is properly the one who shares in the loan-club and pays in the contribution that had to be paid each month. The word is in Lysias in the speech Against Aristocrates Concerning a Pledge of a Loan-Club, if it is genuine.

[138355] Erga neon ("works of the young"). This too Hyperides, in the speech Against Autocles, says is Hesiod's. It is a proverb, which Aristophanes the grammarian also recorded, running thus: "works are of the young, counsels of the middle-aged, prayers of the old."

[138615] Ergiske. Aeschines Against Ctesiphon. Ergiske too is of Thrace, named after Ergiscus the son of Poseidon and the nymph Aba.

[138740] Ergokles. A general of the Athenians.

[138779] Ergofilos. This man too was a general of the Athenians.

[138836] Herkeios Zeus ("Zeus of the Enclosure"). Dinarchus in the speech Against Moschion: "whether he has phratry-members and altars of Zeus of the Enclosure and of ancestral Apollo." "Herkeios" Zeus is the one whose altar is set within the enclosure (herkos) in the courtyard; for they called the enclosure "herkos." That those had a share in citizenship who had a Zeus of the Enclosure, Hyperides too has shown in the speech On Behalf of a Made Citizen, if it is genuine, and Demetrius in his work On the Legislation at Athens.

[139360] Herma ("reef"). The submerged rock; Antiphon in his Defense Against the Information of Callias. The word is also in Anacreon and in the Gerytades of Aristophanes.

[139524] Hermai ("the Herms"). Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon, and Hyperides in the speech Concerning the Gifts of Eubulus. Menecles or Callicrates, in the work On Athens, writes thus: "from the Painted Stoa and the Royal Stoa are the so-called Herms; for, because many were set up both by private men and by magistrates, it came about that they received this name." On one of them is inscribed in ancient letters: "In return for their benefaction the Achaeans bound Agamemnon." That a certain stoa was also called the Stoa of the Herms, Antiphon too has shown in the speech Against Nicocles. That certain Herms were also called "Hipparchian," after Hipparchus the son of Peisistratus, has been said both in the old comedy and in Plato in the Hipparchus.

[140282] Hermos. It is a deme of Attica, of the tribe Acamantis, as Diodorus says in his work On the Demes. But Dionysius the son of Tryphon, in his work On Names, says that the name of the deme, "Hermos," is seemingly neuter, like "herkos." Zopyrus, in his work On Rivers, says there is a "Hermos" in Attica and a deme of the same name as it.

[140618] Hermes ho pros tei pulidi ("the Hermes by the little gate"). Demosthenes in the speech Against Euergus and Mnesibulus. Philochorus, in the fifth book of his Atthis, says that the nine archons set up for the tribes a Hermes by the gateway, the Attic one.

[140873] Hermias. A proper name, the eunuch who had been thrice sold. He stood on intimate terms with Aristotle, and gave his adopted daughter to the philosopher.

[141028] Eroiadai. The Eroiadae are a deme of the tribe Hippothontis, as Diodorus says.

[141108] Eruthraioi. Demosthenes in the eighth Philippic. Erythrae is a city in Ionia, one of those founded by Neleus the son of Codrus, as Hellanicus says in his Atthis.

[141271] Erchiathen ("from Erchia"). Dinarchus Against Stephanus. Erchia is a deme of the tribe Aegeis, as Diodorus says.

[141385] Espathato. Demosthenes in his speech Against Aeschines. Didymus says it is used instead of "was wasted," from the "spathe"; and "spathe" is a sword. Perhaps, however, the metaphor is from weavers; for they use a "spathe" (a weaving-blade). And Aristophanes in the Clouds: "wife, you weave too lavishly (spathas)."

[141700] Estiator ("host, feast-giver"). The man who sets a table before certain people; Demosthenes in the speech Against Boeotus. They feasted the tribes, some willingly, some by lot, as the same orator makes clear in the speech Against Meidias.

[141940] Eschara ("hearth"). Lycurgus in the speech Concerning the Priestess. Ammonius, in his work On Altars, says that the "eschara" is called the hearth that has no height, but is set low on the ground and hollow; from which the physicians too call the hollow ulcers in bodies "escharai."

[142224] Eschatia ("the outlying land"). Demosthenes in the speech Against Phaenippus. They called the lands at the borders of the plots "eschatiai," the ones bordered by either a mountain or the sea.

[142417] Hetaireia ("companionship"). In a special sense Andocides applied the word to prostitution (hetairesis) in his Defense on the Mysteries.

[142555] Eteoboutadai. Lycurgus in the speech Concerning the Priestess. A clan among the Athenians, as it were "those truly from Butes"; for "eteon" means "true." From these was established the priestess of Athena Polias, as Draco says in his work On Clans.

[142805] Heterofthalmos ("the one-eyed man"). The one who made laws among the Locrians; Demosthenes in his speech Against Timocrates.

[142931] Euagoras. A proper name, for whom the encomium of Isocrates is composed.

[143005] Euaion. Demosthenes Against Meidias. A proper name.

[143058] Euandria ("the contest of manhood"). Dinarchus in the speech Against Agasikles. At the Panathenaea a contest of manhood (euandria) was held. Andocides makes this clear in the speech Against Alcibiades, and Philochorus.

[143278] Euboulos. There is a speech of Hyperides Concerning the Gifts of Eubulus, and Demosthenes mentions him in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. That he was a most distinguished demagogue, careful and industrious, and that, providing much money for the Athenians, he distributed it, on which account it came about that the city, under his administration, became most unmanly and most slothful—Theopompus says in the tenth book of the Philippics. There is another, the comic poet, whom Hyperides mentions in the speech Against Archestratides.

[143817] Eudikos. Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. This man was one of those established by Philip as masters of all Thessaly.

[143953] Euenos. Hyperides in the speech Against Autocles. They record two Euenoi, elegiac poets of the same name, as Eratosthenes does in his work On Chronologies, saying that both were Parians; but he says that only the younger is well known. Plato too mentions one of them.

[144222] Eueniotata ("most tractably"). Antiphon in his work On Concord. "Euenios" is the gentle and moderate and not turbulent man; the metaphor is from horses. The word is also in Plato in the ninth book of the Laws.

[144433] Euthias. Hyperides On Behalf of Phryne. Euthias was among those reputed for malicious prosecution. Hermippus says that Anaximenes composed for him the speech Against Phryne.

[144608] Euthunoi ("examiners"). Lysias in the speech Against Nicides, if it is genuine. "Euthynoi" is the name of a magistracy among the Athenians. They were ten men in number, before whom those who had served on embassies or held office or administered any public matter rendered their accounts (euthynai). Aristotle has discoursed about them in the Constitution of the Athenians.

[144983] Euthuoron ("straight ahead"). The going in a straight line; Antiphon in the speech Against Nicocles. The word is also in Xenophon in the second book of the Anabasis.

[145150] Eumenides. Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristocrates. Aeschylus, in the Eumenides, having told of the trial of Orestes, says that Athena, having soothed the Erinyes so that they were not harsh toward Orestes, named them "Eumenides" (Kindly Ones). They are Alecto, Megaera, and Tisiphone.

[145444] Euneidai. Lysias in the speech Against Telamon, if it is genuine. There is a clan among the Athenians so named, the Euneidae; they were lyre-players who furnished their service for the sacred rites.

[145644] Euxitheos. Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon, says that by this man the Eleans were betrayed.

[145754] Euoi saboi ("euoi saboi"). Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. "Euoi" is a Bacchic exclamation. Arignote says that some said "euoi" instead of "well to you" (eu soi), praising the invention of the mirror.

[145974] Euofthalmos ("with fair appearance"). Used instead of "seemly" by Antiphon in his work On Peacocks.

[146075] Eurubaton ("Eurybatus"). Aeschines Against Ctesiphon. Ephorus, in his eighth book, says that Eurybatus, a man of Ephesus, having taken money from Croesus to gather an army for the war against the Persians, then turned traitor and handed over the money given him to Cyrus, and that from this base men are called "Eurybatoi."

[146400] Eurumedon. Lycurgus in the speech Against Leocrates. Eurymedon is a river of Pamphylia, where Cimon, general of the Athenians, defeated the Persians both by land and by sea, as Thucydides says in his first book.

[146613] Eurusakeion. Hyperides in the speech Against Aristogiton. It is a precinct of Eurysaces the son of Ajax at Athens, so named, in Melite.

[146750] Eusumbolos ("easy to deal with"). Used instead of "easily and well dealing," that is, "good at dealing," by Antiphon in the Political speech.

[146893] Eufraios. Demosthenes in the ninth Philippic. This man was an Oreite by birth, and he had a share in the school of Plato.

[147016] Euonumeis. Lysias in the speech Against Philocrates. It is a deme of the tribe Erechtheis, as Diodorus says.

[147126] Efesis ("appeal"). The transfer from one court to another; the same is also called "ekkletos." There is a speech of Demosthenes entitled An Appeal Against Eubulides, and in the speech the word "appeal" and the verb "to appeal" occur often.

[147367] Efektos tokos ("interest at a sixth"). Interest at the sixth part of the principal; Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Chrysippus.

[147503] Efetai ("the ephetai"). Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristocrates. Those who judged the cases of bloodshed at the Palladium and at the Prytaneum and at the Delphinium and at Phreatto were called "ephetai."

[147715] Ef ieron ("to the shrine"). Demosthenes in the speech Concerning the Supplementary Trierarchy. There is a shrine of the twelve gods on the Bosporus, as Timosthenes says in his work On Harbors.

[147909] Eforia. The proclamation made at the boundaries, as Demosthenes teaches in his speech Against Aristocrates, and Theophrastus in the third book of his Laws.

[148066] Eformein ("to lie at anchor against"). Used instead of "to lie in wait"; for the lying off against certain persons, watching for an opportunity of attack, was so called; Demosthenes in the Philippics.

[148268] Echinos. It is a vessel into which the documents for the suits were put; Demosthenes in the speech Against Timotheus. Aristotle mentions this vessel too in the Constitution of the Athenians, and Aristophanes in the Danaids. There was also a city, Echinus, which Demosthenes mentions in the eighth Philippic. There is also a certain creature, both of land and of the sea, a shellfish.

[148653] Heolokrasia ("the dregs of stale wine"). Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon: "this man is the cause, having poured over me, as it were, a kind of dregs of his own wickedness." Didymus says: "the matters which he stirred up yesterday and the day before, today he pours over me and says that I did them."

[148971] 6. Zeira. Zeira, or "seira": as some say, it was a garment which they put on over their tunics like a cloak; Lysias in the speech Against Philip, if it is genuine. And Xenophon, in the seventh book of the Anabasis, speaking of the Thracians, says: "they wore long robes (zeirai) reaching to their feet upon their horses, and not cloaks."

[149310] Zeuxis. Isocrates, On the Exchange of Property. The best of the painters of that time.

[149398] Zelotupoun ("to be jealous"). Aeschines, in the speech Against Ctesiphon, used instead of "to hate"; for "to envy" (zeloun) is "to count blessed," while "to be jealous" (zelotupein) is "to have come into enmity."

[149612] Zetetes ("investigator"). A magistracy at Athens established as occasion required, whenever it was necessary to seek out those committing some public wrong; Demosthenes in his speech Against Timocrates, and Andocides in the speech On the Information. This orator too once became an investigator, as Lysias and Isocrates say, and Plato the comic poet in the Ambassadors.

[149983] 7. Hegemonia dikasteriou ("presidency of a court"). Aeschines Against Ctesiphon. Different suits were brought before different magistrates, and the magistrates introduced the suits brought to them into court, each according to its own law, presiding and taking the lead: thus, before the archon, the suits concerning orphans and heiresses; before the king-archon, those of impiety; before the polemarch, those of desertion and of being without a patron; before the thesmothetai, those of alien status and of bribery-for-citizenship and of malicious prosecution and of bribes and of false registration and of outrage and of adultery and of plotting and others.

[150644] Hegemon summorias ("leader of a symmory"). Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. The man who excelled in wealth, and on that account was charged with leading the rest, was called the "leader of the symmory," as Hyperides suggests in his speech Against Polyeuctus.

[150921] Hegemon. Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. He was one of those who favored the Macedonians and were charged with taking bribes.

[151066] Hegesippos. Demosthenes in a Philippic. This is the one surnamed Crobylus, to whom some think the seventh Philippic ascribed to Demosthenes belongs.

[151216] Heduleion. Demosthenes, in the speech Against Aeschines. The Hedyleion is a mountain in Boeotia, as Theopompus says in his twenty-fifth book. "Or having brought down on the road": instead of "having taken him while lying in ambush," that is, "having struck him down in some ambush"; Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristocrates.

[151548] Eetioneia. Antiphon, in his speech Concerning the Revolution. So was named the other headland of the Piraeus, after Eetion who acquired the land, as Philochorus says in his Counter-Plea against Demon. Thucydides too mentions the Eetioneia in his eighth book.

[151808] Ekroteriasmenoi ("mutilated"). Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon: "having each mutilated their own native lands," instead of "having ravaged them"; for those who maltreat people are accustomed to cut off their extremities, as Sophocles too in the Polyxena. Here, however, "mutilated" stands in place of the active "having mutilated."

[152158] Heliaia. Heliaia and heliasis: the heliaia is the greatest court at Athens, in which the public matters were judged, with a thousand or fifteen hundred jurors gathering. The thousand came together from two courts, the fifteen hundred from three. "To sit in the heliaia" and "heliasis" mean to give judgment in the heliaia. Lysias, in the speech Against Glaucon, often names the heliaia, but in the speech Against Philonides, if it is genuine, he used "to sit in the heliaia."

[152635] Helikia tes poleos ("the prime of the city"). Used instead of "those in their prime, the young men"; Lycurgus Against Aristogiton, and Demosthenes in the Philippics.

[152802] Hemiekton ("half-sixth measure"). Hemiekton and hemimedimnon: Dinarchus in the information Against Callisthenes. The medimnos containing forty-eight choinikes, the measure holding twenty-four choinikes is a half-medimnon; the half-sixth (hemiekton) is the measure holding four choinikes, the half of the sixth-part, which is eight choinikes.

[153145] Hemioliasmos ("a reckoning by one-and-a-half"). Antiphon, in the Political speech: "of doubling and of reckoning by one-and-a-half," instead of "to give the one-and-a-half measure in the calculations." The number "hemiolios" is one that contains another whole and the half of it, as three to two. At any rate Xenophon, in the Anabasis, says that he made the pay of the soldiers one-and-a-half, three half-darics instead of a daric.

[153578] Epeiron ("the mainland"). It is customary for Isocrates to call the land under the king of the Persians by this name, as in both the To Philip and the Archidamus.

[153742] Herakleia. Demosthenes, in the speech Against Aeschines. There being many Heracleia throughout Attica, Demosthenes would now mean either those at Marathon or those at Cynosarges; for these especially the Athenians held in honor.

[153972] Heraion teichos ("the wall of Hera"). Demosthenes in the Philippics. It is a place in Thrace so called, settled by the Samians, as Dionysius says in the fifth book of his Foundations.

[154157] Eria ("tombs"). Lycurgus, in the speech Against Autolycus. The "eria" are the tombs, as the orator himself makes clear. Some say that more generally all tombs are so called, but in a special sense those whose monuments are not raised on high, but where the bodies are laid in the earth; and that the name comes from "era" (the earth).

[154493] Esmen ("we knew"). Used instead of "we knew" (edeimen). Antiphon, in his Defense Against the Information of Callias: "we, then, neither knew (esmen) how great a fleet was needed."

[154674] Eitemenen ("borrowed"). Used instead of "having been lent" by Demosthenes in the speech Against Euergus, if it is genuine. For that they used "to ask" (aiteisthai) for "to borrow," Menander shows: "for not asking for fire, nor begging a dish."

[154919] Hefaistia. Hyperides, in the speech On Behalf of Academus. That there were two cities of Lemnos, Myrina and Hephaestia, Dionysius of Chalcis too makes clear in the third book of his Foundations.

[155115] Eion. Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristocrates. Eion is a city of Thrace, a colony of the Mendaeans, as Thucydides says. But Theopompus, in his fourth book, says that the Athenians, having driven the Amphipolitans out of Eion, razed the place.

[155366] 8. Thargelia. Hyperides, in the speech Against Polyeuctus. The Thargelia is a festival, held in the month Thargelion, which is sacred to Apollo.

[155512] Themenos ta opla ("having put on his arms"). Used instead of "having girded on and armed himself" by Demosthenes in his speech Against Meidias. And Homer: "and on his mighty head he set the helmet." And Aeschines, in the speech Against Timarchus, says: "fellow, for the city for which you do not put on your arms (tithesai)."

[155839] Themisteuein ("to deliver oracles"). Used instead of "to give oracular responses" by Lysias in the speech On the Miscarriage, if it is genuine. That the word came from Themis once having held the oracle before Apollo, Aeschylus says at the beginning of the Eumenides.

[156108] Themison. Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. A proper name. This man became a tyrant.

[156210] Theogeiton. Demosthenes in the same speech. Some named this man Theogenes, as Dinarchus too does in the speech Against Demosthenes.

[156343] Theognis. Lysias in the speech Against Eratosthenes. This man was one of the Thirty tyrants at Athens, as others say, and Xenophon in the second book of the Hellenica. Of the poet Theognis, Isocrates makes mention in his admonitions To Nicocles; this man was a Megarian, from the Megara near Attica; for the poet himself says . . . Plato, in the first book of the Laws, not having attended to this, asserted that he was a citizen of the Megarians in Sicily. Not a few followed Plato in this.

[156836] Theoinion. Lycurgus in the adjudication of the Croconidae against the Coeronidae. The Dionysia held in the demes were called Theoinia, in which the clansmen offered sacrifice; for they called Dionysus "Theoinos," as Aeschylus shows, and Ister in the first book of his Collections.

[157118] Theokrines. Demosthenes, in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon, reviling Aeschines, says "a tragic Theocrines." He means to call him a malicious prosecutor, since Theocrines was such a man, as is clear from the speech Against Theocrines, whether this speech is by Demosthenes or by Dinarchus. Since the man had once been a tragic actor and afterward a malicious prosecutor, he fittingly named him "a tragic Theocrines."

[157538] Therapnai. Isocrates in the Helen. There is a place in Lacedaemon called Therapnae, which Alcman too mentions in his first book.

[157668] Therman. Aeschines in his Defense on the Embassy. This is a Thracian town, as Theopompus too says in his twenty-second book.

[157794] Thermopulai. Isocrates in the Panegyricus. Some call this town "Pylae"; but Phileas, in his Description of the Earth, says it was called Thermopylae because there Athena made warm baths (therma loutra) for Heracles.

[158011] Thersandros. Aeschines Against Timarchus. That this man was a violent lover of boys, Aristogiton too makes clear in the speech Against Timarchus.

[158158] Thesthai ("to take as security, to enact"). Used instead of "to take as a pledge" by Hyperides in the speech Against Hygiaenon, but instead of "to receive and ratify a law" by Demosthenes; for in the case of laws it is said that "the lawgiver laid down (etheke), and the people enacted (etheto)"; Demosthenes in the speech On the Immunities. But in the speech Against Stephanus he says "having enacted private laws for himself," perhaps instead of "having laid down."

[158627] Thesmos ("ordinance"). Of old each single one of the laws was called a "thesmos," and Demosthenes too has so called the whole framework of the constitution in his speech Against Aristocrates.

[158820] Thesmothetai. Demosthenes in his speech Against Androtion. There is a magistracy at Athens, that of the thesmothetai, six in number; they are among the so-called nine archons. They are so called because they had charge of the laws; for the laws were called "thesmoi," as we said before. That these men revised the laws each year, Aeschines has said in the speech Against Ctesiphon, and Theophrastus in the third book of his Laws. Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Athenians, goes through all that they do.

[159331] Thetes ("one who has given security"). Perhaps they call "thetes" the man who has given a pledge, and not, as Didymus says, the man who has adopted a son; for they called the adopted "thetoi," he says.

[159534] Thettalos. Lysias Against Nicides. One of the sons of Cimon was called Thettalus, as Heliodorus says in his work On the Acropolis.

[159666] Theudosian. Demosthenes in his speech On the Immunities. It is a place lying near the Scythians, which Satyrus died while besieging.

[159800] Theorika ("festival-funds"). Demosthenes in a Philippic. The "theorika" were certain public moneys, gathered from the revenues of the city; these were formerly kept for the needs of war and called "military funds," but afterward were laid out both on public works and on distributions, of which Agyrrhius the demagogue was the first to begin. Philochorus, in the third book of his Atthis, says: "the theorikon was first reckoned at a drachma for the show, whence it took its name," and what follows. But Philinus, in his speech against the statues of Sophocles and Euripides, speaking of Eubulus, says: "it was called theorikon because, the Dionysia being at hand, Eubulus distributed money for the sacrifice, so that all might keep the festival and no citizen be left out of the spectacle through want of private means." At different times, however, different sums were fixed for the spectacles and the sacrifices and festivals, as is clear from the first of the Philippics of Demosthenes. That it was not permitted to those abroad to take the theorikon, Hyperides has shown in his speech Against Archestratides. There was also a magistracy over the theorikon, as Aeschines shows in the speech Against Ctesiphon. "Theoroi," moreover, are not only the spectators, but also those sent to the gods; and in general they so named those who guard or have care of divine matters; for they called concern "ore." "For little is the concern (ore) of quarrels and of assemblies."

[161271] Theoris. Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristogiton, if it is genuine. Theoris was a seeress, and being judged for impiety she was put to death, as Philochorus too writes in his sixth book.

[161465] Themakeus. Andocides in the speech On the Mysteries. Themakos is a deme of the tribe Erechtheis, as Diodorus the geographer says in his work On the Demes.

[161621] Theramenes. Lysias in the speech Against Eratosthenes. He was put to death, Critias having accused him, under the Thirty.

[161744] Theseion. Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. It is a precinct dedicated to Theseus.

[161844] Thetes ("thetes, the laboring class"). Thetes and thetikon: Antiphon, in the speech Against Philinus, says "to make all the thetes hoplites," and Demosthenes, in the speech Concerning the Estate of Hagnias, "of the heiresses, those who pay the thetic rate." The constitution being divided among the Athenians into four classes, the poorest were called "thetes" and were said "to pay the thetic rate." These men shared in no office, as Aristotle too shows in the Constitution of the Athenians. That they did not serve in the army, Aristophanes too has said in the Banqueters. Demosthenes, in the passage before us, called the poor girl an "heiress," whom the Attic writers name a "thessa." It was incumbent on the nearest of kin either to take the "thessai" in marriage or to give five minas, as Posidippus the comic poet too says somewhere.

[162686] Thiasos ("religious guild"). Demosthenes in his speech Against Aeschines. A "thiasos" is the multitude gathered for the celebration and honor of the gods; Xenophon in the second book of the Memorabilia. But Ion, in the Omphale, applied the word in general to every gathering. The "thiasotai" were those who shared in the guilds; Isaeus in the speech Concerning the Estate of Astyphilus.

[163074] Thibron. Isocrates in the Panegyricus. This man was a Lacedaemonian sent into Asia as harmost after the Peloponnesian War.

[163198] Tholos ("the Rotunda"). Demosthenes in his speech Against Aeschines. The place where the prytaneis dined was so called among the Athenians. Ammonius, at any rate, in the fourth book of his work On Altars, writes thus: "the place where the prytaneis are entertained is called the Tholos, but by some the 'Shade,' because it was built round, resembling a sunshade (tholia)."

[163572] Thorai. A deme of the tribe Antiochis, as Diodorus says.

[163630] Thorikos. Isaeus in the speech Against Posidippus. It is a deme of the tribe Acamantis, as the same Diodorus says in his work On the Demes.

[163771] Thripedeston ("worm-eaten"). Hyperides, in the speech Against Demades, called Greece "worm-eaten," instead of "ruined," from wood eaten away by woodworms (thripes).

[163937] Thronion. Aeschines in the speech On the Embassy. Thronion is a city of Locris, as Theopompus says in his . . .

[164050] Thumaitadai. A deme of the tribe Hippothontis, named after the hero Thymaetes, as Diodorus says.

[164148] Thurgonidai. Isaeus in the speech Against Nicocles. Nicander of Thyateira, in his work On the Demes, says that the Aphidnaeans, the Perridae, the Titacidae, and the Thyrgonidae were transferred from the tribe Aeantis. Demetrius of Scepsis too, in the second book of his Order, says that the deme belongs to the tribe Ptolemais.

[164477] Thustion. Aeschines Against Ctesiphon. It is a city of Aetolia, as Didymus says, citing as witness the first book of the Aetolica of Nicander. We, however, in the Atticianus copies found it written with a tau, "Thytion."

[164699] 9. Idian ("private"). Used instead of "private" by Demosthenes in his speech Against Conon. They used "idion" and "idiotikon" alike, as the same orator does in the speech Against Zenothemis.

[164891] Idrieus. Isocrates, in the speech To Philip. This man was a dynast in Caria, son of Hecatomnos, brother of Mausolus and Artemisia.

[165023] Hierax. Demosthenes in the first book of the Philippics. That Hierax was one of the envoys sent by the Amphipolitans to Athens, when they wished to hand over both their city and their territory to the Athenians, Theopompus has said in the third book of the Philippics.

[165293] Hiera odos ("the Sacred Way"). Isaeus, in his Defense Against Diophanes. The Sacred Way is the one by which the initiates go from the city to Eleusis. A whole book has been written by Polemon concerning the Sacred Way. Cratinus too mentions it in the Runaway Women.

[165560] Hiera trieres ("the sacred trireme"). Demosthenes in the fourth book of the Philippics: "and he went off, taking the sacred trireme from the country." He would mean the Paralus, as may be gathered both from Philochorus and likewise from the sixth book of Androtion.

[165827] Hieromenia ("sacred month"). Demosthenes Against Timocrates. The festival-days are called "hieromeniai."

[165933] Hieromnemones ("sacred recorders"). Demosthenes On Behalf of Ctesiphon. Those sent to the council of the Amphictyons from each of the cities sharing in the council are so called, as Theopompus makes clear in his thirtieth book.

[166162] Hierofantes ("hierophant"). Hyperides says somewhere: "but I have neither a torchbearer's daughter nor a hierophant's." Dinarchus, in the adjudication of the Croconidae, says that the first hierophant was so named because he revealed (apophenanta) the sacred things when returning from war. Concerning the clan of the hierophants, Hellanicus has shown in the second book of his Atthis.

[166549] Hieronumos. Lysias in the speech Against Hippotherses. Of Hieronymus who served as general of the Athenians, others make mention, and Ephorus both in his eighteenth and in his nineteenth book. There is another Hieronymus, a Megalopolitan, whom Demosthenes mentions in the speech Against Aeschines. That this man was especially among those who favored the Macedonians, Theopompus too has said in his fifty-first book.

[166967] Ithufalloi. Hyperides, in the speech Against Archestratides: "those who dance the ithyphalloi in the orchestra." Certain poems were so called, those sung at the phallus, as Lynceus says in his Letters. But Demosthenes, in the speech Against Conon, applied it to certain men on whom the name had been laid in jest. Properly, "ithyphallus" meant the erect member, as Cratinus uses it in the Archilochi.

[167369] Ikarieus. Isaeus in the speech Against Elpagoras. It is a deme of the tribe Aegeis, as Diodorus says.

[167472] Hiketeria ("suppliant-branch"). Aeschines in his Defense. The "hiketeria" is an olive branch wreathed with a fillet.

[167590] Ionios ("Ionian"). Lysias in the Olympiacus. The ancients sometimes named the so-called Adriatic thus. Epidamnus is a city on the right as one sails into the Ionian Gulf; Thucydides in his first book.

[167792] Ipnos ("kitchen"). Lycurgus in the speech Against Lycophron, book one. A part of the house is so called, what is called among us the "kitchen"; at any rate there is a play of Pherecrates, Ipnos, or the All-Night Festival, in which this is shown, that it is a part of the house. Properly, the "ipnos" is the oven, whence they also call certain men "oven-moulders."

[168157] Hipparchos. Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. This man was a tyrant of Eretria. There is another Hipparchus about whom Lycurgus speaks in the speech Against Lycophron, "Hipparchus the son of Peisistratus." There is yet another Hipparchus, the son of Charmus, as Lycurgus says in the speech Against Leocrates; about him Androtion, in his second book, says that he was a kinsman of Peisistratus the tyrant and was the first to be ostracized, the law about ostracism being then first laid down, on account of the suspicion against the followers of Peisistratus, that, being a demagogue and a general, he might make himself tyrant. There is another Hipparchus, an actor, whom Demosthenes mentions in the speech Against Neaera, if it is genuine. Among the Athenians, moreover, the "hipparch" is also the commander of the cavalry; there were two of these, as Demosthenes says in the fourth book of the Philippics, and Aristotle in the Constitution of the Athenians.

[169134] Hippas ("knight's rate"). Isaeus, in the speech Concerning the Estate of Apollodorus: "he registered a small assessment, as paying at the knight's rate." Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Athenians, says that Solon divided the whole multitude of the Athenians into four classes: the five-hundred-bushel men, the knights (hippeis), the yoke-men, and the thetes. The "hippades," then, belong to the knights.

[169545] Hippia Athena ("Athena of the Horse"). Isaeus, in the speech Against Calydon. Mnaseas, in the first book of his Europe, says that Athena of the Horse is the daughter of Poseidon and of Coryphe daughter of Oceanus, and that, having first constructed a chariot, she was for this reason called "of the horse."

[169853] Hippodameia. Demosthenes, in the speech Against Timotheus, says there is a marketplace in the Piraeus called Hippodameia, after Hippodamus of Miletus, the architect who built the Piraeus for the Athenians.

[170060] Isa bainon Puthoklei ("walking in step with Pythocles"). Demosthenes, in the speech Against Aeschines, used instead of "always being with him and not standing apart even a little." And in the speech Against Stephanus, book one, he says "he walked in step (isa bainon) with Aristolochus the banker." Menander: "an expensive courtesan walking in step beside him."

[170423] Isai psefoi ("equal votes"). Aeschines Against Ctesiphon: "another private man who sailed to Rhodes, because he had borne his fear unmanfully, was once recently impeached, and the votes for him came out equal; but if one vote had fallen over, he would have been banished and put to death."

[170714] Isaios. This man is one of the ten orators, a pupil of Isocrates, the teacher of Demosthenes, an Athenian by birth, as Hermippus says in the second book of his work On the Pupils of Isocrates. But Demetrius, in his work On Poets of the Same Name, says he was a Chalcidian.

[170988] Ismenias. Lysias in the speech Against Thrasybulus, if it is genuine. He was one of the distinguished polemarchs among the Thebans.

[171121] Isolaites. Hyperides, in the speech On Behalf of Phryne. A certain foreign deity, to whom common women, not at all respectable, performed rites.

[171267] Isoteles ("paying equal taxes"). Isoteles and isoteleia: Isaeus often, in the speech Against Elpagoras. A certain honor given to those metics who appeared worthy, by which they also obtained release from the alien-tax, as Lysias says in the speech Against Sostratus for Outrage, if it is genuine. That the "isoteleis" had release also from the other obligations of the metics, Theophrastus has said in the eleventh book of his Laws; and he says that in some places the Athenians voted "isoteleia" to whole cities, as to the Olynthians and Thebans. One may also learn from the speech of Isaeus mentioned above how much the "isoteles" paid.

[171907] Ischandros. Demosthenes Against Aeschines. Ischandros is a tragic actor. Aeschines the orator, acting along with him, is thought to have fallen down in Collytus, as Demochares says in his Dialogues.

[172107] Itelios. Lysias in the speech Against Nicides. Itea is a deme of the tribe Acamantis, from which the demesman is Iteaeus, as Diodorus says.

[172248] Ion. Isocrates, in the speech On the Exchange of Property. The orator would now be mentioning Ion the tragic poet, who was a Chian by birth, son of Orthomenes, surnamed son of Xuthus. He wrote many lyric poems and tragedies, and a philosophical treatise entitled the Triagmus, which Callimachus says is disputed as being by Epigenes; in some copies it is entitled in the plural, Triagmoi, as Demetrius of Scepsis and Apollonides of Nicaea say. They record in it these words: "This is the beginning of my discourse: all things are three, and nothing more nor less than these three. Of each one of these three the excellence is a triad: understanding and power and fortune."

[172922] 10. Kabule. Demosthenes in the eighth book of the Philippics. It is a place of Thrace, as Theopompus says in his forty-seventh book and Anaximenes in the eighth book of the Philippics. The latter says it is situated by the river Taxus in the middle of Thrace.

[173183] Kadiskos ("voting-urn"). Isaeus in the speech Concerning the Estate of Hagnias. They so called a certain vessel into which the jurors cast their votes. Phrynichus in the Muses: "Look, take the vote. Here is your urn (kadiskos): this one acquits, that one over there condemns."

[173461] Kadmeia. Isocrates in the Panegyricus. The other orators too often mention the Cadmeia; the citadel of the Thebans is so called, as is agreed among nearly all the historians.

[173637] Katharsion ("purificatory offering"). Aeschines Against Timarchus. It was a custom at Athens to purify the assembly and the theaters and, in general, the gatherings of the people with very small piglets, which they called "katharsia." This was done by those called "peristiarchoi," who were so named either from going around (peristeichein) or from the hearth (hestia).

[174008] Kathelon ("having struck down"). Demosthenes, in his speech Against Aristocrates, says "or having struck down on the road," instead of "having killed or slain." Others too used the word thus, as Stesichorus in the Sack of Troy and Sophocles in the Eumelus.

[174266] Kathekonta ("things befalling, duties"). Demosthenes, in the tenth book of the Philippics, says "whoever did not think fit to do the things befalling upon himself," instead of "the things that come upon him."

[174476] Kathetos ("the lowered lamb"). The lamb let down into the sea; Lysias in the speech Against Telamon. Concerning the "kathetos" Meliton has discoursed in the first book of his work On the Clans at Athens.

[174681] Kai ("and"). "For even the fact that none of the fighting men, without the magistrates' . . ."

[174777] Gnomes apodemein ("resolve, to go abroad"). When Isocrates says this in the Busiris about the Lacedaemonians, one must say that those who wrote the constitutions of the Lacedaemonians have said the like; for Aristotle says that it was not permitted to the Lacedaemonians to go abroad, lest they grow accustomed to be friends of other laws than their own. But while Isocrates says that only the fighting men were prevented from going abroad, the followers of Aristotle say that all the Lacedaemonians were.

[175284] Kainos ("in a new way"). Isocrates in the Panegyricus, that is, "as befits more recent matters." Ephorus explained it in a certain way in his first book.

[175439] Kakotechnion ("of malicious contrivance"). The name of a suit, which those who had convicted someone of false testimony brought against the man who produced him; Demosthenes in the speech Against Timotheus for Repayment, if it is genuine, and in the speech Against Euergus and Mnesibulus.

[175729] Kakos eidotes ("knowing ill"). Used instead of "being ignorant" by Isocrates in the speech On the Peace.

[175835] Kakoseos ("of maltreatment"). The name of a suit, granted to heiresses against those who have married them, to children against their parents, and to those who proceed against guardians on behalf of orphans; Demosthenes Against Timocrates, and Lysias both in the speech Concerning the Estate of Hegesander and in the speech On Behalf of . . . , and Hyperides Concerning the Estate of Pyrrandrus. That it was permitted to anyone who wished to indict for the maltreatment of parents and to come to the aid of heiresses, is made clear both in the speech of Hyperides mentioned above and in the speech of Lysias Against Philonides for Violence, if it is genuine. It was also without water.

[176522] Kalaureia. Demosthenes in his letter concerning his own return. It is an island near Troezen, as Hecataeus said in his Description of the Earth. Calauria was formerly called Eirene, as Anticleides says.

[176726] Kaneforoi ("basket-bearers"). Lycurgus in the speech Against Lycophron. Concerning the basket-bearers, Philochorus, in the second book of his Atthis, says that in the reign of Erichthonius the maidens of rank were first appointed to carry the baskets for the goddess, on which lay the implements for the sacrifice, both at the Panathenaea and in the other processions.

[177096] Karkinos ("crab"). Lysias, in the Defense Concerning the Dog, if it is genuine: "for the bitches kept coming in and damaging my crab." And when the grain takes root in the earth, they say it has "crabbed"; Pherecrates in the Deserters: "whenever you have leisure, sprinkle it, that the crops may crab together." "Karkinos" is also the name of a certain ailment occurring in bodies, which they now call "carcinoma." It is also a proper name, which Isocrates mentions in the Trapeziticus; this would be the Athenian general sent to sail around the Peloponnese. Concerning the tragic poet, the son of Xenocles, Lysias speaks in the speech Against Mnesimachus: "and Carcinus the poet agrees with these, having said, 'It was not wine that drove them out of their senses; for no occasion stirs up wits rightly fixed by nature . . . to err.'"

[177933] Karpou dike ("suit for produce"). Lysias in the speech Against Demosthenes for Maladministration of a Guardianship: "for if you make any claim against this young man and he holds anything of yours, bring suit against him according to the laws—if you dispute a plot of land, a suit for produce; if a house, a suit for rent—just as he now sues you for maladministration of a guardianship."

[178322] Karuanda. Dinarchus in his speech Against Polyeuctus. It is a city of Caria.

[178400] Katabole ("an instalment, an onset"). Demosthenes in the ninth Philippic: "like a period or onset (katabole) of a fever." In recurrent diseases a certain "onset" is so called, because it comes on at a fixed time, just as the members of a loan-club make their instalments (katabolai) of money.

[178694] Katadedesthai. Used instead of "to be bewitched and bound with drugs" by Dinarchus in the information Against Pytheas.

[178814] Kata demous dikastas ("the deme-judges"). Demosthenes in his speech Against Timocrates. Concerning the deme-judges—that formerly they were thirty and went around the demes giving judgment, then became forty—Aristotle has spoken in the Constitution of the Athenians.

[179081] Katadikasamenos. Used instead of "having won and caused someone to be condemned" by Isaeus in the speech Against Diocles for Outrage.

[179216] Katagein ta ploia ("to bring the ships to land"). Demosthenes in the eighth Philippic. "To bring the ships to land" is used instead of "to use force and do harm, and not to allow those sailing to sail where they wish, but to bring them to land for the pirates at their own places," as Lycurgus too makes clear in the speech Against Leocrates.

[179560] Katastasis ("establishment-money"). Lysias: "and that the phylarchs vote to register those who served in the cavalry, that you may exact the establishment-money from them." It seems to be money which the cavalrymen appointed received from the public treasury on their appointment, as the orator himself suggests in what follows. Eupolis too indicates this in the Friends: "you did not act wisely, old man, in taking this establishment-money suddenly before you had even learned horsemanship." It is stated still more clearly in the Syrphax of Plato. The money was repaid by those who had served in the cavalry, when others were established in their place; and the phylarchs demanded it.

[180248] Kata ten agoran apseudein ("to tell no falsehood in the marketplace"). Hyperides, in the speech Against Athenogenes, book one: "the law bids one tell no falsehood in the marketplace." The law seems to concern the goods for sale; at any rate Theophrastus, in his work On Laws, says that the market-officers must attend to these two things, the good order in the marketplace and the telling of no falsehood, not only by the sellers but also by the buyers.

[180703] Katatome ("the cutting"). Hyperides in the speech Against Demosthenes: "and sitting below, under the cutting (katatome)." Philochorus, in his sixth book, writes thus: "Aeschraeus of Anagyrous dedicated the tripod above the theater, overlaying it with silver, having won as choregus for boys the year before, and inscribed it on the cutting of the rock."

[181058] Katapaex ("astonished"). One continually struck; Lysias in the speech Against Aeschines the Socratic, and in the speech Against Andocides for Impiety, if the speech is genuine. Theopompus in the Tisamenus: "but Eileithyia has pardon, being struck astonished (kataplex) at her craft by the women."

[181356] Katachusmata ("things poured down"). Demosthenes in his speech Against Stephanus, book one. That the masters poured sweetmeats over the newly-bought slaves, Aristophanes makes clear in the Plutus; and that they did so also for those returning from a sacred mission . . . They poured them also over bridegrooms, as Theopompus shows in the Hedychares.

[181707] Katacheirotonia ("condemnation by show of hands"). It was a custom at Athens to lay denunciations against the magistrates and against the malicious prosecutors before the people; and if someone was condemned by show of hands, he was brought into court. The word occurs often both in Demosthenes, in the speech Against Meidias, and in Hyperides, in the speech On Behalf of Chaerephilus Concerning the Salt-Fish. Theophrastus too has treated of condemnation by show of hands in the fourth book of his Laws.

[182213] Katapseudomarturesamenos. Used instead of "having produced those who would bear false witness" by Demosthenes in his speech Against Stephanus.

[182357] Kateleusan. Used instead of "they cast down with stones" by Hyperides in the speech Against Autocles.

[182460] Katoikodomesen. Used instead of "he shut up in a chamber and killed" by Isaeus, often, in the speech Against Diocles.

[182579] Kebrena. Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristocrates. Cebren is a city of the Troad, a colony of the Cymaeans, as Ephorus says in his first book.

[182729] Kegchreon ("the millet-house"). Demosthenes in the special plea Against Pantaenetus: "and then he persuaded my slaves to sit down in the millet-house (kegchreon)," instead of "in the cleansing-house," where they dried the millet-ore from the mines, as Theophrastus suggests in his work On Mines.

[183026] Keioi. Lysias in the speech On His Own Benefactions: "the Ceans, a city of such size." Ceos is one of the Cyclades islands, lying near Attica. The orator called the island a city. Euripides too called Euboea so: "Euboea is some neighboring city to Athens." And Aristophanes, concerning Sicily, says: "what a wretched city is being utterly ruined."

[183375] Keiriades. Isaeus in the appeal Against Boeotus from the demesmen. That Ceiriadae is a deme of the tribe Hippothontis, Diodorus has said in his work On the Demes.

[183539] Kekropis. Hyperides in the speech Against Aristogiton. Cecropis was one of the ten tribes at Athens, as Demosthenes says in the Funeral Oration, if it is genuine.

[183703] Keleontes ("loom-posts"). Antiphon, in his Defense Against the Indictment of Demosthenes: "where he fixed the loom-posts (keleontes)." Properly the "keleontes" are the loom-uprights, as is clear in Aristophanes the comic poet. But here the orator would use it metaphorically for the upright timbers.

[184004] Kerameis. Hyperides in his speech On Behalf of Xenophilus, book one. Cerameis is a deme of the tribe Acamantis, as Diodorus says. Philochorus, in his third book, says these got their name from the potter's craft (keramike techne) and from sacrificing to a certain hero Ceramus.

[184283] Kerameikos. Antiphon in the speech Against Nicocles, Concerning Boundaries. That there are two Cerameici, as the orator too says—one within the city, the other outside, where they buried at public expense those who died in war and delivered the funeral orations—Callicrates or Menecles makes clear in the work On Athens.

[184605] Kerkidas. Demosthenes, in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon, listing the traitors, says "Cercidas of Arcadia." That this man was among those who favored Macedonian interests, Theopompus too has said in the fifteenth book of the Philippics.

[184846] Kerkouros. A kind of ship; Dinarchus in the Tyrrhenian speech.

[184910] Kerkops ("Cercops"). Aeschines in the speech On the Embassy. In the poems ascribed to Homer, in the Cercopes, it is shown that the Cercopes were deceivers and liars. Xenagoras says they were changed into apes, and that the Pithecusae islands were named after them. Aeschrion of Samos, in his iambics, even records their names, Candulus and Atlantus.

[185261] Keineas. Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. It is agreed among the historians too that Cineas was one of those who betrayed the affairs of the Thessalians to Philip, and especially by Theopompus in his first book, who at the same time describes the man's character.

[185543] Kersobleptes. The orators often mention this man, as also Demosthenes Against Aristocrates. He was a son of Cotys, and being very young was established by his father as king of Thrace. That he once made war on the Athenians concerning the Chersonese, Isocrates too makes clear in the speech On the Peace.

[185849] Kestrinoi. Hyperides in the speech On the Salt-Fish. The "kestrinos" is a fish. But one must consider whether it differs at all from the "kestreus" (mullet).

[186008] Kefalos. A proper name, a demagogue.

[186046] Kefalethen ("from Cephale"). Isaeus in the speech Against Calydon Concerning a Guardianship. Cephale is a deme of the tribe Acamantis, from which the demesman is said to be "from Cephale" (Kephalethen), as Diodorus says.

[186268] Kedonides. Aeschines in the speech Against Timarchus: "passing over these savage men, Cedonides and Autocleides and Thersander." These were violent lovers of boys.

[186433] Kekis ("gall-dye"). A certain dye and astringent, or a fruit of the oak suitable for dyeing; Demosthenes in his speech Against Aphobus, book one.

[186580] Kepos ("garden"). Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon. There is a city on the Bosporus called Cepos ("Garden").

[186699] Kerukeia ("herald's fee"). The pay given to the heralds at the sales that take place; Isaeus in the speech Against Elpagoras and Demophanes.

[186841] Kerukes ("the Heralds"). Isocrates in the Panegyricus. There is a clan at Athens so named; it was called after Ceryx the son of Hermes.

[186978] Kettoi. Lysias in the speech Against Nicides for Idleness. It is a deme of the tribe Leontis, as Diodorus the geographer says.

[187106] Kefisieus. Isaeus in the speech Against Elpagoras and Demophanes. It is a deme of the tribe Erechtheis, as he himself says.

[187231] Kefisodoros. Lycurgus in the speech Against Menesaechmus. This man was ridiculed in comedy as sluggish. There is another Cephisodorus who, being a cavalry-commander, died at Mantinea together with Gryllus the son of Xenophon, whom Dinarchus mentions in the speech Against Callaeschrus.

[187518] Kefisodotos. Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon. Androtion, in the fifth book of his Atthis, relates that, while besieging Alopeconnesus, he was deposed by show of hands, and being tried was convicted and paid five talents.

[187750] Kigklis ("lattice-gate"). Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristogiton. The doors of the law-courts were called "lattice-gates" (kigklides); Aristophanes in the Banqueters: "and the juror crept toward the lattice-gate."

[187972] Kinados ("beast"). Used instead of "wild beast" by Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. It is found in comedy too, as in Aristophanes. They say that the Sicilians, in a special sense, call the fox "kinadion."

[188195] Kinesias. There are two speeches of Lysias Against Cinesias, in which he often mentions the man, saying that he was most impious and most lawless, and that the comic poets write against him every year. This would be the dithyramb-poet, whom the comic poets often mention, and Strattis, who composed a whole play against him, entitled Cinesias, in which he also makes comedy of his impiety.

[188586] Kirraion pedion ("the Cirrhaean plain"). Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon. Cirrha is a city distant thirty stades from Delphi. The orator seems, then, to call "Cirrhaean plain" the plain lying beside this city.

[188807] Kisthene. Isocrates in the Panegyricus. A mountain of Thrace. Cratinus: "and thence you will come to the ends of the earth and see the mountain Cisthene."

[188963] Kittoforos ("ivy-bearer"). Some write it with a sigma, "kistophoros" ("chest-bearer"); for they said that the so-called chests (kistai) were sacred to Dionysus and to the two goddesses.

[189150] Klimazei. Dinarchus, in the work entitled A Speech in Support of Aeschines Against Dinias: "whenever, then, in his defense he 'klimazei' and distorts the laws," instead of "bends aside and perverts." Perhaps one should write "blimazei," so that it means "presses hard and forces."

[189432] Klerouchoi ("cleruchs"). Demosthenes in the eighth book of the Philippics. "Cleruchs" were those whom the Athenians sent to the cities they took, distributing allotments (kleroi) to each. Isocrates in the Panegyricus: "for which the right-minded ought to feel great gratitude, far rather than to reproach us for the cleruchies, which we sent out to the depopulated cities for the sake of guarding the territory, and not through greed." But in the speech On the Symmories Demosthenes would mean by "cleruchic property" the property of those sent out to some other land under a cleruchy; "for how can a man not residing at Athens serve as trierarch?"

[190082] Klesis ("summons"). The summons, that is, the citation to trial; Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristocrates. That they also said "prokleseis," the same author makes clear in the speech Concerning the Estate of Hagnias.

[190306] Kleteres ("summons-witnesses"). Kleteres and kleteuein: the "kleteres" are the men through whom those bringing suits against others summon them to the trials; for there had to be present certain persons, as it were witnesses, of the summons; Isaeus in the speech Against Neocles, Concerning a Plot of Land. The word is altogether frequent both among the orators and in the old comedy. "Kleteusai" is to become a summons-witness, as Isaeus says in the speech Against Cleomedon. But "to be summoned" and "to be called out" are also used of witnesses, when they do not respond to give testimony in the courts; and there is a penalty against them of a thousand drachmas, as Isaeus says in the speech On Behalf of Python for Desertion.

[191038] Kobaleia ("knavery"). Dinarchus in the information Against Pytheas. "Kobaleia" was the term for pretended jesting with deceit, and "kobalos" the man who used it. It seems synonymous with "bomolochos." Philochorus, in the second book of his Atthis: "for one must not, as some say, suppose Dionysus to be a buffoon and a knave (kobalos)." Aristotle, in the eighth book of the History of Animals, says that the eagle-owl is a knave (kobalos) and a mimic, and is caught while dancing in answer.

[191530] Koinon grammateion ("common register"). Koinon grammateion and lexiarchikon: the "common register" is the one in which were enrolled those introduced to the phratry-members and clansmen; the "lexiarchikon" is the one in which were enrolled those registered in the demes, as other orators show and Isaeus in the speech Concerning the Estate of Apollodorus.

[191887] Koinonikon ("partnership property"). Demosthenes in the speech On the Symmories. By "partners" (koinonikoi) he would perhaps mean brothers having undivided property, whose father could perform public services, but whose heirs, taking the property singly, were not sufficient each to serve as trierarch; or perhaps also those who had agreed on a voluntary partnership in trade or some other matter, of whom each did not have the whole assessment of the common property.

[192357] Koironidai. There is a speech of Lycurgus entitled The Adjudication of the Croconidae against the Coeronidae, which some think to be by Philinus. The Coeronidae are a clan, about whom Ister speaks in his Collection of the Atthis. It would have been named after Coeron, whom they say was the bastard brother of Crocon, on which account the Croconidae are more honored. But the author of the speech, whoever he is, says they were called by three names: Coeronidae and Philieis and Perithoidae.

[192850] Kolluteus. Aeschines in the speech Against Timarchus. Collytus is a deme of the tribe Aegeis.

[192945] Kolonetas. Hyperides, in the speech Against Apellaeus, Concerning the Treasure. They named the hired men "Colonetae," since they stood by the Colonus, which is near the marketplace, where the Hephaesteum and the Eurysaceum are; and this Colonus was called "of the marketplace." There was another Colonus by the shrine of Poseidon, as Hyperides says in the speech Against Autocles; this would be the Colonus "of the knights." Pherecrates in the Petale: "where do you come from, fellow? I was hurrying to Colonus. Not the one of the marketplace, but the one of the knights." Demosthenes, in the speech On the . . . , says "from Colonus." Concerning the Coloni, Diodorus the geographer and Philochorus in the third book of his Atthis have treated.

[193691] Komistika ploia ("transport vessels"). Hyperides, in the speech Concerning the Guarding of the Tyrrhenians. The "transport vessels" seem to be those in which the Tyrrhenians carried the spoils they had taken, as the orator himself suggests in the speech.

[193947] Kommata ("husks"). Kommata and kyrebia: Dinarchus in the information Against Callisthenes. The "kyrebia" are the bran; the "kommata" seem to be certain parts either of the straw or of the things about the grain itself in the ear, or of the beards of grain.

[194205] Kordakismos ("the cordax-dance"). Demosthenes in the Philippics. The "cordax" is a kind of comic dance, as Aristoxenus says in his work On Tragic Dancing. The word is found in the old comedy too, as in Nicophon.

[194418] Koroplathos ("doll-moulder"). Isocrates, in the speech On the Exchange of Property. They so named those who moulded girls or boys out of clay or wax or some such material.

[194591] Korsiai. Demosthenes in the speech Against Aeschines. Corsiae is a city of Boeotia, as Theopompus says in his thirtieth book.

[194718] Kotulaion oros ("Mount Cotylaeum"). Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon. It seems to be a mountain of Euboea; at any rate Archemachus, in the third book of his Euboean History, says: "Cotylus, then, appears to have held the mountain now called Cotylaeum after him."

[194991] Kotus. Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristocrates. This man ruled Thrace for twenty-four years; at first he lived in luxury and indulgence, but afterward, as his prosperity increased, he was carried away into savagery and rage, so that he even cut his wife, by whom he had children, in two with his own hands, beginning from the genitals.

[195335] Krauallidai. Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon. Didymus says it should be written "Craugallidae"; for so was called the territory in Phocis near Cirrha, the "Craugallium," as Xenagoras too relates in the fourth book of his Chronicles.

[195579] Krastis. Dinarchus in the speech Against Lysicrates. "Krastis" is grass, as Aristophanes too says.

[195679] Krithoten. Demosthenes in his speech Against Aristocrates. Crithote is one of the cities in the Chersonese, as Hellanicus says in the first book of his Trojan History. But Ephorus, in his fourth book, says it was settled by the Athenians who came there with Miltiades.

[195949] Krioeus. Demosthenes in the speech Against Phaenippus. Crioa is a deme of the tribe Antiochis, as Diodorus says in his work On the Demes.

[196088] Krobulos. Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon. Hegesippus is the one surnamed Crobylus; but properly the "krobylos" is a kind of hair-knot, as Thucydides says in his first book.

[196273] Ktesiou Dios ("of Zeus Ctesius"). Hyperides in the speech Against Apellaeus. They set up Zeus Ctesius ("of property") in the storerooms; Menander in the False Heracles: "but now, when I see a parasite going into the women's quarters, and Zeus Ctesius keeping the storeroom unlocked but with little harlots running in."

[196593] Ktesifon. Demosthenes in his speech Against Aeschines: "for at the outset, until Philip obtained a hearing concerning the peace, Ctesiphon and Aristodemus bore the first share of the deception." This man was one of the ten envoys who served on embassy with Demosthenes and Aeschines; each of the orators, at any rate, often mentions him in the speech On the Embassy. There would be another man, the one who proposed the decree about the crown for Demosthenes, against whom Aeschines' speech Against Ctesiphon is directed.

[197116] Kudathenaieus. Hyperides in the speech Concerning the Estate of the Knight. Cydathenaeon is a deme of the tribe Pandionis, from which the demesman is Cydathenaeus.

[197281] Kudantides. Hyperides in the speech Against Polyeuctus. Cydantidae is a deme of the tribe Aegeis.

[197380] Kutherios. Demosthenes in the speech Against Phaenippus. Cytherus is a deme of the tribe Pandionis, from which the demesman is called Cytherius.

[197526] Kuthnioi. Demosthenes in the speech On the Levy. Cythnos is one of the Cyclades islands, as Aristotle says in the Constitution of the Cythnians.

[197672] Kukloi ("the circles"). Dinarchus in the speech Against Callaeschrus. "Circles" were the places in which certain persons were sold; they were named from the fact that those being sold stood round in a circle. Menander in the Ephesian: "I think now, by the gods, that I see myself stripped in the circles, running round in a circle and being sold."

[198021] Kumbion ("the cymbium-cup"). Demosthenes in his speech Against Meidias. The "kymbion" is a kind of drinking-cup. Didymus says it is long and narrow and similar in shape to the boat called a "kymbion."

[198223] Kunnidai. Lycurgus in the adjudication of the Croconidae against the Coeronidae. The Cynnidae are a clan among the Athenians.

[198350] Kunosarges. Demosthenes in his speech Against Timocrates. The Cynosarges is one of the gymnasia among the Athenians.

[198468] Kuprothemis. A proper name. Demosthenes in the speech On the Freedom of the Rhodians: "Samos, garrisoned by Cyprothemis, whom Tigranes the king's viceroy installed."

[198635] Kupassis. Lysias in the speech On Behalf of Bacchius and Pythagoras, if it is genuine. The glossographers say the "kypassis" is a kind of tunic, some saying a woman's, others a man's. Hipponax mentions it, and Hecataeus in his Description of Europe, saying: "the Cissians wear Persian tunics (kypasseis)"; and Aristophanes in the Frying-pan Men.

[198982] Kurbeis. Lycurgus in the speech Concerning the Priestess. The "kyrbeis," Apollodorus says in his work On the Gods, have the laws inscribed on them, and they are upright standing stones, which from their standing they called "stelae," but from their upward extension, because they were brought to a point (kekoryphosthai), they called "kyrbeis," just as they called the headdress placed on the head a "kyrbasia." Aristotle, in the Constitution of the Athenians, says: "having inscribed the laws on the kyrbeis, they set them up in the Royal Stoa."

[199530] Kureion ("the Cyrean army"). Isocrates in the Panegyricus. The "Cyrean army" is the one that marched up with Cyrus, when he campaigned against his brother Artaxerxes; in which Xenophon too took part.

[199731] Kurebion. Demosthenes in his speech Against Aeschines. That this is a nickname of Epicrates, the brother-in-law of Aeschines, has been shown elsewhere too.

[199888] Kuria ekklesia ("sovereign assembly"). Hyperides in the speech Against Demeas for Alien Status, if it is genuine. What the "sovereign assemblies" are, Aristotle has shown in the Constitution of the Athenians, saying that the prytaneis convene the Council and the people—the Council daily, except when there is a holiday, and the people four times in each prytany. He says they announce in advance a "sovereign assembly," in which the magistrates who seem not to govern well must be confirmed or removed by show of hands, and matters concerning the guarding of the territory are dealt with. And he says that on this day those who wish make their impeachments, and so on.

[200559] Kursilon. Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon: "having chosen as general Themistocles, who gave this counsel, but stoning to death Cyrsilus, who declared that they should submit."

[200753] Kodeia ("poppy-head"). They so call the head of the poppy; Hyperides, and Aristophanes in the Farmers: "a good poppy-head."

[200878] Kolias. Demosthenes in his speech Against Neaera, if it is genuine. Colias is a coastal headland of Attica, named by metaphor from the "kolon" (limb); there is there a shrine of Aphrodite. Aristophanes mentions it at the beginning of the Lysistrata.

[201129] 11. Lagiska. Lysias in the speech Against Lais, if it is genuine. Lagisca the courtesan is mentioned by Strattis the comic poet too, thus: "to see Lagisca, the concubine of Isocrates, while she was still gathering figs in bed, and the flute-bore himself."

[201386] Lampadion ("little torch"). What we now call a "lampas" (torch) they used to name thus; Dinarchus in the speech Against Pytheas, and Plato in the first book of the Republic.

[201561] Lampas ("torch-race"). Lysias in the speech Against Euphemus. The Athenians hold three torch-festivals: at the Panathenaea, the Hephaestia, and the Promethia, as Polemon says in his work On the Tablets in the Propylaea. But Ister, in the first book of his Atthis, having said that at the festival of the Apaturia the Athenians who have put on the finest robes take kindled torches from the hearth and run, singing the praise of Hephaestus—a memorial of the man who, having understood the use of fire, taught it to the others.

[202088] Lamptreis. Demosthenes in the speech Against Callippus. Lamptrae is a deme of the tribe Erechtheis, as Diodorus says. There are two Lamptrae, the coastal and the upper; Aristophanes in the Amphiaraus: "I am a Lamptraean of the lower deme."

[202329] Larkos. Lysias in the speech Against Callippides. The "larkos" is a basket into which they put charcoal. Others use the word, and Aristophanes in the Acharnians.

[202492] Laruggizein ("to bawl"). To broaden the voice and not to utter naturally, but to make an over-elaborate use of the throat (larynx), was so called; Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon.

[202690] Lebadeia. Lycurgus in the speech Against Lysicles. It is a city of Boeotia.

[202767] Lembos. Demosthenes in the speech Against Zenothemis. The "lembos" is a kind of ship; it is often mentioned in comedy.

[202887] Leschai ("lounges"). Antiphon in the speech Against Nicocles. They called certain public places "leschai," in which many sat at leisure. Homer: "nor are you willing to go and sleep in the smithy or in the lounge." Cleanthes, in his work On the Gods, says that the "leschai" are assigned to Apollo, and that they are like exedrae, and that among some the god is surnamed "Leschenorios."

[203274] Leukas. Demosthenes in the eighth book of the Philippics. It is an island lying off Epirus.

[203367] Leuke ("the white poplar"). Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon: "crowned with fennel and white poplar." Those initiated into the Bacchic rites are crowned with white poplar, because the plant is of the underworld, and Dionysus the son of Persephone is also of the underworld. They say the white poplar grew by the Acheron, whence it is also called "Acherois" in Homer: "he fell as when some oak falls, or a poplar, or a tall pine."

[203814] Leuke akte ("White Cape"). Lysias in the speech Against Alcibiades. There being several White Capes, as Demetrius of Magnesia shows, the orator seems now to mean the one in the Propontis.

[204003] Leukonoieus. Demosthenes in the speech Against Aphobus. Leuconoion is a deme of the tribe Leontis, as Diodorus says.

[204121] Leuktra. Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. It is a Boeotian place near Thespiae.

[204219] Lechaion. In his Defense on the Indictment of Mixidemus, Lysias says that Lechaeum was captured in the archonship of Mnasippus. Lechaeum is the harbor-town of the Corinthians.

[204396] Leokoreion. Demosthenes in his speech Against Conon. The Leocoreum, Phanodemus says in the ninth book of his Atthis, is in the middle of the Cerameicus.

[204550] Lexiarchikon grammateion ("the deme-register"). Aeschines in the speech Against Timarchus: the register into which were enrolled those of the boys who had come of age, to whom it was now permitted to manage their patrimony, whence too the name came, from their having authority over "lexeis"; and "lexeis" are the estates and properties, as Dinarchus too says in his first speech in support of Hegelochus, concerning an heiress.

[204980] Lexis ("claim"). The charge, in the sense in which we also say "to obtain a suit by lot"; Isaeus in the appeal Against Boeotus.

[205109] Lete. Hyperides Against Demades. Lete is a city of Macedonia, which Marsyas the younger often mentions in the sixth book of his Macedonian History.

[205258] Lithos ("the stone"). Demosthenes in his speech Against Conon: "leading us one by one, just so, to the stone and putting us on oath." The Athenians seem to have taken their oaths by a certain stone, as Aristotle in the Constitution of the Athenians and Philochorus in his third book suggest.

[205551] Liknoforos ("winnowing-basket-bearer"). Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. The winnowing-basket (liknon) is suitable for every rite and sacrifice; the one who carries it, then, would be called "liknophoros."

[205775] Lipara. Dinarchus in the Tyrrhenian speech. Lipara is one of the so-called islands of Aeolus near Sicily, as Eudoxus says in the seventh book of his Description.

[205938] Logismos ("calculation"). The art of reckoning; Isocrates in the Busiris.

[206013] Logistai ("auditors"). Logistai and logisteria: a magistracy among the Athenians so called; they are ten in number, who audit the accounts of those who have administered office within thirty days, when the magistrates lay down their offices; Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. Aristotle has discoursed about them in the Constitution of the Athenians, where it is shown that they differ from the "euthynoi." The comic poets too mention the office; Eupolis in the Cities: "auditors of the choruses subject to audit." "Logisteria" are the offices of the auditors, as Dinarchus shows in the speech Against Timocrates, and Andocides in the speech On the Mysteries.

[206689] Logopoios ("story-writer"). What we call the historian; Isocrates in the Busiris, and Herodotus in his second book.

[206806] Logou tuchein ("to obtain mention"). Used instead of "praise" by Demosthenes in his speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon.

[206922] Loidias. Aeschines in the speech On the Embassy. That it is a river of Macedonia, others relate, and Hecataeus in his Description of Europe.

[207064] Loutroforos ("the bath-bearer"). Loutrophoros and loutrophorein: it was a custom for those marrying to send for baths for themselves on the day of the wedding; and they sent for this the nearest male kinsman, and these "bore the bath" (eloutrophoroun). It was also a custom, when the unmarried died, to set a "loutrophoros" upon the tomb; this was a boy holding a water-jar. Dinarchus speaks of these things both in the speech Against Theodotus and in the information Against Callisthenes. That they fetched the baths from the spring now called Enneacrunus, formerly Callirrhoe, Philostephanus says in his work On Springs. The comic poets too mention the custom.

[207728] Lousieus. Hyperides in his speech on the indictment Against Demeas. Lousia is a deme of the tribe Oeneis, from which the demesman is Lousieus, as Diodorus says.

[207890] Lukeion. Demosthenes in his speech Against Timocrates. The Lyceum is one of the gymnasia among the Athenians, which Theopompus, in his twenty-first book, says Peisistratus made, but Philochorus, in his fourth book, says came to be while Pericles was overseer.

[208151] Lukiourgeis ("of Lycian workmanship"). Demosthenes in the speech Against Timotheus. Didymus says that the bowls made by Lycius, the son of Myron, were so called. But the grammarian seems not to know that one would not find such a formation made from proper names, but rather from cities and nations: Critias, in the Constitution of the Lacedaemonians, says "a couch of Milesian workmanship (Milesiourges)." Perhaps, then, one ought to write also in Herodotus, in his seventh book, "Lycian-worked" (Lykiergeas) instead of "Lycurgus-worked" (Lykoergeas) javelins, so that, as in Demosthenes, the things wrought in Lycia might be so named.

[208789] Lukourgos. One of the ten orators, whose grandfather was Lycurgus the lawgiver.

[208870] Lusandros. A proper name, an admiral of the Lacedaemonians.

[208931] Lusimachos. Demosthenes in his speech On the Immunities. He was the son of Aristides, surnamed the Just. There is another Lysimachus whom Lycurgus mentions in the speech On the Administration, as a worthless lyric poet.

[209152] maimakterion. MAIMAKTERION The fifth month among the Athenians; Demosthenes in the speech Against Timotheus. It is named after Zeus Maimaktes. A "maimaktes" is one who is impetuous and turbulent, as Lysimachides says in his work On the Months at Athens; for at the time when winter takes its beginning, in this month the air is disturbed and undergoes change.

[209513] makrokephaloi. MAKROKEPHALOI ("Long-heads") Antiphon in the work On Concord. There is a people so called, whom Hesiod also mentions in the third book of the Catalogue of Women. Palaephatus, in the seventh book of his Trojan History, says that the Long-heads dwell in Libya, above the Colchians.

[209809] malkiomen. MALKIOMEN ("We grow numb") Demosthenes in the ninth of the Philippics says, "we wait and grow soft." In some copies it is written "we grow numb," which means to shiver to the very base of the spine. Aeschylus: "Drive on, pursue with foot unwearied, though it grows numb."

[210093] malthe. MALTHE Softened wax; Demosthenes in the speech Against Stephanus. Hipponax: "then having smeared the keel with wax."

[210219] mantineon_dioikismos. THE BREAKING-UP OF MANTINEA INTO VILLAGES Isocrates, in the speech On the Peace, speaking of the Lacedaemonians, says they "broke up Mantinea into villages"; and Ephorus in the twentieth book says that the Lacedaemonians broke up the city of the Mantineans into five villages.

[210519] margites. MARGITES Aeschines in the speech Against Ctesiphon: "and he gave Alexander the nickname Margites." And Marsyas, in the fifth book of his work On Alexander, records that Alexander was called Margites by Demosthenes. They used to call foolish men by this name, after the Margites attributed to Homer, a poem which Callimachus seems to have admired.

[210877] maroneia. MARONEIA Demosthenes in the special plea against Pantaenetus. It is a place in Attica. There is also, however, a city in Thrace called Maroneia, which is said to be the one Homer calls Ismarus; Demosthenes mentions it in the speech Against Polycles, and Ephorus in his fourth book.

[211170] massalia. MASSALIA Isocrates says, in the Archidamus, that the Phocaeans, fleeing the dominion of the Great King, migrated to Massalia; but that Massalia had already been settled by the Phocaeans before that time, Aristotle too makes clear in the Constitution of the Massaliots.

[211450] masteira. MASTEIRA In the eighth of the Philippics Demosthenes says, "of the evils in Thrace—for what else could one call Drongilus and Cabyle and Masteira?" Perhaps one should write Basteira, or Pisteira, or Epimastus, since we find these cities in Anaximenes in the seventh book of his work On Philip, whereas Masteira is nowhere recorded.

[211793] masteres. MASTERES Hyperides in the speech Against Pancalus. It seems to have been a magistracy established to investigate the public affairs of the people, like the inquisitors, and the "mastroi" at Pellene, as Aristotle says in the Constitution of the Pelleneans.

[212060] matruleion. MATRYLEION Deinarchus in the speech Against Proxenus. Heracleon and Didymus say it is a certain place in which old women, lingering there, receive those who wish to drink themselves senseless. Menander in the Arbitrants: "Will he not come to grief, having ruined his life in a brothel?"

[212360] mausolos. MAUSOLUS Demosthenes in the speech Against Timocrates. A proper name; a ruler of the Carians. Theopompus says of him that he abstained from no act for the sake of money.

[212541] machatas. MACHATAS A proper name.

[212576] medimnos. MEDIMNUS Deinarchus in the speech Against Callisthenes. It is a measure of dry goods, such as wheat or barley, and contains forty-eight choenixes, as Nicander of Thyateira says in his works expounding the Attic dialect.

[212807] methone. METHONE Demosthenes in the Philippics. He would mean the Methone in Thrace, in besieging which Philip had his right eye struck out. But Demetrius of Magnesia, in his work On Cities of the Same Name, says there are four Methones.

[213046] meion. MEION MEION and MEIAGOGOS: Isaeus in the speech Against Stratocles: "he presented a meion." It is a victim which those who introduced their children to the phratry-members offered to them. Eratosthenes, in his works On Comedy, says that, since there was a law not to introduce a victim below a fixed weight, in mockery and jest people used to say that anyone who introduced a victim "introduced a meion" ("a smaller one"), whence the sacrificial animal was called "meion," and the one who introduced it "meiagogos." Apollodorus, in his work On the Gods, says: the phratry-members, in order to receive larger portions, used to cry out, as they stood there, that it must be set up to weigh, for it is "a meion" (too small). Concerning the "meiagogos," Eupolis in the Demes: "Therefore from that time on no general was able, like a meiagogos feasting them, to draw a weight greater than the victory of this man."

[213964] meiagogesai_de_esti. MEIAGOGESAI: it is MEIAGOGESAI means to deliver the meion to the phratry-members, as Lysias has it in the speech Against Demosthenes concerning a guardianship.

[214146] melanippeion. MELANIPPEION Lycurgus in the speech Against Lycophron. It is a hero-shrine of Melanippus the son of Theseus, as Asclepiades says in the Subjects of Tragedy. But Cleidemus, in the first book of the Atthis, says it is in Melite.

[214388] melanopos. MELANOPUS Demosthenes in the speech Against Androtion. A proper name; the father-in-law of Diophantus the orator.

[214514] meline. MELINE ("Millet") Demosthenes in the Philippics. It is the seed of a pulse, and they use the word as masculine; but Sophocles in the Triptolemus uses it as feminine: "shin of millet," and Herodotus: "sowing millet." Xenophon in the first book of the Anabasis: "both of grain and of millet," and in the same work: "much sesame and millet-oil," and in the sixth book: "and all kinds of pulse and millet." Now some consider millet to be a kind of panic-grass, which some call "elymos"; but Theophrastus, in the eighth book On Plants, records these as differing things—panic-grass, or millet, or "elymos."

[215125] melite. MELITE Demosthenes in the speech Against Conon. It is a deme of the tribe Cecropis. Philochorus, in his third book, says the deme was named after Melite, daughter (according to Hesiod) of Myrmex, but (according to Musaeus) of Dius the son of Apollo.

[215384] mende. MENDE Demosthenes in the speech Against Lacritus. Mende is one of the cities in Pallene, settled by the Eretrians.

[215507] menelaos. MENELAUS Demosthenes in the Philippics. The brother of Philip by the same father.

[215600] mesegguema. MESENGYEMA ("Money held in escrow") The agreed sum of money placed with a man acting as middle surety for its repayment. And MESENGYESASTHAI means to do this, as Aeschines indicates in the speech Against Ctesiphon.

[215828] metageitnion. METAGEITNION Hyperides in the speech On Behalf of Xenippus. The second month among the Athenians is so called. In it they sacrifice to Apollo Metageitnios, as Lysimachides says in his work On the Months at Athens.

[216057] metalleis. METALLEIS ("Miners") Lysias in the speech Against Diochares, if it is genuine. Those who work the mines are called "metalleis." There is also a play of Pherecrates called the Miners, which Eratosthenes, in the seventh book of his work On Old Comedy, says Nicomachus composed.

[216345] metapurgion. METAPYRGION Lysias in the speech On His Own Public Services. The structure between the towers upon a wall was called a "metapyrgion." Thucydides too uses it often, as in the third book.

[216545] metoikion. METOIKION ("Resident-alien tax") Hyperides in the speech Against Aristagora. A metic is one who, migrating from another city, settles in a second city, not staying for a short while as a foreign visitor, but having established his dwelling there. They paid each year twelve drachmas, which was called the metoikion, as Eubulus shows in the Plangon. And Isaeus, in the speech Against Elpagoras and Demophanes, indicates that the man paid twelve drachmas as the metoikion, and the woman six, and that while the son was paying, the mother did not pay; but when he was not paying, she paid herself. That slaves freed by their masters also paid the metoikion has been shown by others of the comic poets, including Aristomenes. Menander, in the Anatithemene and in the Twins, says that they paid, in addition to the twelve drachmas, a further three obols, perhaps to the tax-farmer. Metics who did not pay the metoikion were brought before the sellers, and if convicted were sold, as Demosthenes says in the speech Against Aristogeiton. They also used to put the metics aboard the ships, as the same orator shows in the Philippics. The comic poets used to call the metics "trough-bearers" (skapheis), since at the processions they carried the troughs.

[217803] metoionisasthai. METOIONISASTHAI For "to change a bad omen"; Deinarchus in the speech Against Demosthenes.

[217911] metronomoi. METRONOMOI ("Controllers of measures") There is a magistracy at Athens, that of the controllers of measures, as Deinarchus says in the speech Against Callisthenes. They were ten in number, five for the Piraeus and five for the city; they had the oversight of seeing that the measures of those who sold were just, as Aristotle too shows in the Constitution of the Athenians.

[218298] metaulos. METAULOS Lysias in the defence speech On the Murder of Eratosthenes. The "metaulos" is what is called the dirty courtyard, where the fowls were kept; Aristophanes in the Lemnian Women, and Menander in the Thais.

[218521] mekuberna. MECYBERNA Hyperides in the speech Against Demades. Mecyberna is a city in Thrace, twenty stades distant from Olynthus.

[218652] melobios. MELOBIUS Hyperides in the speech Against Autocles. He is one of the Thirty who held tyrannical power among the Athenians.

[218785] meuroion. METROON Lycurgus in the speech Against Aristogeiton. They set up the laws, having inscribed them, in the Metroon; Deinarchus shows this in the speech Against Pytheas.

[218963] mikon. MICON Lycurgus in the speech On the Priestess: "and they fined Micon the painter for depicting the Greeks too meanly."

[219090] molpis. MOLPIS Lysias, in the speech On the Estate of Diogenes, says, "Molpis, one of the ten in the Piraeus." So under the Thirty there were ten men ruling in the Piraeus, one of whom was Molpis, as Androtion says in the third book of the Atthis.

[219339] moirokles. MOEROCLES A proper name; a man of Salamis, one of those who took no obscure part in Athenian public life.

[219457] moirologchesai. MOEROLONCHESAI For "to obtain one's portion"; Antiphon in the defence speech Against the Indictment of Callias.

[219586] mounuchia. MUNYCHIA Demosthenes in the speech On Behalf of Ctesiphon. A place by the sea in Attica. Hellanicus, in the second book of the Atthis, says it was named after a certain Munychus, king, the son of Pantacles.

[219805] mountchion. MUNYCHION Hyperides in the speech On Behalf of Xenophilus. The tenth month among the Athenians is so called, and in this month they sacrifice to Artemis Munychia.

[219981] mousaios. MUSAEUS Lysias, in the speech against the indictment of Mixidemus, if genuine: "and that he had two slave-boys in attendance, of whom he calls the one Musaeus and the other Hesiod." That the man on trial made a practice of so naming his servants is clear; but concerning Musaeus, Aristoxenus, in the Praxidamanteia, says that some have said the man was from Thrace, others that he was an autochthon from Eleusis. Others have spoken of him too, among them Glaucus.

[220456] moran. MORA Demosthenes in the Philippics. Certain Laconian military formations are so called. Aristotle has discussed them in the Constitution of the Lacedaemonians. He says there are six divisions called "morae," and that all the Lacedaemonians are distributed into the morae. Xenophon, in the Constitution of the Lacedaemonians, says: "each of the civic morae has one polemarch, four captains, eight commanders of fifty, and sixteen commanders of an enomotia."

[220921] mulothros. MYLOTHROS One who owns a mill and works in it; Deinarchus in the speech Against Callisthenes, often. The word is also common among the comic poets.

[221081] murioi_en_megalei_polei. THE TEN THOUSAND IN MEGALOPOLIS Demosthenes in the speech Against Aeschines. It is a common council of all the Arcadians, which the historians often mention. Aristotle too has discussed them in the common Constitution of the Arcadians, at the beginning of the book.