WORK: Social Statics  (slug: herbert-spencer-social-statics-32e645)

CHAPTER: 44-a-second-edition-with-explanatory-preface



[0] THE NEMESIS OF FAITH. By J. A. Froude, M.A., late Fellow of Exeter College, Oxford. Post 8vo, cloth, 6s.

[106] “’The Nemesis of Faith’ possesses the first requisites of a book. It has power, matter, and mastery of subject, with that largeness which must arise from the writer’s mind, and that Individual character—those truths of detail—which spring from experience or observation. The pictures of an English home in childhood, youth, and early manhood, as well as the thoughts and feelings of the student at Oxford, are painted with feeling pervaded by a current of thought: the remarks on the humbug of the three learned professions, more especially on the worldliness of the church, are not mere declamation, but the outpouring of an earnest conviction: the Picture of Anglican Protestantism, dead to faith, to love, and to almost everything but wealth-worship, with the statement of the objects that Newman first proposed to himself, form the best defence of Tractarianism that has appeared, though defence does not seem to be the object of the author.....As the main literary object is to display the struggles of a mind with the growth and grounds of opinion, incidents are subordinate to the intellectual results that spring from them: but there is no paucity of incident if the work be judged by its own standard.”—Spectator.

[1330] “The most striking quality in Mr. Froude’s writings is his descriptive eloquence. His characters are all living before us, and have no sameness. His quickness of eye is manifest equally in his insight into human minds, and in his perceptions of natural beauty.....The style of the letters is everywhere charming. The confessions of a Sceptic are often brilliant, and always touching. The closing narrative is fluent, graphic, and only too highly wrought in painful beauty.”—Prospective Review, May, 1849.

[1836] “The book becomes in its soul-burning truthfulness, a quite invaluable record or the fiery struggles and temptations through which the youth of this nineteenth century has to force its way in religious matters.....Especially is it a great warning and protest against three great falsehoods. Against self-deluded word orthodoxy and bibliolatry, setting up the Bible for a mere dead idol instead of a living witness to Christ. Against frothy philosophic Infidelity, merely changing the chaff of old systems for the chaff of new, addressing men’s intellects and ignoring their spirits. Against Tractarianism, trying to make men all belief, as Strasburgers make geese all liver, by darkness and cramming: manufacturing state folly as the infidel state wisdom; deliberately giving the lie to God, who has made man in his own image, body, soul, and spirit, by making the two first decrepit for the sake of pampering the last.....Against these three falsehoods, we say, does the book before us protest: after its own mournful fashion, most strongly when most unconsciously.”—Frazer’s Mag., May, 1849.

[2931] THE PURPOSE OF EXISTENCE, Popularly considered, in relation to the ORIGIN, DEVELOPMENT, and DESTINY of the HUMAN MIND. Crown 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d.

[3077] “This singularly thoughtful essay embraces a wide range of topics, but without ever departing from its proper theme. In the performance of his task, the author has displayed great power of reflection, much learning, and an eloquence and elevation of style, peculiarly appropriate to the loftiness of the subject-matter.”—Critic.

[3407] GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE. With an Outline of some of its recent developments among the Germans, embracing the Philosophical Systems of Schelling and Hegel, and Oken’s System of Nature, by J. B. Stallo, A.M. Post 8vo, cloth, 6s.

[3658] THE PRINCIPLES OF NATURE, HER DIVINE REVELATIONS, AND A VOICE TO MANKIND. By and through Andrew Jackson Davis, the “Poughkeepsie Seer,” and “Clairvoyant.” 2 vols. large 8vo, cloth, 18s.

[3845] The work consists of 800 pages, including a history of its production, with a Biographical Sketch, and Portrait (engraved on Steel) of the Author.

[3993] THE LIFE OF THE REV. JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE. Written by Himself. With Portions of his Correspondence. Edited by John Hamilton Thom. 3 vols. post 8vo, 1l. 4s., cloth.

[4157] “This is a book which rivets the attention, and makes the heart bleed. It has, indeed, with regard to himself, in its substance, though not in its arrangement, an almost dramatic character; so clearly and strongly is the living, thinking, active man projected from the face of the records which he has left.

[4466] “His spirit was a battle-field, upon which, with, fluctuating fortune and singular intensity, the powers of belief and scepticism waged, from first to last, their unceasing war; and within the compass of his experience are presented to our view most of the great moral and spiritual problems that attach to the condition of our race.—Quarterly Review.

[4819] “This book will improve his (Blanco White’s) reputation. There is much in the peculiar construction of his miod, in its close union of the moral with the intellectual faculties, and in its restless desire for truth, which may remind the reader of Dr. Arnold.”—Examiner.

[5090] “There is a depth and force in this book which tells.”—Christian Remembrancer.

[5170] “These volumes have an interest beyond the character of Blanco White. And beside the intrinsic interest of his eelf-portraiture, whose character is indicated in some of our extracts, the correspondence, in the letters of Lord Holland, Southey, Coleridge, Channing, Norton, Mill, Professor Powell, Dr. Hawkins, and other names of celebrity, has considerable attractions in itself, without any relation to the biographical purpose with which it was published.”—Spectator.

[5641] LIFE OF GODFREY W. VON LEIBNITZ. By J. M. Mackie. 12mo, 3s. 6d., eloth.

[5714] “We commend this book, not only to scholars and men of science, but to all our readers who love to contemplate the life and labours of a great and good man. It merits the special notice of all who are interested in the business of education, and deserves a place, by the side of Brewster’s Life of Newton, in all the libraries of our schools, academies, and literary institutions.”—Christian Watchman.

[6117] THE EDUCATION OF THE FEELINGS, By Charles Bray. Second Edition. Post 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

[6207] THREE EXPERIMENTS OF LIVING.—Within the Means. Up to the Means. Beyond the Means. Fcp. 8vo, ornamental cover and gilt edges, 1s.

[6337] STORIES FOR SUNDAY AFTERNOONS. From the Creation to the Advent of the Messiah. For the use of Children from 5 to 11 years of age. By Mrs. George Dawson (late Miss Susan Fanny Crompton). 16mo, 1s. 6d., cloth.

[6546] “This is a very pleasing little volume, which we can confidently recommend. It is designed and admirably adapted for the use of children from five to eleven years of age. It purposes to infuse into that tender age some acquaintance with the facts, and taste for the study of the Old Testament. The style is simple, easy, and for the most part correct. The stories are told in a spirited and graphic manner.

[6954] “Those who are engaged in teaching the young, and in laying the foundation of good character by early religious and moral impressions, will be thankful for additional resources of a kind so judicious as this volume.”—Inquirer.

[7182] HYMNS FOR THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH AND HOME. Edited by James Martineau. Sixth Edition, 12mo, 3s. 6d., cloth.

[7288] REVERBERATIONS. PART I. Fcp. 8vo, paper cover, 1s.

[7340] REVERBERATIONS. PART II. Fcp. 8vo, paper cover, 2s.

[7393] “In this little verse-pamphlet of some sixty or seventy pages, we think we see evidences of a true poet; of a fresh and natural fount of genuine song; and of a purpose and sympathy admirably suited to the times.....The purchaser of it will find himself richer in possessing it hy many wise and charitable thoughts, many generous emotions, and much calm and quiet, yet deep reflection.”—Exammer.

[7789] “Remarkable for earnestness of thought and strength of diction.”— Morning Herald.

[7872] “The author of these rhymed brochures has much of the true poetic spirit. He is always in earnest. He writes from the full heart. There is a manliness, too, in all his utterances that especially recommends them to us.....As long as we have such ‘Reverberations’ as these we shall never grow weary of them.”—Weekly News.

[8193] TWO ORATIONS AGAINST TAKING AWAY HUMAN LIFE, Under any Circumstances; and in explanation and defence of the misrepresented doctrine of Non-resistance. By Thomas Cooper, Author of “The Purgatory of Suicides.” Post 8vo, 1s., in paper cover.

[8433] “Mr. Cooper possesses undeniable abilities of no mean order, and moral courage beyond many.....The manliness with which he avows, and the boldness and seal with which he urges, the doctrines of peace and love, respect for human rights, and moral power, in these lectures, are worthy of all honour.”—Nonconformist.

[8748] “Mr. Cooper’s style is intensely clear and forcible, and displays great earnestness and fine human sympathy; it is in the highest degree manly, plain, and vigorous.”—Morning Advertiser.

[8935] “These two orations are thoroughly imbued with the peace doctrines which have lately been making rapid progress in many unexpected quarters. To all who take an interest in that great movement, we would recommend this book, on account of the fervid eloquence and earnest truthfulness which pervades every line of it.”—Manchester Examiner.

[9274] THE CHRISTIAN’S KEY THE PHILOSOPHY OF SOCIALISH; Being Hints and Aids towards an Analytical Enquiry into the Principles of Social Progress, with a View to the Elucidation of the great practical problem of the present day,—the Improvement of the Condition of the Working Classes. In Ten Propositions, by Upsilon. Post 8vo, paper cover, 1s.

[9614] THE HEBREW COSMOGONY, AND MODERN INTERPRETATIONS. Demy 8vo, sewed, 1s.

[9686] “The work is short and forcibly written, and states the question plainly.”

[9762] Economist.

[9774] THE DUTY OF ENGLAND: a Protestant Layman’s Reply to Cardinal Wiseman’s Appeal. 8vo, 1s.

[9863] “The ‘Protestant Layman’ argues the question in the right spirit. He would meet the ‘Papal aggression’ solely by logical argument, free inquiry, and free thought, unbiassed by authority.”—Manchester Spectator.

[10074] BRIEF EXPOSITION OF THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW. By the Rev. R. E. B. Maclellan. 12mo, cloth, price 3s.

[10177] ECCLESIASTICAL PRETENSIONS, ROMISH AND ENGLISH; with the Antidote which a Catholic Protestantism Supplies. A Tract for the Times, being A SERMON, preached in Renshaw Street Chapel, Liverpool, Sunday, November 17, 1850. By John Hamilton Thom.

[10420] RELIGION, THE CHURCH, AND THE PEOPLE. A SERMON, preached in Lewin’s Mead Chapel, Bristol, September 23rd, 1849, on behalf of The Ministry to the Poor in Bristol. By John Hamilton Thom. Published by Request. 12mo, paper cover, price 1s.

[10657] CATHOLICITY, SPIRITUAL AND INTELLECTUAL, An Attempt at Vindicating the Harmony of Faith and Knowledge. A Series of Discourses. By Thomas Wilson, M.A., late Minister of St. Peter’s, Mancroft, Norwich, Author of “Travels in Egypt and Syria,” etc.

[10903] 8vo, paper cover, price 1s. each.

[10938] See Anti-Slavery Society’s Report for 1847; and Evidence before Parliamentary Committee, 1848.

[11034] See Times of October 12, 1846.

[11066] As here used, this word is of course to be understood in a popular, and not in a metaphysical sense.

[11168] Whether we adopt the views of Locke or of Kant as to the ultimate nature of what is here, for analogy’s sake, called geometric sense, does not affect the question. However originated, the fundamental perceptions attaching to it form the undecomposable basis of exact science. And this is all that is now assumed.

[11482] A doctrine held by Aristotle and his followers.

[11531] Coleridge clearly expresses such a belief. He says—“This is indeed the main characteristic of the moral system taught by the Friend throughout; that the distinct foresight of consequences belongs exclusively to the Infinite Wisdom which is one with the Almighty Will, on which all consequences depend; but that for man—to obey the simple unconditional commandment of eschewing every act that implies a self-contradiction, or, in other words, to produce and maintain the greatest possible harmony in the component impulses and faculties of his nature, involves the effects of prudence.”—The Friend.

[12130] Advice, by the way, which in these latter days the giver might properly enough take home to himself.

[12232] These other divisions of the subject may be taken up on a future occasion, should circumstances favour.

[12337] Why the appetite for food should now be greater than is proper, seems at first difficult to understand. On calling to mind, however, the conditions of the aboriginal man, we shall find an explanation of this apparent anomaly in the fact, that the irregularity in his supplies of food necessitated an ability to eat largely when food was attainable, and necessitated, therefore, a corresponding desire. Now that the supplies of food have become regular, and no contingent periods of long fasting have to be provided against, the desire is in excess and has to be abated.

[12908] We need not here debate the claims of this maxim. It is sufficient for present purposes to remark, that were it true it would be utterly useless as a first principle; both from the impossibility of determining specifically what happiness is, and from the want of a measure by which equitably to mete it out, could we define it.

[13237] Four Years in the Pacific. By Lieut. Walpole.

[13284] These inferences do not at all militate against joint-stock systems of production and living, which are in all probability what Socialism prophesies.

[13435] Speech of Mr. Garland, one of the Conference Methodists.

[13493] Though Washington Irving has pointed out that the Koran does not teach this, he has not shown that Mahomet’s followers do not hold it. Most likely the Mahometan faith has undergone corruptions similar to those suffered by Christianity.

[13730] See Dr. Conolly on Lunatic Asylums.

[13767] Hence may be drawn an argument for direct taxation; seeing that only when taxation is direct does repudiation of state burdens become possible

[13911] The immediate interest of the subject will sufficiently explain the length to which this chapter is extended; and if the style of argument used in it is somewhat too popular for a work like the present, the same consideration must serve as an excuse. Two of the sections have already appeared in print.

[14215] “It is time,” said a veteran of this school, “to retire from the bar, since this new-fangled special pleading has superseded the use of gunpowder.”—Sketches of Ireland Sixty Years Ago.

[14401] “Allotments are generally given on poor and useless pieces of land, but the thorough cultivation they receive soon raises them to a high pitch of fertility. The more fertile they become the more the rent of each portion is increased, and we were informed that there are at present allotments on the Duke’s property which, under the influence of the same competition which exists with reference to farms, bring his Grace a rent of 2l., 3l., and even 4l. an acre.”—Times Agricultural Commissioner on the Blenheim Estates.

[14922] See Letters on “Labour and the Poor.” An officer’s widow says:—“Generally, the ladies are much harder as to their terms than the tradespeople; oh, yes, the tradespeople usually show more lemty towards the needlewomen than the ladies. I know the mistress of an institution who refused some chemises of a lady who wanted to have them made at 9d. She said she would not impose upon the poor workpeople so much as to get them made at that price.”—Morning Chronicle, November 16, 1849. A vendor of groundsel and turfs for singing birds says:—“The ladies are very hard with a body. They tries to beat me down, and particular in the matter of turfs. They tell me they can buy half-a-dozen for Id., so I’m obligated to let’em have three or four.”—Morning Chronicle, November 20, 1849.

[15700] No doubt the belief which Dr. Chalmers combats, viz., that the landlord’s revenue is wholly consumed by him, is an erroneous one; for, as he points out, the greater portion of it goes to maintain those who directly or indirectly minister to the landlord’s wants: but Dr. Chalmers overlooks the fact that did the landlord not exist, the services which such now render to him in return for “sustenance and support,” would be rendered to those producers from whom the landlord’s revenue originally came; and that in the loss of these services society suffers.

[16258] Instance the behaviour of the Prussian electors since the late revolution.

[16334] It is true that a plaintiff who can swear that he is not worth £5 may sue in formâ pauperis. But this privilege is almost a dead letter. Actions so instituted are usually found to fail, because those who conduct them, having to plead gratuitously, plead carelessly.

[16601] The case occurred at Winchester in July, 1849.

[16649] See Address to the British Association at Edinburgh, in 1850.

[16712] Reports of Dr. Fr. J. Behrend. See Medical Times, March 16, 1850.

[16779] See Grote’s History.

[16801] A metaphor that has been used to denote the pride with which the German officials regard their titles.

[16905] The writer has himself been thus addressed.

[16950] See letter of Sir Colin Campbell to Lord Stanley, May 2, 1845.

[17014] And not without success, according to Mr. Wilde, who (writing before the late revolution) tells us, by way of panegyric upon the Austrian system of education, that the people “sigh not for a state of political liberty about which they know nothing. The government wisely preventing their minds from being inflamed by those blisters upon society that have written and preached our own countrymen into the fever of discontent and disaffection, the effects of which are now so visible in Great Britain.”(!)

[17519] Quoted from a speech at Edinburgh

[17554] Summary of the Moral Statistics of England and Wales. By Joseph Fletcher, Esq., Barrister-at-Law, one of Her Majesty’s Inspectors of Schools.

[17697] For these and other such facts, see Sir W. Molesworth’s speeches delivered during the sessions of 1848 and 1849.

[17811] See Sir Alexander Burns dispatches.

[17848] See Times, Oct. 17, 1848.

[17875] For putting out fires in Berlin they depend on open tubs of water that stand about the city at certain points, ready to be dragged where they are wanted.

[18030] Such results have actually been brought about by the Metropolitan Buildings Act. Whilst this Act has introduced some reform in the better class of houses (although to nothing like the expected extent, for the surveyors are bribed, and moreover the fees claimed by them for inspecting every trifling alteration operate as penalties on improvement), it has entailed far more evil, just where it was intended to confer benefit. An architect and surveyor describes it as having worked after the following manner. In those districts of London consisting of inferior houses, built in that insubstantial fashion which the New Building Act was to mend, there obtains an average rent, sufficiently remunerative to landlords whose houses were run up economically before the New Building Act passed. This existing average rent fixes the rent that must be charged in these districts for new houses of the same accommodation—that is, the same number of rooms, for the people they are built for do not appreciate the extra safety of living within walls strengthened with hoop-iron bond. Now it turns out upon trial, that houses built in accordance with the present regulations, and let at this established rate, bring in nothing like a reasonable return. Builders have consequently confined themselves to erecting houses in better districts (where the possibility of a profitable competition with pre-existing houses shows that those pre-existing houses were tolerably substantial), and have ceased to erect dwellings for the masses, except in the suburbs where no pressing sanitary evils exist. Meanwhile, in the inferior districts above described, has resulted an increase of overcrowding—half-a-dozen families in a house—a score lodgers to a room. Nay, more than this has resulted. That state of miserable dilapidation into which these abodes of the poor are allowed to fall, is due to the absence of competition from new houses. Landlords do not find their tenants tempted away by the offer of better accommodation. Repairs, being unnecessary for securing the largest amount of profit, are not made. And the fees demanded by the surveyor, even when an additional chimney-pot is put up, supply ready excuses for doing nothing. Thus, whilst the New Building Act has caused some improvement where improvement was not greatly needed, it has caused none where it was needed, but has instead generated evils worse than those it was to remove. In fact, for a large percentage of the very horrors which our sanitary agitators are now trying to cure by law, we have to thank previous agitators of the same school!

[20626] Writing before the repeal of the brick-duty, the Builder says, “It is supposed that one-fourth of the cost of a dwelling which lets for 2s. 6d. or 3s. a week is caused by the expense of the title-deeds and the tax on wood and bricks used in its construction. Of course the owner of such property must be remunerated, and he therefore charges 7 ½d. or 9d. a week to cover these burdens.” Mr. C. Gatliff, secretary to the Society for Improving the Dwellings of the Working Classes, describing the effect of the window-tax, say, “They are now paying upon their institution in St. Pancras the sum of £162 16s. in window-duties, or 1 per cent. per annum upon the original outlay. The average rental paid by the Society’s tenants is 5s. 6d. per week, and the window-duty deducts from this 7 ¼d. per week.”—Deputation to Lord Ashley, see Times, Jan. 31, 1850. Mr. W. Voller, a master-tailor, says, “I lately inserted one of Dr. Arnott’s ventilators in the chimney of the workshop, little thinking I should be called upon by Mr. Badger, our district surveyor, for a fee of 25s.“—Morning Chronicle, Feb. 4, 1850.

[21731] Though not literally currency, bills of exchange, serving in many cases to effect mercantile transactions which would otherwise be effected in money, to that extent perform its function.

[21919] Capital, Currency, and Banking. By James Wilson, Esq., M.P.

[21980] Ibid.

[21987] Capital, Currency, and Banking. By James Wilson, Esq., M.P.

[22048] The alliance consists in this, that on the credit of a standing debt of £14,000,000, due from the Government to the Bank, the Bank is allowed to issue notes to that amount (besides further notes on other security), and hence to the extent of this debt the notes have practically a Government guarantee.

[22352] Whilst these sheets are passing through the press, facts, which he is not now at liberty to quote, have been communicated to the writer, conclusively proving the superior economy of a coin-manufacture conducted by private individuals; together with other facts suggesting the obvious truth that the debasement of coinage, from which our forefathers suffered so much, was made possible only by legal compulsion—would never have been possible had the currency been left to itself.

[22832] “An Archbishop of Cologne having built a fortress of this kind, the governor inquired how he was to maintain himself, no revenue having been assigned for that purpose. The prelate only desired him to remark, that the castle was situated near the junction of four cross roads.”—Hallam’s Middle Ages.

[23132] See pamphlets on the Mark System of Discipline.

[23181] “Three Years’ Crwize in the Mosambique Channel.”

[23231] A General Outline of the Animal Kingdom. By Professor T.R.Jones, F.G.S.

[23304] Jones.

[23312] Ibid.

[23319] When dishonesty and improvidence are extreme, capital cannot be bad under 30 to 40 per cent., as in the Burmese empire, or in England in the time of King John.—See Mill’s Political Economy.

[23510] “The primitive forms of all tissues are free cells, which grow by imbibition, and which develop their like from their nucleus of hyaline. All the animal tissues result from transformations of these cells. It is to such cells that the acephalocyst bears the closest analogies in physical, chemical, and vital properties. ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ We may, with some truth, say that the human body is primarily composed or built up of acephalocysts; microscopical, indeed, and which, under natural and healthy conditions, are metamorphosed into cartilage, bone, nerve, muscular fibre, &c. When, instead of such change, the organic cells grow to dimensions which make them recognisable to the naked eye, such development of acephalocysts, as they are then called, is commonly connected in the human subject with an enfeeblement of the controlling plastic force, which, at some of the weaker points of the frame, seems unable to direct the metamorphosis of the primitive cells along the right road to the tissues they were destined to form, but permits them to retain, as it were, their embryo condition, and to grow by the imbibition of the surrounding fluid, and thus become the means of injuriously affecting or destroying the tissues which they should have supported and repaired. I regard the different Acephalocysts, therefore, as merely so many forms or species of morbid or dropsical cells.”—Professor Owen’s Hunterian Lectures.

[24925] “Schleiden has viewed these Gregarinæ as essentially single organic cells, and would refer them to the lowest group of plants. And here, indeed, we have a good instance of the essential unity of the organic division of matter. It is only the power of self-contraction of tissue, and its solubility in acetic acid, which turn the scale in favour of the animality of the Gregarinæ they have no mouth and no stomach, which have commonly been deemed the most constant organic characteristics of an animal.”

[25429] “1846, Henle and others have questioned the title of the Gregarina to be regarded as an organic species or individual at all, or as anything more than a monstrous cell: thus applying to it my idea, propounded in 1843, of the true nature of the acephalocyst.”

[25689] “1848, Kollicker has recently published an elaborate memoir on the genus, in which good and sufficient grounds are given for concluding that the Gregarina not merely resembles, but actually is an animated cell; it stands on the lowest step of the animal series, parallel with that of the single-celled species of the vegetable kingdom. The Gregarina consists, as Schleiden and others have well shown, of a cell-membrane, of the fluid and granular contents of the cell, and of the nucleus with (occasional) nucleoli. The nucleus is the hardest part, resisting pressure longest, like that of the Polygastrian. It divides, and its division is followed by spontaneous fission.”—Professor Owen’s Hunterian Lectures.