WORK: Epitome of Histories, Volume 1  (slug: joannes-zonaras-epitome-of-histories-volume-1-d4bea2)

CHAPTER: 02-book-1



[107222] 25. No longer did judges lead Israel, but the high priest Eli presided over them; in his time there was a famine, and a certain man of Bethlehem called Abimelech migrated with his wife and two sons into Moab on account of the famine. So he takes Moabite wives for his sons. Within ten years, however, both Abimelech and his sons died, and there were left as widows both Naomi, the wife of Abimelech, and the two wives of his sons, Orpah and Ruth. And Naomi returned to her fatherland, and of her daughters-in-law Orpah, being entreated by her mother-in-law, remained among the Moabites, but Ruth departed with Naomi. And when they had now come to Bethlehem, Boaz, who was a kinsman of Abimelech, received them as guests. And when the woman was addressed by name by the citizens, she said, "Call me not Naomi but Mara"—for "Naomi" means "good fortune," but "Mara" means "grief and bitterness"—"for I went out full and returned empty." And as it was harvest time, Ruth went out, by the counsel of her mother-in-law, to glean in the field of Boaz. And he, seeing the girl and learning who she was, permitted her to reap what she could and to keep it, and commanded the farm-overseer to provide her a meal. And she, having received barley meal from him, kept it for her mother-in-law, and went away late, carrying also the barley she had gathered, and related to her the things she had from Boaz. And again she went out with the maidservants of Boaz. And Naomi resolved to lay Ruth beside him, and sends her daughter-in-law, having instructed her to fall asleep at the feet of the man while he slept on the threshing-floor. And so she did, but Boaz, perceiving about midnight, asked who she was. And learning, he then kept quiet, but at dawn, waking Ruth, he commanded her to go to her mother-in-law, and said, "I myself will ask the one who is a nearer kinsman to you, and if he wishes to take you, you shall go to that man, but if he declines, you shall lawfully dwell with me." So the woman went away and reported everything to Naomi. And Boaz called together before the council of elders Ruth and the kinsman, and said to him, "Do you hold the inheritance of Abimelech our kinsman and of his sons?" And when he had agreed to hold it according to the laws by right of kinship, Boaz said, "Then one must not remember the laws by halves, but in all things do according to them. It remains that you must also marry the wife of Mahlon, the son of Abimelech, that you may raise up seed for the kinsman." But he declined, yielding to him both the inheritance and the woman. So, according to the law, before the council of elders Ruth loosed the sandal of that man and spat in his face. And so Boaz took her, and she bore him Obed—which in Greek is interpreted "serving." And from Obed comes Jesse, and from him David, who reigned over those of Israel and left the rule to his children, which endured for twenty-one generations. And while Eli the high priest, as has already been related, was leading the people, his two sons Hophni and Phinehas were pestilent, transgressing in all things, and not turning back when their father exhorted them. And God, angered on account of their transgressions, through Samuel, who was still a child, made known to Eli what he himself and his children and his house would suffer. Now Samuel was the son of Elkanah, a Levite man, with whom dwelt two wives, of whom the one was named Hannah and the other Peninnah. And to one there were children from Elkanah, but Hannah was without offspring. And when the man came with both wives to Shiloh and had sacrificed, since it was a time of feasting and Peninnah rejoiced with her children, Hannah, because she was alone, wept for herself, and running to the tabernacle of God, prayed to the Lord to grant her offspring, vowing to consecrate the firstborn to God. And as she lingered in her prayers, Eli, sitting before the tabernacle, supposed her to be drunk and sent her away. But she said, "I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, lord, but being in anguish on account of my childlessness I have wasted away." And the priest said to her, "Go, and may God grant you your request." And returning home with her husband, she conceives and bears Samuel—one might call him "asked of God." And when the child had grown, she brings him to Eli, according to the vow, to be reared for God, letting his hair grow and dwelling in the sanctuary and using water for drink. And being now twelve years old, he prophesied. And once, while he slept, God called him by name. And he went to the high priest, supposing that he was perhaps called by him. And this happened three times. And Eli, perceiving that the call was from God, said to Samuel, "If you are called again, say, 'Behold I am here, Lord.'" And when the child had done so, the one who called said to him that there would be a heavy calamity for the Israelites, and that the sons of Eli would die together and the priesthood would pass over to the house of Eleazar. And Samuel was unwilling to disclose the words to the priest, but, constrained by oaths, he reported everything just as he had heard.

[112345] 26. From this the Palestinians make war against the Israelites, and were superior in the battle. And the people ask that the ark be brought to their aid. And when the ark was sent there with the sons of Eli, a battle was joined. And the Hebrews were defeated, and about thirty thousand fell, and the sons of the high priest, and the ark was taken by the enemy. And Eli the high priest was sitting upon a high seat, and learning of the battle and the slaughter of his sons and the capture of the ark, in great anguish he fell from his seat and died, being ninety years old, of which he had led Israel forty years. And the foreigners, having carried off the ark to the city of Azotus, dedicated it to Dagon—for so they called their god. And at dawn, entering the house of Dagon, they found the image lying before the ark upon the ground. And raising it up, they set it upon its former base. But when they found this happen often, and many times having set the idol upright, found it as often lying in the posture of one worshiping the ark, they were astounded and at a loss. Then a destruction fell upon the city and country of the Azotians—a disease among the people about the seat, which Josephus calls dysentery, and many died of it; and mice, springing up from the ground, ravaged the whole country. And at last the Azotians understood that the ark was the cause of their sufferings, and they send it to Ascalon; and those too suffered the like. And so the ark passed through five cities of the Palestinians, and to all became a cause of affliction. So the rulers of the five afflicted cities came together—of Gath and Ekron and Ascalon and Gaza and Azotus—and some counseled one thing about the ark, others another. And at last it seemed good to all to make five golden seats and as many golden mice and to place them upon the ark, and to make a new wagon and yoke to the wagon cows that had borne their first calves, but to keep back their calves, and to set the ark upon the wagon, and, having led the cows to a place where three roads met, to leave them, that it might rest with them to go whichever way they should set out: if they went straight toward the Israelites, they would believe that on account of the ark the evils were being brought upon them, and would not hinder their journey to those people; but if they went somewhere else, they would turn the cows and the wagon and what was on it back again. Having, then, accomplished what seemed good, they let the cows go, themselves following at a distance, that they might see the outcome. And they went straight toward the Hebrews and did not stop before they came to a great plain in Bethshemesh. So when the men of that village saw the ark, they hastened to it, and taking it down from the wagon, they sacrificed the cows and offered them as whole burnt offerings with the wood of which the wagon had been made. And seeing this, the Palestinians returned home. But those who touched the ark, not being priests, God in anger put to death. And the rest made known to the community of the Hebrews the things concerning the ark; and they, taking it, carry it away to Kiriath-jearim and deposit it in the house of Aminadab, who was of the tribe of Levi. And it remained there twenty years, but among the foreigners four months. And Samuel the prophet, having now gained a great name and come to much glory, gathering the people, spoke to them about freedom and persuaded them to lay claim to it. Learning this, the Palestinians come unexpectedly upon the Hebrews and terrified them, so that they ran to Samuel, saying that their safety was despaired of unless he himself asked for them the aid from God. And he exhorted them to take courage, and assured them that God would help them, and having sacrificed a lamb, he prayed to God. And before the sacred flame had consumed the sacrifice, the enemy attacked the Hebrews, supposing they would more easily prevail over them as unarmed. But when the earth was shaken by God with an earthquake, and thunders broke forth and lightnings flashed, the enemy fell into cowardice and turned to flight. And Samuel and the multitude pursued after them and destroyed many, and no longer after this blow did they make war against the Israelites, but Samuel even recovered for the Hebrews the country that they had taken. And he judged the people and ruled over them.

[116710] 27. And being now grown old, he distributed to his sons the leadership of the people and the office of judging. The name of the elder was Joel, and of the younger Abiah. But they did not walk in the ways of their father, but, turning aside, betrayed justice for gifts and gave their judgments for bribes. And the people, on account of this, gathering to Samuel, said, "Since you are not able to preside over us by reason of age, make us a king, who shall both lead the nation and make war against the enemy." And while Samuel grieved at this, God said to him, "It is not you the people have rejected, but me. Hearken, then, to them, and whomever I shall point out to you, anoint him as king." And gathering the Hebrews, Samuel set forth that he would appoint them a king, but foretold that they would repent and would ask of God a deliverance from kings. But they persisted, seeking a king, and asked him not to be concerned about what was to come. And the prophet said, "Go now, and when I learn whom God gives you as king, I will send for you." Now there was a certain Benjamite, Kish by name, who, having lost his donkeys, sent his son, who was tall and fair and called Saul, in search of the donkeys, with one of his servants. And he, having gone about and sought and not found them, came to Armathaim, to Samuel, to inquire about the donkeys. So God reveals to Samuel that this is he whom He wishes to reign over the people of the Hebrews. So when Saul asked about the donkeys, Samuel said that they had been recovered, and having lodged Saul, he sent him forth at dawn, and going outside the city with him and taking the young man aside alone, he pours oil upon his head. And kissing him, he said, "The Lord has anointed you ruler over his people Israel, and let this be the sign of the anointing: that two men shall meet you about the tomb of Rachel, bringing you the good news of the finding of the donkeys." And he told him other signs of the truth, and that he would prophesy when he came to Gabatha among the prophets there, and he commanded him to come to Gilgal when he should be summoned by him. And then he gathered the people and bade the tribes cast lots, that it might be shown from which the one who was to reign would be. So the lot fell upon Benjamin, then upon the family of Mattari. And when the family had been allotted man by man, the lot fell upon Saul. And as, when sought, he was not found, Samuel is informed by God where he was hidden, and having him brought, set him in the midst. And he was a head taller than all and surpassing all in the stature of his body. And the prophet said to the multitude, "This man the Lord has anointed for you as king, to whom there is none like among you all." And the people shouted approval and said, "Long live the king." So, when Saul had thus become king, many attended him as king and honored him as was fitting, but many despised and mocked him. And after a month Nahash the king of the Ammonites makes war against Jabesh-gilead, saying that he would not otherwise spare the men unless they gave him the right eye of each to put out. And they asked for a respite of seven days; and receiving it, they send messengers to Gabaa. And when those there heard the words of the Ammonite, they wept; but Saul was greatly angered, and taking two oxen, he cut them in pieces and sent them into all the territory of Israel, threatening to do likewise to those who would not march out with him against the Ammonites. And when the people had run together, he numbered them and found seven hundred thousand. And the spirit of the Lord leaped upon Saul, and he prophesied, saying that on the morrow there would be deliverance for the men of Jabesh. And rising, he himself and the people marched all night, and about the morning watch he came upon the Ammonites, dividing the army into three parts. And surrounding them, he killed many, and the king Nahash himself, and turned the survivors to flight; and invading their country and taking very much spoil, he returned in splendor. So no longer was he held in low esteem by any, but he was renowned for his courage and honored even by those who had formerly mocked him. And Samuel, gathering the people again, proclaims Saul king a second time, anointing him again with the oil. So the commonwealth of the Hebrews passed from an aristocracy into a kingship; for in the time of Moses and Joshua they were governed as an aristocracy, then for eighteen years they continued without a ruler, and afterward they were ruled by those called judges, entrusting to the best man the judging and management of all affairs.

[121327] 28. And when Samuel adjured the people to say if he had done any wrong to them, all cried out that he had presided over the nation justly and well. And he answered them, "Know that you have greatly sinned in asking a king for yourselves, and by this you have provoked God to anger. And this shall be a sign to you, that in the height of summer there shall come a storm." And according to the word of the prophet there were thunders and lightnings, and hail came down, so that fear fell upon the people and they entreated Samuel to come and reconcile God to them, since they had sinned. And while the Palestinians were subduing the Hebrews and taking away their arms and forbidding them to use iron, Saul, going down to Gilgal, urged the people to rise up against the Palestinians for their freedom. But they were cautious on account of the multitude of the enemy. And the king called Samuel to him. And he promised to come after six days, and to sacrifice on the seventh, that so they might engage the foreigners. But Saul, seeing the people slipping away and abandoning him, sacrificed. And hearing that Samuel was now approaching, he went out to meet him. But he said, "What is this you have done, transgressing my command? Know, then, that your kingdom shall not stand, but the Lord shall seek a man after his own heart." And Samuel withdrew, but Saul and Jonathan his son came to Gabaa with six hundred soldiers. And the foreigners, divided into three parts, plundered the country of the Israelites. And Saul and Jonathan and Ahiah the high priest, seeing from a height what was being done, and not strong enough to defend on account of the fewness of their men, were grieved. But Jonathan, saying nothing to his father, went down from the hill with only his armor-bearer and said, "Let us attack the camp of the foreigners, and if they say to us, 'Stand off,' we will not go up to them, but if they say, 'Come up to us,' we must reckon the word a token of victory for us." And they set out for the camp of the enemy. And the foreigners said to them, "Come up to us, and we will make known to you a matter." This put courage into Jonathan; and withdrawing from there, he crept up from another side with his attendant and came upon the enemy while they slept. And they kill about twenty, and into the rest they put cowardice; who, thrown into confusion and fleeing, were destroyed by one another. And Saul, seeing the camp of the enemy thrown into confusion, and perceiving that his son was absent together with his armor-bearer, himself also attacks the disordered enemy; and those who before, out of fear, had hidden, taking courage, joined the king. And pursuing the enemy he kept killing them. So he laid a curse upon his own men, that if any one, ceasing from the slaughter of the enemy, should eat before night stopped them, he should die. And in the pursuit they came to a certain wood, in which there was a beehive, and Jonathan, taking a honeycomb, ate it; for he had not heard the curse of his father. And Saul, wishing to attack the camp of the enemy, asked God through the high priest whether He would grant victory. And when God did not reveal it, he sought the cause, and said, "I swear by God himself that I will kill the one who has sinned, even if it be Jonathan my son." And when they cast lots, the lot fell upon Jonathan. And he, being examined about the sin, said he was conscious of nothing in himself except that "yesterday, not knowing the curse, I tasted a honeycomb in the pursuit." And hearing this, his father swore that he would kill him. But the people swore in turn that they would not allow the author of the victory to die, and snatching him away, they propitiated God with prayers. And Saul, having destroyed about sixty thousand of the Palestinians, returned. And he subdues the Ammonites and Moabites and Palestinians and Idumaeans and Amalekites, and the king of Suba, and delivered Israel from the hand of the foreigners.

[125291] 29. Now Saul had three sons, Jonathan and Ishvi and Malchishua, and two daughters, Merob and Michal; and he had as commander-in-chief Abner, the son of Ner, his kinsman. And Samuel said to Saul that God commanded him to strike Amalek, and, when he had prevailed, to spare nothing—not women, not infants, not beasts of burden, not cattle—but to blot out his name from the earth. And Saul, engaging Amalek, conquers mightily and kills all, and takes captive also the king of the country, named Agag, and did not kill him, admiring him for his beauty and stature; and the choicest of the herds and flocks and the rest he kept for himself, forgetting the divine command. And Samuel, being informed by God, who said that He repented of having made Saul king, met the king. And he said that he gave thanks to God for granting him power over the enemy, and that he had done all that was commanded. And the prophet said, "I hear the bleating of beasts of burden and of other cattle. Whence are these?" And Saul said that the people had kept them for sacrifice to God, but that all the Amalekites had been destroyed except their king. To this Samuel said, "Since you have transgressed what was commanded you by God, know that you shall be deprived of the kingdom." And he confessed that he had sinned, and entreated the prophet to offer a propitiatory sacrifice. And as he withdrew, Saul lays hold of his cloak and tears it, forcing him to stay. And the prophet said, "So shall your kingdom be torn and given to a man righteous and good." And when the king still entreated, he is persuaded, and asks that Agag be brought, and when that man had been killed, at his command, he at once withdraws to Armathaim. And God commands him to go to Jesse and to anoint with oil for king one of his sons, whomever He should point out to him. And going to Bethlehem and sacrificing, he called Jesse and his sons. And seeing the firstborn, tall and fair, he supposed that God favored him. But God said, "Look not upon his appearance, nor upon the greatness of his body; for man looks upon the face, but God upon the heart." And when the other sons of Jesse had passed by, God favored none of them. And Samuel said, "The Lord has not chosen among these, and if there is yet one remaining, let him come." And Jesse said, "There is still left the youngest, tending the flock." So the prophet commanded that he be called. And when David came, being called—a ruddy youth with fair eyes and otherwise fair—God reveals to Samuel that this was the one to be anointed. And he, taking the horn of oil, anointed him in the midst of his brothers. And he went away to Armathaim. And a divine spirit leaped upon David, but departed from Saul, and an evil spirit pursued him, choking and tormenting the man. So it seemed good that there should stand by the king one who knew how to play the harp, that when the demon fell upon him and troubled him, he might play upon the harp and lull the disturbance. So he sends for David as such a one; and the young man was greatly loved by the king, and became his armor-bearer. And when the evil spirit came upon the king, David sang over him, and it departed, and Saul came back to himself. And the foreigners made war against the Israelites, and those of Israel set themselves against them. And in the space between the two armies a certain man of the foreigners stood—Goliath was his name—a powerful man towering above all, for his height was six cubits and a span, and his breastplate weighed five thousand shekels, and his spear was like a weaver's beam, and the head of the spear six hundred shekels; this man, standing in the midst, cried out to the sons of Israel, "Let one of you come down and stand against me; and if he strikes me, we will serve you, but if I lay him low, you shall be servants to us." And this he did for forty days. Now when Saul had sent David back to Jesse, his father sent him to the camp to bring provisions to his brothers who were in the army; for three of the elder ones were following Saul. And when David came to his brothers, the foreigner Goliath again, as was his custom, challenged to single combat and reproached the Hebrews because none dared to engage him. And hearing these words, David was indignant and said to those present, "I will fight him in single combat." This was reported to the king, and to David, standing before him, he said, "You will not be able to go in battle against this uncircumcised man, for you are still a boy." And David said he took courage in God, who had strengthened him against the bear and against the lion when they came upon the flock and snatched the young, whom, he said, he pursued and recovered what had been snatched, and struck the beasts and killed them. In Him, he said, he took courage, that He would grant him to strike down the foreigner too and to take away the reproach from the sons of Israel. So he said this, and the king permitted him to go, and put his own arms upon him. But they were a burden to him, and he took them off, and taking up his staff and putting five stones in his pouch and carrying the sling in his hand, he set out against the foreigner. And he laughed at him and asked whether he came against a dog with a staff and stones. And David answered that he reckoned him worse than a dog. And he, angered, and boasting that he would give his flesh to the birds and the beasts, rushed upon him. But David, being quick and putting a stone in the sling, struck the enemy upon the forehead. And the blow was mighty, and the foreigner fell upon his face. And David, running and drawing his sword, cuts off the head of Goliath and strips off his arms. This put cowardice into the foreigners, and they turned to flight. And Saul leads his own army against them as they fled; and a great multitude of the Palestinians is killed, and more are wounded, and their camp is plundered. And David brings the head of Goliath to Saul, but dedicates the sword to God.

[131254] 30. And as the army returned, the women met them, and dancing they sang that Saul had slain thousands, while the maidens answered in song that David had destroyed ten thousands. This stirred Saul to envy, and he said, "What is lacking to him but the kingdom?" And he looked askance at David. And when an evil spirit fell upon Saul, and David sang over him as was his custom, Saul threw his spear at him; and he did this twice. But David turned aside, for the Lord was with him. And the king, fearing him, made him a commander of a thousand, that going against the enemy he might be endangered. But he, with God as ally, prospered, and the people loved him, and the king's daughter Michal loved David. So her love was reported to the king, and he used the love as a handle for a plot. For he said that he would give him his daughter if he would bring him a hundred foreskins, supposing that he would fall fighting the foreigners. Learning this, David went with his men, and struck among the foreigners and brought Saul a hundred foreskins. (But Josephus says that David brought not a hundred foreskins, but six hundred heads of foreigners.) And he joins to him his daughter Michal. But seeing David both allied with God and beloved by the multitude, he feared still more, and plotted against him, and tried to kill him. So he commands his son Jonathan and his most trusted servants to do away with him. But Jonathan, loving David, reveals to him the command, and exhorts him to be on his guard, and promises to speak about him to his father and to disclose everything to him. And indeed he spoke and turned him to gentleness; for, changing his mind, Saul swore that he would do David no wrong. And Jonathan, having revealed this to David, brings him to the king, and he remained with him as before. And when the Palestinians stirred again and came against the Hebrews, David is sent by Saul to set himself against them, and returns with victory. But with the man's successes the envy against him grew in Saul. And when the evil spirit came upon him again and choked him, David was present, striking the harp and singing over him. And Saul, holding his spear, hurled it at David; but he, foreseeing it, turned aside and withdrew. And Saul sent guards by night to David's house, that he might kill him by day. But Michal his wife, learning this, let her husband down through a window, and he fled. And at dawn, when Saul sent for David, Michal, having prepared the bed as though someone lay in it, and having placed under the coverings the liver of a freshly slaughtered goat, so that by its movement the covering, being shaken, might give the appearance that someone lay upon the bed, brings in those who had been sent and says that the man is sick. And they reported it to Saul, and he commanded that he be brought to him on the bed. But those sent, going and lifting the covering of the bed, perceived the trick and reported it to the king. So David, having thus escaped death, came to Samuel at Armathaim and passed his time with him at Nabioth in Rama. So Saul sends there too those who should bring David. But they, going and finding an assembly of prophets, themselves also prophesied. Learning this, the king sends others, and when these too were likewise affected, he sent still others, and when the third group too had been seized by the spirit, he himself set out in anger, and drawing near, he himself also began to prophesy. At which time those present uttered the saying, "Is Saul too among the prophets?" And coming to where Samuel was, becoming as it were out of his mind and stripping off his clothing, he lay naked through a whole day and night.

[134916] 31. And David fled from there and made known to Jonathan his father's design against him; but he disbelieved it. And David asked him to make trial of his father's intent and to disclose it to him as he waited outside the city. So Jonathan, bringing words to his father about David, and having learned that his father's purpose thirsted for the man's death, reports everything to him secretly in person, and urges him to save himself. And he adjured David to remember him, and, even should he chance to die, to show some kindness to his offspring. Saying this, Jonathan returned, and David, fleeing to Nob, comes to Abimelech the high priest. And he inquired how he came alone. And David said that something secret had been commanded him by the king, "and that no one might know of it, I am alone; and here he ordered me to meet with my servants." Saying this, he asked for loaves. And the high priest said he had none but the holy ones, and, "If you have kept yourselves from a woman, take these and eat." And he asked that a sword too be given him. But the high priest answered that he had no other weapon except the sword of Goliath, which David himself had dedicated to God. And taking these, David went away to Gath, to Achish the king of the foreigners. And being recognized for who he was and taking fright, he feigned madness and behaved and acted as one out of his mind. And so, escaping safe from the foreigners, he comes to the tribe of Judah, and hides in the cave of Adullam. There his brothers and his kindred came to him; then others too flowed together there, so that all became about four hundred. And he goes from there to the Moabites, and begs the king of Moab to let his parents dwell with him until matters concerning him should come to some end. And he is persuaded and receives Jesse and his household. And David went into the land of Judah, since Gad the prophet commanded this. But Saul, learning that a multitude had gathered to David, called together his friends and reproached them as taking his part. And a certain servant of Saul, a Syrian by race, Doeg by name, who had been present when the high priest gave the loaves to David and the sword of Goliath, standing then beside him, reported to the king that he had seen David come to the high priest and inquire of God through him and receive provisions and the sword. And the king, summoning the high priest, charged him with conspiracy with David. And he commanded the armed men standing by him to kill the high priest and all his kindred; but when they shrank from laying hands on those consecrated to God, he orders Doeg to do the killing. And he killed them all, three hundred and five in number, and struck their city, killing all of full age, sparing neither women nor infants nor any other age. But one son of the high priest alone escaped death, called Abiathar, who, fleeing to David, reported what had happened. And when the foreigners had invaded Keilah and were plundering the country, David, at God's command, came upon them with the four hundred, and struck them and brought back all the spoil. But Saul sends a multitude of soldiers to do away with him there. And he went from Keilah into the wilderness. And Saul did not cease seeking to put him to death. And Jonathan came to David and encouraged him and exhorted him to have good hopes. And when David had taken refuge upon the rock in the wilderness of Maon, and Saul came upon him with a great multitude, David was in danger of being taken, had not a messenger come to Saul that the foreigners had attacked the country; for, leaving David, he set out against the enemy. Then it was reported to him that David was encamped in the wilderness of Gaddi, and taking three thousand he set out. And as he went he was troubled by his bowels. And there was a certain cave there, in which David and those with him were hidden farther within; into this Saul entered to relieve himself. And David was urged by those with him to kill Saul. But he was not persuaded; rather, he secretly cut off the skirt of his cloak and took it. And when the king had gone out, David came forward and called out after Saul. And the king turned at the voice. And David did obeisance and said, "Do not believe slanders. Behold, the Lord delivered you into my hands; for when in the cave I cut off the skirt of your cloak, it was easy for me to kill you also." And at the same time he showed him the piece, and cried out, "May the Lord judge between me and you." And Saul, pierced to the heart at this, lifted up his voice and, weeping, said to David, "You are righteous; for I have been the cause of evils to you, but you have repaid me with good. Whence I am persuaded that God is keeping you to be king of Israel. Give me, then, pledges that you will not destroy my house, but will preserve my line." And David swore to Saul, and they departed from one another.

[139801] 32. At that time too Samuel the prophet died, a righteous and good man, who had ruled Israel after Eli, alone for twelve years, but together with Saul for eighteen. And David went into the wilderness of Maon. And he sent to Nabal the Carmelite, a rich man who was shearing his flocks, those who should greet him and ask him to give to those with him and to himself, as he might choose, since they had kept his flocks and his shepherds untouched. But Nabal, being harsh and insolent, answered David's men inhumanly and shamelessly, saying, "Who is David, and who is the son of Jesse?" and calling him a runaway. At this David is angered, and swore to destroy all that belonged to Nabal, and set out against him with four hundred armed men. But Nabal's wife, being sensible and fair, having learned both how David had greeted her husband and how he had kept their property unharmed, and what blasphemous things Nabal had answered David, without communicating anything to her own husband, taking on donkeys gifts of every kind and many, set out to David. And meeting him, she did obeisance, and begged him not to bear a grudge against her husband; for his disposition was according to his name—for Nabal means "folly"—but to lay aside his anger and to receive what was offered. And he both praised the woman and, granting pardon, returned. And the woman, returning to Nabal, made known to him David's coming. And he, seized by fear and grief, surviving not more than ten days, broke off his life. And learning this, David sent to Abigail, wooing her for himself. And she said she was not worthy to dwell with such a man; nevertheless she went, and David took her as his wife. But Saul still plotted against him, and with three thousand chosen men encamps by the hill of Hachilah, where David was passing his time with the six hundred men who were with him. And by night David himself and Amesa went into the camp of Saul, and they entered where Saul was sleeping. And when Amesa set out to kill him, David did not allow it, but, taking the king's spear and the vessel of water, they went out without anyone perceiving, and this though Abner, the commander of his army, and many others lay around the king. And going up to the top of the mountain, David called out to Abner, "Why is it that you do not guard the king? For behold, some men came in to kill him, and you have not known it. Look, then, for the spear and the flask of water, and you will know what a danger has passed you by." And Saul, recognizing David's voice, and how he had spared him again when able to kill him, said that he had sinned and acted foolishly, and exhorted him to take courage and to return to his house. And he said, "May the Lord render to each according to his righteousness and his faith." And David went away with the six hundred who were with him to Achish the king of Gath, and passed four months there. And when the Palestinians wished to make war against Israel, Achish said to David, "Will you go out with me to the war, you and those with you?" And he readily promised to be his ally. But when the foreigners had now advanced into the country of the Israelites, Saul was thrown into confusion and inquired of God whether he should fight. And when He did not answer, he sought out a woman with a familiar spirit and went to her in disguise, that it might not be recognized who he was, and asked that the soul of Samuel be brought up for him. And when, by certain incantations, Saul supposed it had been brought up, he said, "I am greatly distressed, because the foreigners have gathered against me and the Lord has departed from me." And the phantom of Samuel answered, "The Lord has done to you what he foretold through me, and he takes away your kingdom and gives it to David, and subjects the people to the enemy; and you and your sons shall fall tomorrow." And Saul, greatly grieved at hearing this, departed. And the foreigners encamped, and David and the six hundred with him were behind. But it did not please the satraps that David should march with them, saying, "Lest he do us some harm by joining his own people in the battle," and they asked that he be sent back. And Achish, persuaded by the satraps, commanded David to depart. And he went away with those who were with him, and found Ziklag, which Achish had given him for a dwelling, burned with fire, and his two wives and all who were there taken captive by the Amalekites. And David and those with him lamented over this, and he asked God through the high priest Abiathar whether he should pursue after them. And when God permitted it, he pursued with the four hundred, leaving the two hundred to guard the baggage. And finding them scattered, eating and drinking, and falling upon them suddenly, he killed them all except four hundred who had fled on swift camels, and recovered all the spoil. But the four hundred with David, returning, were unwilling that the two hundred too should share with them, and demanded to be content with the recovery of their own wives. But David judged this opinion unjust, and declared that the gain should be divided equally among all. And from that time this became a law also, commanding that those who guarded the baggage should share equally in the spoils with those who fought. And when a battle broke out between the Israelites and the Palestinians, very many of the Hebrews are killed, and the three sons of Saul fell, and Saul himself was wounded in the lower abdomen. And knowing that he had been struck mortally and would not live, he told his armor-bearer to run him through, that he might not be taken alive by the enemy. And when he would not do what was commanded, Saul himself fell upon his sword and died. And his armor-bearer, when he saw the king fallen, killed himself also. And on the next day, while the foreigners were stripping the fallen of the Israelites, they came upon the bodies of Saul and his sons on the mountains of Gilboa, and cutting off their heads, they sent them into their own country, making a show of them everywhere and announcing the good news, and they dedicated their armor to their own gods, but crucified the bodies by the wall of Methsam, which was afterward called Scythopolis. But when the inhabitants of the city of Jabesh in Gilead learned what had befallen Saul, the strongest of them went out, and pressing their march through the whole night, they took down the bodies of Saul and Jonathan, and carrying them to Jabesh, they burned them, and gathering the bones, they buried them. And Saul reigned eighteen years while Samuel was still living, and after his death twenty-two.