WORK: Epitome of Histories, Volume 1  (slug: joannes-zonaras-epitome-of-histories-volume-1-d4bea2)

CHAPTER: 05-book-4



[107230] When, since no war was pressing, Demetrius reduced the soldiers' pay, and from this was hated by them, a certain general of Alexander, surnamed Tryphon, perceiving the hatred toward him, went to Malchus the Arab, and asked for the son of Alexander, Antiochus, who was being reared with him, saying that he would restore to him his ancestral rule; and Malchus gave him up. Demetrius, sending to Jonathan, asked for an alliance, promising him many favours. Jonathan therefore sent him three thousand men, through whom he routed the people of Antioch, who had risen against Demetrius out of the enmity they nursed because they were ill-treated by him; and he burned the city and killed many of them, until they were forced to lay down their arms and surrender themselves to him. So the revolt was ended; and Demetrius sent the Jews back to Jonathan, presenting them with gifts and acknowledging his gratitude to him. But later he broke his promises and threatened him with war. And he would have carried out his threats, had not Tryphon, returning from Arabia into Syria, set a diadem upon Antiochus, who was then a stripling, and stirred up war against Demetrius, the soldiers who had abandoned Demetrius because of the reduction of pay coming over to him. Tryphon, having gained the upper hand in the battle, took Antioch and the elephants. Demetrius went off to Cilicia; and the boy Antiochus summoned Jonathan to an alliance. He agreed to be his friend and ally, and undertook to make war on Demetrius, and at once set about the work. First he made many cities go over to Antiochus, having revolted from Demetrius; then, leaving his brother Simon in Judaea, he advanced against the generals of Demetrius. Simon besieged Bethsura, a place in Judaea held by Demetrius's men, who, hard pressed by the siege, on receiving pledges abandoned the place; and Simon set his own garrison in it. Jonathan, engaging the generals of Demetrius, both turned them to flight and, after killing about two thousand, returned to Jerusalem. And he sent an embassy to Rome, to renew the former friendship which they had with the nation. The members of the senate ratified again what had before been decreed. The envoys, on returning, came also to Sparta, having this too charged upon them by Jonathan. And the Spartans received the envoys kindly, and passed a decree concerning friendship and alliance with the Jews. But the generals of Demetrius, eager to retrieve their defeat, came against Jonathan with a larger force. He met them swiftly. Afraid to stand against him in open battle, they fled by night. By day, learning of their flight, Jonathan pursued, but did not overtake them; instead, coming into Arabia and falling upon the Nabataeans, and driving off much spoil from there and taking captives, he returned. Gathering the people, he advised them to renew the walls of Jerusalem and to set up again as much of the circuit of the temple as had been pulled down. The counsel pleasing all, he himself set to the work, and sent his brother Simon to secure the country.

[110286] Demetrius came into Mesopotamia, intending to take over Babylon and the upper satrapies. For the Greeks and Macedonians who dwelt there promised to surrender themselves to him and to help him make war on Arsaces the king of the Parthians; and so they received him. But joining battle with Arsaces, he lost his whole army and was himself captured. Tryphon, learning what had befallen Demetrius, plotted against Antiochus, contriving to kill him and usurp the rule. But he feared Jonathan, who was a friend of Antiochus. And he was eager first to take him by deceit, and so to attempt what concerned Antiochus. Therefore he went to Scythopolis, where Jonathan met him with forty thousand fighting men. Tryphon, dealing with him deceitfully, received him with gifts and honours, wishing to remove all suspicion, that he might take him off his guard. He advised him to dismiss his army, and himself to come with him to Ptolemais with a few men, to take over the city and all the strongholds there. Jonathan, suspecting nothing, sent back his army, and went off keeping only a thousand men. But being shut up in Ptolemais, he himself was taken alive, and those with him were destroyed. When those in Jerusalem learned this, they fell into fear because of the surrounding nations, which, learning of the seizure of Jonathan, had been stirred against the Jews. But Simon, conversing with the multitude and encouraging it, was chosen by it as leader, and gathering the fighting men of the people, he attended to the walls of the city, and took thought for all that concerned the security of affairs. Tryphon came into Judaea, leading Jonathan a prisoner. Simon met him with a force; and Tryphon sent to him, declaring that he would give a hundred talents of silver and two of Jonathan's sons as hostages, if he wished his brother to be released. Simon understood the villainy of Tryphon, but, that he might not be blamed for being unwilling to save his brother, sent both the money and the sons. Receiving these, Tryphon did not keep the agreement, but went up with his army toward Jerusalem. Simon followed alongside, always encamping opposite. But a heavy snowfall hindered his arrival at Jerusalem; and he turned aside into Syria, and as he departed killed Jonathan.

[112549] Simon, when his brother Jonathan was dead, after a high priesthood of four years, was himself put forward as high priest by the multitude, and no longer paid tribute to the Macedonians. The nation prospered greatly under him, and they mastered the surrounding nations, and subdued many of the cities, that they might not be bases for the enemy. And the mountain on which the citadel was built, being very high, by labouring continuously for three years they moved into a plain, so that the temple might stand above it.