WORK: Epitome of Histories, Volume 1  (slug: joannes-zonaras-epitome-of-histories-volume-1-d4bea2)

CHAPTER: 04-book-3



[108870] 22. Money came to Cyrus from the Indian, and those bringing it reported that the Indian said, "I am glad, Cyrus, that you made known to me concerning your needs, and I wish to be your guest-friend, and I send you money, and if you need more, send for it; and my men are charged to do whatever you bid." And Cyrus said, "I bid, then, that the rest remain where you have encamped and guard the money, but that three of you come to me into the enemy as though from the Indian about an alliance, and learning the things there, whatever they say and do, report to me and to the Indian as quickly as possible." So the Indians, having equipped themselves, set out the next day, and Cyrus prepared his war-affairs magnificently. For the Persian horsemen were now full to ten thousand, and there were scythe-bearing chariots to a hundred, and Abradates fashioned another hundred, and the Median chariots they put together, another hundred, remade in the same fashion from the Trojan and Libyan driving; and on the camels were posted two archers on each. As Cyrus's war-affairs were being so ordered, the Indians came from the enemy and said that Croesus had been chosen leader and general, and that many kings and many nations and Greeks were ready to ally. When Cyrus's army heard this, they fell into anxiety. When Cyrus perceived fear running through the army, he conversed with them and turned them to a more cheerful temper. Then he said, "It seems to me, men, that we should go against them as quickly as possible." And all agreed. Cyaxares, then, with a third part of the Medes remained behind, that the home country too might not be left desolate, but Cyrus went on as quickly as he could. When the advance scouts seemed to make out smoke or dust rising, and to see men taking fodder and wood, they guessed the enemy's army was somewhere near, and reported to Cyrus. He ordered them to remain at the lookouts and report whatever they saw, and sent a squadron of horse forward to take some prisoners. They, dashing down into the plain, seized men and brought them. And the captives said they were from the camp. And Cyrus said, "How far off from here is the army?" And they said, two parasangs. And he asked further, "Was there any talk of us among them?" "Yes, by Zeus," they said, "and much, that you were now near, approaching." "What then?" said Cyrus, "did they rejoice to hear we were coming?" "No, by Zeus," they said, "but were greatly grieved." "And who is it that marshals them?" said Cyrus. And they answered, "Croesus himself, and a certain Greek man, and a certain Mede, who was said to be a fugitive from you." And Cyrus to this, "O Zeus, may it be mine to take him as I wish." He ordered the captives to be led away. There was not much interval, and the scout sent long ago, Araspes, that is, is announced to be riding up. When Cyrus heard, leaping up he went to meet him and greeted him, while the others were astounded at the matter, until Cyrus said, "Friends, there has come to us a most excellent man, who went off not overcome by anything shameful, fearing me, but sent by me, that learning the enemy's affairs clearly he might report to us. All must therefore honour this man. For he both underwent dishonour and ran into danger for our good." From then all greeted Araspes. And Cyrus said, "Relate, Araspes, all that you have seen." And he related the number of the enemy and the place of their array and the plans of the enemy. And Cyrus ordered each to go off and inspect his own arms and horses, and at dawn to make ready for battle.

[112429] Then, then, they departed; and on the next day each armed himself, and Abradates, having drawn by lot to be posted opposite the Egyptians. As he was arming, Panthea brought a golden helmet and arm-pieces and bracelets about the wrists of his hands and a purple tunic reaching to the feet and a crest dyed hyacinth-blue, which she herself had made for her husband. And he, seeing them, said, "You surely, wife, having broken up your own adornment, made the arms for me?" "Yes, by Zeus," said Panthea, "for you are to me the greatest adornment." And saying this she put the arms on her husband, and tried to weep unseen, but the tears fell down her cheeks. When Abradates was now ready to mount the chariot, Panthea, bidding those present withdraw, said, "That I honour you, Abradates, even above my own life, I think you know; nevertheless, being so disposed toward you, I swear by my love and yours that I would rather, with you having proved a good man, be buried in common with you than live in shame with one who is shamed. And to Cyrus I think we owe great gratitude, that when I was made captive and chosen for him he treated me neither as a slave nor as a free woman in a dishonourable name, but kept me for you as one taking a brother's wife. Moreover, when Araspes who guarded me deserted from him, I promised him that, if he would let me send to you so that you should come, you would prove far more faithful and better than Araspes." So she spoke, and Abradates, marveling at her words, prayed, "Grant, O Zeus, that I appear a man worthy of Panthea and a friend worthy of Cyrus." Saying this he mounted the chariot.

[114056] 23. Cyrus, gathering the leaders, harangued them, encouraging them to the battle, and so set out to go. When they drew near the opposing forces, so as to see one another, Cyrus marshaled his men as well as possible, and going along the ranks he sharpened the men for battle with words. And Croesus, setting his own army opposite Cyrus's force, signaled to them to advance against the enemy. And three phalanxes came on, one in front, and of the two, one on the right, the other on the left, so that fear came upon all Cyrus's army; for it was surrounded by the enemy on every side except behind. Nevertheless Cyrus's men too, when he gave the order, all turned to face the enemy. And there was for a while much silence on every side; and when it seemed to Cyrus to be the time, he began a paean, and the whole army shouted it with him. And Cyrus rose up and with the horsemen engaged the enemy, while the foot drawn up with him followed. And Artagerses, commander of those on the camels, attacked on the left, sending the camels forward, as Cyrus had ordered. And the horses from afar would not endure them, but some fled, some leaped aside, some fell on one another. And the chariots, on the right and the left, charged at once, and many fleeing these were caught by them. And Abradates, crying "Friends, follow," drove on, sparing none of his horses; and the other charioteers charged with him. And Abradates broke into the phalanx of the Egyptians, and with him broke in those nearest posted, while the others swerved aside after the fleeing chariots. And those about Abradates, striking with the rush of the horses, overturned some and ran over those who fell; and whatever the scythes caught, all was forcibly cut through, both arms and bodies. In this indescribable confusion, the wheels leaping over the heaps of all sorts, Abradates falls out, and others too of those who had charged with him. And these were cut to pieces, while the Persians, following close, killed the disordered Egyptians, but those who held together advanced against the Persians; and there was a fierce battle. The Egyptians had the advantage both in number and in arms. The Persians could not hold out, but drew back step by step, striking and being struck, until they came under the engines. When they came there, the Egyptians were struck again from the towers. There was much slaughter of men, much din of arms, much shouting. Meanwhile Cyrus, pursuing those opposite him, comes up. And seeing the Persians forced from their ground, he was grieved, and ordering those with him to follow, rode round to the rear; and falling on them they killed many. When the Egyptians perceived it, they turned about. And foot and horse fought in confusion; and a man fallen under Cyrus's horse and being trodden struck his horse in the belly with a sword, and the horse, convulsing from the blow, shakes Cyrus off. And at once all cried out and falling on fought. And one of Cyrus's attendants, leaping down, set him on his own horse. And when he had mounted, he saw the Egyptians now being struck on every side. And going along by the engines he went up onto one of the towers, and looked down upon the plain full of horses, men, chariots, fleeing, pursuing, mastering, being mastered, but nowhere could he see anything still standing except that of the Egyptians. These, surrounded on every side, sat under their shields, doing nothing now, but suffering many and dreadful things. And Cyrus, admiring them and pitying them, that good men were perishing, allowed no one to fight with them any more, but sent heralds to them asking whether they wished all to perish or to be saved. And they said, "By doing what fair thing might we be saved?" And Cyrus said, "If you give up your arms to us, who choose to save you, though we might destroy you." Hearing this, the Egyptians gave pledges and received them.

[117933] Having accomplished this, Cyrus, now in the dark, withdrew and encamped. And those about Cyrus, having supped, slept; but Croesus at once fled to Sardis with his army, and the other nations withdrew in the night where they could. At dawn Cyrus led on toward Sardis, and coming to the city set up his engines and prepared ladders. On the following night he sent up Chaldaeans and Persians by what seemed the steepest part of the Sardian fortress. A Persian man, a slave of one of the guards on the citadel, led the way for these. When the heights were taken, the Lydians fled from the walls. Cyrus at daybreak entered the city, charging that no one from the ranks should move. Croesus, shut up in the palace, called for Cyrus. And Cyrus left guards over Croesus, and having encamped his men went off to Croesus. And seeing him Croesus said, "Hail, master." "And you too," said Cyrus, "Croesus. But would you be willing to give me some counsel?" "I would be willing," he said, "Cyrus." "I, then, Croesus," he said, "seeing the soldiers worn out and having run very many risks and now thinking they hold the richest city in Asia after Babylon, I judge it right that the soldiers be benefited, but I do not wish to let them plunder the city." And Croesus said, "But let me speak to those of the Lydians whom I wish, that I have brought it about with you that there be no pillage; and know that there will be for you, from willing Lydians, everything precious in Sardis. But first send to my treasures and take what you wish."

[119456] Cyrus agreed to do this, and they passed the day on these matters; on the next, Cyrus, calling some of his friends, ordered some to take the treasures, and others to take whatever money Croesus delivered. Then he asked whether anyone had seen Abradates; and when one of the attendants said that he had died in the battle, he struck his thigh, and leaping on his horse rode to him. And when he saw Panthea sitting on the ground and the corpse lying, he wept and said, "Alas, good and faithful soul." And the woman said, "I know that it was for my sake that he suffered this, and perhaps, Cyrus, for yours too. For I, fool that I was, often urged him to appear a friend worthy of mention to you, and he himself considered how he might do you a favour. And he has died blamelessly, while I, who urged him, sit beside him alive." And Cyrus for some time wept in silence, then spoke many consolations for the grief, and went off. And the woman bade the eunuchs withdraw, but told her nurse to remain and, when she was dead, to cover both her and her husband with one garment. The nurse sat weeping; but she slew herself, and laying her own head upon her husband's breast she died. And the nurse wailed and covered them both. And the eunuchs, learning what had happened, being three, drawing their scimitars, slew themselves. And Cyrus, when he perceived the woman's deed, admired her and mourned her, and heaped over them a vast monument, burying them magnificently.

[120919] 24. The Carians, having fallen into faction and warring with one another, both parties surrendered themselves to Cyrus; and those of Phrygia by the Hellespont gave very many gifts to Cyrus, so as not to receive barbarians into their walls, but to pay tribute to him and to march wherever Cyrus bade. But the king of the Phrygians prepared as if not about to make peace; and when his subordinates revolted from him, he came to grips with Hystaspes. And Hystaspes, leaving Persian garrisons in the heights, went off, bringing with his own men many Phrygian horsemen and peltasts. And Cyrus set out from Sardis, leaving a garrison in Sardis, having Croesus with him bringing very many wagons full of much and varied money, and having accurately written down how much was in each wagon. And he gave the writings to Cyrus; and Cyrus said, "You have done well, Croesus; but those who have taken the money will surely bring it all to me, and if they steal anything, they will steal their own." And Croesus brought also many Lydians, splendidly armed.

[121964] Going on toward Babylon, Cyrus subdued the Phrygians in Greater Phrygia, and subdued the Cappadocians, and made subjects of the Arabians; and from all these he equipped of the Persians horsemen not fewer than forty thousand, and to all the allies he distributed many of the captured horses. He came, then, to Babylon bringing many horsemen, and many archers and javelin-men, and slingers innumerable. When he was at Babylon, he set the army about it, and himself, going round with the commanders of the allies and his friends, surveyed the walls. Then he brought the army up and encamped about the city. And seeing the river there flowing into the city and passing through the middle of Babylon, he disclosed his plan to no one, but ordered a trench to be dug around the camp, broad and very deep, that they might perhaps need the fewest guards in the camp. Those making the trench dug a moderate distance from the river, and threw the earth toward the camp; and the Babylonians laughed at the siege, as having provisions for more than twenty years. When the trench was dug, Cyrus, watching for a night on which he knew the Babylonians would keep a feast, drinking and reveling the whole night, on this gathered a multitude and opened the trenches to the river—this is the Euphrates, as Herodotus relates; and the water passed into the trenches in the night, and the channel of the river through the city became passable for men, the water being diverted. Then, sending down into the dry bed of the river attendants and foot and horse, he ordered them to see whether it was passable. Meanwhile, conversing with the leaders of the multitude and rousing them to the work, at last he said, "Come, take up your arms; I will lead; and do you, Gobryas and Gadatas, show the ways, knowing them. And when we are within, lead with all speed to the palace." Upon this they went. And going as quickly as they could, those with Gobryas and Gadatas came to the palace, and found the gates shut, and fell upon the guards as they drank. When a cry and tumult arose, those within, the king having ordered them to see what the matter was, opened the gates, into which the enemy fell and came to the king. And they found him already standing and drawing the scimitar he had. And him those with Gadatas and Gobryas overpowered, and those with him died, some defending themselves, some giving way. And Cyrus sent the squadrons of horse through the streets, having proclaimed that whomever they took outside they should kill, but should proclaim to those in the houses, those who knew how to speak Syriac, to remain within, and that if anyone were caught outside, he would die. Meanwhile Gobryas and Gadatas came, and because they had avenged themselves on the unholy king, first they worshipped the gods, then kissed Cyrus's hands and feet.

[124786] Xenophon, relating the affairs of Cyrus, does not give the name of the captured king of the Assyrians; but Josephus, in the tenth book of the Antiquities, records that this was that Baltasar to whom also the hand appeared coming forth from the wall and writing the letters already mentioned, whose interpretation Daniel explained.

[125118] 25. When day came, the holders of the citadel, perceiving that the city was taken and their king dead, surrendered the citadel too. And Cyrus sent into them commanders and guards. Then, calling the magi, since the city was spear-won, he ordered firstfruits to be set apart for the gods, and he distributed houses and public buildings to those who had shared in his deeds; and for himself he intended to prepare a manner of living befitting a king. But that he might not become an object of envy to his friends, he wished to do this with their consent, and conversing with them, by what he said he persuaded them to ask for this. From there he enters the palace, and sets guards about himself, and those who tended his person he gelded and made eunuchs, and chose for bodyguards Persians to the number of ten thousand, and in the city he posted sufficient guards. Having done this, he trained the more honoured of the army not to live without toil and in luxury; and over other matters he set other overseers—receivers of revenues, I mean, and dispensers of expenditures, superintendents of works and guardians of possessions, and overseers of provisions for living, and managers of horses and dogs; but those whom he thought should be guardians of his prosperity, the care of these he assigned to himself. And since to benefit men with money was added to him, he knew that no benefit is more pleasing to men than the giving of food and drink; therefore he ordered much to be set before him like what he himself ate, and enough for very many, and what was set out, except what he and his fellow-diners used, he distributed. And he became the most generous of men. But to surpass in the greatness of gifts, being the richest, is no marvel; but to surpass, while a king, in the care and attention to friends, this is more noteworthy. And a saying of his is remembered, that the works of a good herdsman and of a king are alike; for he said the herdsman should use his beasts after making them well-fed, and the king likewise should use cities and men after making them prosperous.

[127197] It is said too that Croesus once said to him that by giving much he would become poor, and was asked by Cyrus, "How much money do you think I would now have, if I had been collecting gold as you bid since I have been in the rule?" And Croesus said some large number. And Cyrus said, "Come now, Croesus, send a man with this Hystaspes. And you, Hystaspes, going round to the friends, tell them that I need money for a certain undertaking, and bid them, each as much as he can, provide me money, and writing it and sealing it, give the letters to Croesus's servant." And writing and sealing all that he charged Hystaspes, he gave it to him to carry to the friends. And he wrote to all to receive Hystaspes as his friend. When he had gone round and Croesus's servant had brought the letters, Hystaspes said, "Cyrus, king, use me now too as a rich man; for I am present with very many gifts because of your letters." And Cyrus said, "Here is one treasury for us, then, Croesus; but survey the others, and reckon how much ready money I have, if I need to use any." It is said that Croesus, reckoning, found many times more than he had said would be in the treasuries for Cyrus if he had been collecting; and upon this Cyrus said, "You see, Croesus, that I too have treasures."

[128470] It having seemed good to him to make a procession to the precincts set apart for the gods, calling those who held office among the Persians and the rest, he distributed to them Median robes; and then first the Persians put on the Median robe. When he had distributed the finest robes to the best men, he brought out other Median robes too—for he had prepared very many, sparing neither purple nor dark nor scarlet nor crimson garments—and apportioning to each of the leaders a part of them, he ordered them to adorn their subordinates with these. And one of those present asked him, "And you, Cyrus, when will you adorn yourself?" And he said, "Do I not seem to you now to be adorning myself, while adorning you? For if I can do good to my friends, in whatever robe I am, in that I shall appear fair." Having made the procession and sacrificed to the gods, he dined with his friends, seating those whom he most honoured at his left hand, as being more open to plot against than the right, and the rest at his right. After supper he sent home those who had allied with him as volunteers, except those who wished to remain with him; to these he gave land and houses. And to those who departed, both soldiers and officers, he gave many gifts. Then to the soldiers and officers about him he distributed all the money he had taken from Sardis according to each one's worth. And when they had received what was given, they said of Cyrus, "Surely he himself has much, since he has given so much to each of us too." But others said, "It is not Cyrus's way to amass money, but he delights more in giving than in getting." Perceiving this, Cyrus gathered his friends and all the men of standing and said, "It seems to me a mark of the simplest character for the ruler, having made his power manifest, to contend on the basis of it for nobility. And I, then," he said, "wish to show you all that I have that can be seen, and what cannot be seen, to describe." Saying this, he showed much fair money, and described what was so stored as not to be easily seen. And he said, "Men, you must consider these no more mine than yours; for I gather these that I may have something to give to whoever of you does any fair thing, and that, if any of you needs anything, he may take it by coming to me."

[130752] 26. When he had set the affairs in Babylon in good order, he made ready to go off to Persia. And as, journeying, he came to Media, Cyrus turned to Cyaxares, and greeting him said that a house had been chosen for him in Babylon, and gave him many fair gifts. And Cyaxares sent to him his daughter, bringing a golden crown and bracelets and a necklace and a most beautiful Median robe. And the girl crowned Cyrus, and Cyaxares said, "I give you, Cyrus, this very woman to wife, being my daughter, and I give with her as dowry all Media; for I have no legitimate male child." And Cyrus said, "The lineage, Cyaxares, I commend, and the girl and the gifts, but I wish to marry her with the consent of my father and mother." And saying this he journeyed to Persia. Coming to the borders of the Persians, he left the army there, and himself with his friends entered the city, bringing victims enough for all the Persians to sacrifice and feast. He brought gifts for his father and mother such as was fitting, and for his friends such as befitted magistrates and elders; and he gave to all Persians, and indeed to Persian women too. And having spent some time with his parents, he departed. And coming to Media, with his father's consent he married the daughter of Cyaxares; and having married, at once taking her with him he set out.

[132080] When he came to Babylon, he sent satraps to the subdued nations—to Arabia, that is, and Cappadocia, to Greater Phrygia, to Lycia and Ionia, to Caria, to Phrygia by the Hellespont and Aeolis. To the Cilicians and Cyprians and Paphlagonians he did not send satraps, because they seemed to march with him willingly; yet these too paid tribute. And that, his rule being great, reports might be conveyed to him quickly even from afar, he considered how long a road a horse driven hard could accomplish, and he made horse-stations so far apart from one another, and set horses in them and those who cared for them, and posted at each a suitable man to receive the dispatches conveyed and to deliver them, and to take the worn-out horses and send others fresh.

[132835] When a year had now passed he made a campaign, in which he is said to have subdued all the nations that dwell from where one enters Syria as far as the Red Sea. After this he marches against Egypt and subdues it too; so that from there his rule was bounded on the east by the Red Sea, on the north by the Euxine Sea, on the west by Cyprus and Egypt, and Ethiopia on the south. And he himself, making his abode in the midst of these, passed seven months in Babylon, the winter season, for this country is warm, three months about spring in Susa, and in Ecbatana two months he spent, the height of summer.

[133440] Having so lived, and being now very old, Cyrus comes to Persia for the seventh time, his parents having long since died. And as he slept in the palace, there seemed to him in a dream one greater than a man to come to him, saying, "Make ready, Cyrus; for now the gods summon you." From this he guessed that the end of his life was at hand, and on the third day he called his sons, for they accompanied him, and his friends and the rulers of the Persians, and said, "To me the end of life is now at hand, and I must make clear concerning the kingdom, to whom it shall belong after me, that it may not, becoming disputed, cause you trouble. You, then, Cambyses, being the elder, hold the kingdom, the gods granting and I; and to you, Tanaoxares, I give to be satrap of the Medes and Armenians and Cadusians." Having charged his sons with these things and exhorted them much, and having addressed those present and given his right hand to all, he covered himself and so departed. And when he was gone, at once his sons fell into faction, and cities and nations revolted, and all turned to the worse.

[134537] These things, then, are related by Xenophon concerning Cyrus; but Herodotus of Halicarnassus says other things about Cyrus's upbringing and end and the rest of his life, which it would be long to relate. And for me, who have made an epitome of history, it is not fitting to set down a work of many lines; but I myself have written the more probable things, and whoever wishes to know what Herodotus too wrote about him, taking up his book will find these things in the first book, to which he gave the title of the first of the Muses, Clio.