WORK: Studies in Hegelian Cosmology  (slug: john-mctaggart-studies-in-hegelian-cosmology-f3efa4)

CHAPTER: 09



[109708] Does he mean, however, to limit this assertion to the past, and only to say that no religion has come so near to absolute truth as Christianity does? Or would he go further, and say that it would be impossible that any religion, while it remained religion, should ever express the truth more adequately than Christianity? I am inclined to think that he would have been prepared to make the wider assertion. Nothing less would justify the strength of his language in calling Christianity the absolute religion. Moreover in all the applications of his philosophy to empirical facts, he shows a strong tendency to suppose that the highest manifestation of Spirit already known to us is also the highest which it is possible should happen – although the degree in which he yields to this tendency has been exaggerated. This more sweeping assertion we must pronounce to be unjustified.

[110590] We cannot be certain of the future except by an argument a priori, and arguments a priori can only deal with the a priori element in knowledge.

[110735] No conclusion about the nature of the empirical element in knowledge can be reached a priori. Now the degree of adequacy with which a religion can express absolute truth depends on the precise character of its symbolism. And the precise character of the symbolism of any religion is an empirical fact, which cannot be deduced a priori.

[111072] It is therefore impossible to be certain that no religion will arise in the future which will express the truth more adequately than Christianity.

[111220] It may be said, indeed, that such a religion would be improbable. It might be maintained that Christianity gets so near to absolute truth, that if people got any nearer they would have reached the truth itself, and require no symbols at all. But of this it is impossible to be certain. New religions cannot be predicted, but it does not follow that they are impossible.

[111591] 263. The truth of Hegel’s statement however, if it is confined to the past, cannot be denied. No religion in history resembles the Hegelian philosophy so closely as Christianity. The two great questions for religion – if indeed they can be called two – are the nature of the Absolute and its relation to the finite. The orthodox Christian doctrines of the Trinity and the Incarnation are not, as we have seen, compatible with Hegel’s teaching. But they are far closer to that teaching than the doctrines of any other religion known to history.

[112136] In this way, and this way, I believe, alone, the difficult question of Hegel’s relation to Christianity admits of a solution. The difficulty is increased by a change in Hegel’s method of exposition when he reaches the Absolute Religion. In dealing with the lower religions, he had described those religions in the form in which they were actually held by those who believed them – or, at any rate, in what he believed to be that form – and had’ then pointed out in what degree they fell short of absolute truth. But, when he came to Christianity, he did not expound the Christian doctrines themselves, but that absolute truth which, according to him, they imperfectly symbolised. This not unnaturally produced the impression that the doctrines of Christianity not only symbolised the absolute truth, but actually were the absolute truth. But closer examination dispels this, for it shows, as I have endeavoured to show in this Chapter, that Hegel’s doctrines are incompatible with any form of Christianity which has ever gained acceptance among men.

[113187] 264. Thus the result is that Hegel does not regard his system as Christian but holds Christianity to be the nearest approach which can be made to his system under the imperfect form of religion. And that he is right in both parts of this – the positive and the negative – may be confirmed from experience.

[113494] Christian apologists have not infrequently met the attacks of their opponents with Hegelian arguments. And so long as there are external enemies to meet, the results are all that they can desire. Against Scepticism, against Materialism, against Spinozistic Pantheism, against Deism or Arianism – nothing is easier than to prove by the aid of Hegel that wherever such creeds differ from orthodox Christianity, they are in the wrong. But this is not the end. The ally who has been called in proves to be an enemy in disguise – the least evident but the most dangerous.

[114062] The doctrines which have been protected from external refutation are found to be transforming themselves till they are on the point of melting away, and orthodoxy finds it necessary to separate itself from so insidious an ally.

[114291] This double relation of Hegelianism to Christian orthodoxy can be explained by the theory which I have propounded. If orthodox Christianity, while incompatible with Hegelianism, is nevertheless closer to it than any other religion, it is natural that Hegelianism should support Christianity against all attacks but its own, and should then reveal itself as an antagonist – an antagonist all the more deadly because it works not by denial but by completion.