WORK: Letters of Lord Acton to Mary Gladstone  (slug: john-emerich-edward-dalb-letters-of-lord-acton-to-mary-gl-faa6fd)

CHAPTER: 02-letters-of-lord-acton



[330194] Here and at King's I have been seeing Holmes, who is reaping a harvest he never sowed, and was very well received by the insolent youths in the Senate House yesterday.

[330363] I hope I did not say too much against your friend and possible comforter, Carlyle. Lamartine is certainly much more inaccurate; yet Pontécoulant, who died under the Second Empire, and whom Charlotte Corday chose as her defender, said that the Girondins were substantially a true picture, and made his nerves tingle much as they did in 1792.

[330705] There is a good deal of that general reality which comes from vigour of thought and vivid expression in Carlyle, and he is good for reading aloud and discussing loudly. But he wrote before the materials existed. The first serious history was written by Droz, a year or two later, who had the then unpublished memoirs of Malouet, and so made a good book, obsolete since the printing of Malouet Probably Carlyle, in later editions, took hints from him. But it is surprising how few of the books we now rely on existed in 1838.

[331231] Michelet in 1847 first examined the papers of the Commune; Sybel, in 1853, first saw those of the Foreign Office; Mortimer Ternaux, those of the Home Office.

[331390] Only after all that, things began to be seen in their concatenation, we still are ignorant of the most essential things.

[331512] Therefore, I beseech you, read Carlyle without too much reliance. He is suggestive, and even impressive; but it is only en grand, telescopically, that he is true: after Sybel, Tocqueville, Taine, and Quinet there is little that will stand scrutiny in his pages. One goes to him for literature, not for history. Nevertheless, I have given him to my children because he sets the brain on fire and is open to discussion.

[331931] A mild attempt to attract your father to Cannes for the early winter failed conspicuously. I had dreamt of raising all the problems of his career and getting him to pass everything in vivid review.

[332130] Perhaps the Granvilles would have come too. I see that, in pursuing the topic of Mrs. Craven's publication, the scheme of setting his papers in order has been divulged.

[332300] We had rather a good time at the Wolvertons'. As you will hear all about it from two witnesses on Monday, let me prepare you with impartial observation. Foreseeing that Wolverton would try to burn other ships besides his own, I could not help advising Lord Granville not to attend the meeting at Templecombe; but as that reason could not be stated I suppose it remained unguessed, and left room for conjecture. Wolverton was a good deal wilder than anybody could have foreseen, and enjoyed himself thoroughly. I had a most welcome opportunity of getting the measure of John Morley. He did not speak in a way to carry away his audience. P. Mahony said that it is nonsense to apprehend anything for the Irish Protestants. His wife and little children were in Kerry, alone among Irish Catholics, miles from any Protestant neighbour; yet he was in Dorset, not at all uneasy, etc. John Morley thought this rather a fine stroke, as if the conduct of the majority on the morrow was prefigured by their conduct on the eve.

[333316] I found a wider rift He sees nothing in politics but higher expediency and no large principles. As there are, for him, no rights of God, there are no rights of man—the consequence, on earth, of obligation in Heaven. Therefore he never tries to adjust his view to many conditions and times and circumstances, but approaches each with a mind uncommitted to doctrines and untrammelled by analogies. It is useless to speak to him of the application of democracy to land in Ireland as part of a process going through many countries, or of Home Rule as a question tried in a long series of instances (seven or eight at least), under the pressure of one far-reaching force.

[333984] The consequence of this propensity of mind is that he draws his conclusions from much too narrow an induction; and that his very wide culture—wide at least for a man to whom all the problems, the ideas, the literature of religion are indifferent and unknown—does not go to the making of his policy.

[334284] These are large drawbacks, leaving, nevertheless, a mind of singular elasticity, veracity, and power, capable of all but the highest things. He seems to me to judge men dispassionately. He has by no means lost his old admiration for Chamberlain, but it is balanced by a rising reliance on Harcourt's ability and resource. He cleaves to Spencer, and is but little drawn towards Trevelyan or Bryce or Rosebery. He has strong underground links with Courtney. I very much hope you will make much of him at Hawarden.

[334797] I received your letter during a visit with Mamy at Holmbury, where I had the room in which you heard Argyll discoursing to himself. They were expecting S. Rendel to bring Morley to dinner.

[334987] The great bulk of cultured men in our day do not believe that politics are a branch of Moral Science. They think that politics teach what is likely to do good or harm, not what is right and wrong, innocent or sinful. If I say: “I owe this man half-a-crown. He is sure to get drunk on it; shall I pay him?” They will answer—Certainly; you must do your duty, in private life, and wherever the plain rules of morality or the applicable laws extend, regardless of consequences. But they would not admit a like obligation in politics. America cannot be taxed because it is not represented. Civil disabilities for religion must be abolished. Slavery must be put down. The tyranny of Indian princes must be repressed, etc., etc., etc. Such propositions they would deny absolutely. They would say: “It is highly desirable—not obligatory. We must consider consequences, balance probabilities, estimate forces, choose the lesser evil. Until it can be shown that oppression, repression, suppression, damage the interests of the State, there is no good reason to interfere with them. If the State would be greater, stronger, richer, by keeping down part of its subjects, by denying education, by restraining labour, by working children to death in factories, by wars for prestige, etc., etc., etc., then those things are lawful by the only test known to politics. You must keep your promises and pay the public debt, because the law of common morality goes as far as that. But the law of common morality is silent as to questions that exist only in a political shape. Those can only be treated experimentally, by the Baconian methods. There is no code of political morality distinct from or beyond the limits of private. There is no such thing as political science; men do not lose their souls by political, as they do by domestic, error. Whoever does not see this is a doctrinaire, a fanatic, an unfit survival from the dogmatising and abstract epoch, before the reign of Induction.”

[336961] Thus Maine, Stephen, Dilke, all men who live in diplomacy, all men concerned with India, all men belonging to the Services. Above all, this is part of the teaching of Burke, and from him Morley has adopted it.

[337172] Newman and Keble are the two types. When Newman moaned and murmured at the Disestablishment policy, Keble said, “But isn't it just?” Newman must have thought that the good man was getting a little weak. At Christmas 1885, when Bryce came to Cannes and talked about Home Rule, I said, “Remember, it will break up the Liberal Party.” I could not have said such a thing to Morley, or Newman, or Maine. They would have replied, “You cannot be sure that this policy will succeed in Ireland; you are persuaded that it will grievously injure political life in England. What else have you to go upon?” Bosworth Smith spoke to me in almost these very terms, and evidently felt that he had said what could not be answered.

[337886] But this negation of a science of political ethics, this repudiation of political principle, does not depend on men's attitude to religion. Political Economy and Criminal Law were the first branches of practical politics that assumed a scientific form. The founders of the former, Hume, Quesnay, Smith, Turgot, were all unbelievers. So were the reformers of Criminal Law, Beccaria, Morellet, Bentham. Jefferson, who wrote the American Rights of Man, Lafayette and Sieyes, who composed the French, were all alike unbelievers.

[338412] There is a very strong tendency to substitute for a religious system another system of obligations, equally determined and absolute, but not at all religious. Especially nowadays when unbelief in the shape of doubt is yielding to unbelief in the shape of certain conviction.

[338688] And in these things the influence of religion is by no means certain. It has often been opposed to the theory of the divine right of man. As the history of persecution, of slavery, shows, quite naturally. The New Testament, which deals so largely with private morality, deals very little with public, and introduced only one political idea beyond the Hellenic horizon. If, therefore, we admit the authority of a binding system, independent of religion, we raise up a rival power, in morals as in science. Our conduct becomes subject to a law which is not that of the Church, which may deviate from it, and which, at certain points, inevitably collides with it. We live under a divided reign. Christianity becomes an influence instead of an authority, a prop, but not a sufficient guide. The surrender of one bit of its domain to the mathematicians, of another to the economists, of a third to the politicians, may be followed by further encroachment from biologists, evolutionists, and Monistic philosophers.

[339698] That is the line of reasoning which makes religious belief a weak security for political principle, unless the faith of men is thoroughly sincere, and even men thoroughly sincere may object that they know not which political theory or which system of the Rights of Man is so surely the right one that, where it commands, they must prefer it to their religion. No consensus, no Vincentian Rule, exists that can decide this question.

[340131] Therefore, although I fully admit that political Rights proceed directly from religious duties, and hold this to be the true basis of Liberalism, I do not mean to say that there is no other foundation for a system of right for men who know of no relations between man and God. Indeed I gathered that Burke and Austin had deleteriously influenced Morley in this respect, and that he easily submitted to their influence, having no conception of certain rights that are divine.

[340607] Let me add, as I am disparaging Burke, that he is not consistent, and there is another strain in his web. But if he had not taken the lower level in the American question, he would have been forced into an attitude on Irish questions, and perhaps on parliamentary reform, which would have isolated him and alienated his friends, who were also his patrons, in the British aristocracy.

[340992] This is why I thought Mahony wrong. No doubt, some people would say, there is no security for Protestants among Catholics. These are essentially fanatical, etc. To such people the answer is sufficient But then such people are not serious, and the argument was open to a decisive reply.

[341279] One must never suppose one's adversary foolish, but must meet his argument in its strongest form. The strongest form in this case, the real objection, is this. The Irish detest the Protestants, as represented by people like Cairns. They will be under the influence of priests who think that every Protestant deserves the death of a dog, and are restrained from inflicting it by a wide consideration of consequences, not by conscience. It is not safe to commit a Protestant minority to such keeping. They will try to boycott them in detail, to take away their institutions, to injure them in education, in appointments, socially, etc., etc. This peril ought to be provided against. No such provision is made by the Liberals, because they deny the danger. Therefore it is wiser not to expose the minority to it. What we apprehend is not an explosion of violence, but a subtle, crafty, gradual, slowly working sap. Nothing of the sort is to be feared at a moment when Scotch and English opinion has to be won over, while they depend on the support of British Protestants. Least of all is it to be feared by a Protestant who is one of their champions. For that would deprive them of all Protestant support, and drive them from operation by craft to operation by violence. It would be an act of madness. Now nothing is more sure than that the Irish cause is managed with the greatest art and calculation.

[342680] One's memory is both a fragile and a treacherous thing, and if the guardians of Keble's reputation doubt, I am sure I cannot substantiate my story. But my impression is that I read it in Sir J. Coleridge's Life of K. There Newman relates how he went to see his old friend, and found Pusey there; and either then, or at another interview, if there was another in the last year or two of Keble's life, the conversation must have taken place which, in my recollection, has probably taken a wrong shape.

[343181] Coleridge's book must be in the Chapel of Ease. When you have verified, please put me out of my pain. I hope it was clear that I spoke of Irish Disestablishment. The case in England might be or become a strong one; but that plain elementary quality of Justice it can never have in our time. The Northern Miner's speech is as fine as Keble's supposed one. But that is not one of those matters to which Justice applies entirely, excluding Policy. France was built up by the agency which we absurdly call the Salic Law.

[343699] There is a reason why you should not be surprised or disappointed at the touch of failure in men like the Dean of St. Paul's; but it is hard to expound without offence to the sister, wife, and cousin of so many Anglican divines.

[343929] It was very interesting to arrive at Sudbury just when the echoes of Nottingham and Derby were still sounding. The effect had been quite satisfactory, and was even more than Midland residents expected. There was a slight trace or flavour of a policy accepted by the speaker, rather than proceeding from him. I mean that sort of conference with wirepullers and understanding with local managers which does not always leave him quite at his ease. It belongs to the new system of limited leadership and partnership tenure of authority, of divided and intermittent action, which is having the effect of giving so much prominence to Harcourt, at a time when there is no peer who could possibly lead. And so it brings the thought of coming danger to my mind.

[344683] The attack of hoarseness was remarkable, because it was so rapidly overcome.

[344761] There was a curious incongruity in our group at Sudbury. The master of the house, bewildered at his prominence, but true to the accepted position, and otherwise free from the gnawing cares of thought. … A Bessarabian taking the opportunity to do a little Staffordshire politics. A sadly failing and discontented old Hellenist, in whom the world has lost, or overlooked, the raw material of a skilled intriguer. A high priest of Positivism, in go-to-meeting garb, very attentive to the local sermon, and only regretting that he was out of reach of the Oratory. Lastly, the second in command, hitting rather wide at the good name of Burke, and occasionally giving a good “contrapelo rub.” For myself, I was as happy as could be when your father was about, and vainly forbidden to speak; and at other times I was immersed in rare treatises on Dante, which I never saw elsewhere.

[345638] Otherwise I was not going to festive scenes while Maine lay unburied. He had not been living at the Madeleine, but at the Hotel Montfleury close by, with Dick's tutor. There he was struck down, and after two days died without coming to himself. Next morning Lady Maine arrived, unprepared, and had to learn at the station that she came too late. She has borne it well. We have all combined to conceal from her that Maine's splendid mind was beginning to decay. There were moments when he terribly reminded me of Cardwell at the same place, eight years ago. At times he was nearly as good as ever, and quite happy about himself; only disinclined to study, and a Tory of the most ordinary and uninteresting type.

[346350] Fustel de Coulanges, who is to pronounce his éloge at the Institute, and who is here, very ill, tells me that he considers him the first historian of our epoch. I saw that most of the English here called him Sir Richard, and thought he was the retired chief of the police. When he did not come to us, Dick used to go and dine with him, and I think it was useful to him to hear so able a man even at second-best.

[346763] An early telegram of mine to Humphry Ward getting the benefit of Sunday, produced that remarkable notice in the Times by its least Tory contributor. I have advised that Maine's recent Lectures on International Law be carefully revised before publication. Even in the summer, when he was preparing them, I could not induce him to read books he was not familiar with.

[347130] We had an extremely jolly time at Cambridge, and Rosebery stood very generously and manfully the touch of ridicule which attaches to guests of Oscar Browning. One observed your mother on the best of terms with triumphant Lady Salisbury. Once I had to take in Lady Sophia Palmer, with whom it turned out that I had a good deal in common. And at one of the dinners I had good entertainment between her father and Balfour, who poked up the astronomers near us, and compelled them to be interesting.

[347627] For myself, there was a touch of sadness, as Cambridge only knew me through Maine, and I missed him sadly. His son, too, died just then. I was a good deal struck with the want of softness and sympathy in the way men remember him.

[347858] At Oxford I spent some days in still more Tory company, living with Dicey, and fed at All Souls. I arranged with Warren for Dick to go to Magdalen, and everybody I consulted—Talbot, Liddon, Paget—decidedly approved my choice. I thought Jowett weaker than last year and more vague. Bright is such a good fellow and good Liberal, for the head of the Cecilian College; and you must read his new volume on England from 1735 to 1880. John Morley, after trying to get Mr. Gladstone to write the life of his cherished Elizabeth, in the “Statesmen” series, asked me to dinner, and I made acquaintance with his gracious wife. I tell him that his lecture on aphorisms is not worth much; and he says it is my fault for giving him bad suggestions. There is a Conservative inside him. We held discourse about Mr. Pitt, distressing to ears as sensitive as mine. I ended by telling him that I would have hanged Mr. Burke on the same gallows as Robespierre. Tableau.

[348810] Under the influence of the funeral minute-guns I put on paper what seemed good to say about the Emperor; but your father declined with thanks, and then advised the Contemporary to get me to write an article on him—declined ditto. His speech was extremely solemn and impressive.

[349089] I am to review Bright's new History. He is such a good fellow—all round—and the only Liberal Head of a House, and likely to be Dick's only protection against the prevalent Conservatism of Oxford, that I want to do him honour. So much so, that another man having undertaken to do it, I have suffered Creighton to put him off for my sake.

[349427] Here is my difficulty:—

[349452] Bright says, page 444: “A letter in which four years previously he had declared the question of disestablishment in Ireland to lie beyond the field of practical politics was alleged in proof of his rapid change of front.”

[349675] I ought to know all about this letter, but I have forgotten it. And this is my fix.

[349760] When I first met you at Cliveden, he and I had a very memorable talk on this question. The result was, that I not only understood that he was going to disestablish, but that he was going along the path leading to where he stands now.

[349995] I have always kept that day, March 31, 1864, as the date of getting the future policy of Liberalism quite clear before me. Something of this I intended to testify in reviewing Bright.

[350180] But here is his description of that letter. I cannot make out its date, and I do not know its terms, and how far they were guarded.

[350313] No doubt all this came out later, in 1868, when he gave a sort of autobiography. But I am out of the way of all books. And so my question is: May I say that the change of front in 1867, 1868, was at least as old as March 1864—as a thing inevitable and foreseen, if not as a thing actually done?

[350609] And secondly: Is the refusal to form a ministry with Lord Lansdowne, after the Crimean War, still a secret?

[350718] I remember a letter of Roundell Palmer's going back even farther than our meeting at the Duchess of Sutherland's, which Ronald Gower has commemorated, much to my honour and diversion.

[350903] From our conversations, too short and much interrupted, I was not quite prepared for the immediate attack on the government. But I suppose the Irish following grows impatient. We discussed two other matters of importance. He wrote a letter to the Prefect on leaving Naples, a very handsome letter, containing some words of warning, as became the author of the letter to Lord Aberdeen. And the Prefect asked his leave to publish it. I don't know whether it has appeared; but it would probably have led to larger things, and would have been followed up by a public disclosure of what appeared to him good and especially wise in the condition of Italy. I was rather anxious that nothing should be written, unless under valid compulsion. The Italian danger is financial, and that comes from political causes—the Roman question which is an element—I don't mean actually a producing cause—of enmity with France, and the German alliance, which induces excessive armaments. I thought it useless to discuss the surface effect without touching the deeper causes. And I thought it untimely to discuss the Roman question, and perilous to go into the European system of alliances, while we have our Egyptian log, threatening us with a French quarrel at any time; but especially at the general election next autumn. For a spirited policy in Egypt is the first card of any Pretender who may come to the front.

[352299] Indirectly I am afraid I appeared rather an obstacle to another plan of writing on biblical criticism; for I not only urged that there is a good deal to read up, but obtrusively furnished the necessary books. This is how I have come to shine in the light of an obstructive, of a too perpetual note of interrogation and a bore. I mention the humiliating particular, because it is a reason for not annoying him on another point of which I think very much, namely, the business of getting copies of his correspondence during so many years with so many people. It will not do to say that that can be done years hence, by those who will be his heirs and the guardians of his fame. As I have said this to somebody else, altho' a friend of yours, I think I ought to say it to you:—His life has been the fullest in the world, and it will take long, hereafter, to master all the materials in detail. Neither the party, nor the country, nor the world, will be willing to wait, years, for his Theodore Martin. If he never puts together his reminiscences, which he will not do, now, unless disabled by illness for other work, the right way of reproducing his mind and career would be a very carefully selected volume of Letters. That would be the best and immediate form of Testament And for its effect, it should be prepared and laid down in his time.

[353641] Mallock has been here, and visited me. Also the H. Wards, separately; she, eager to talk about the Times; he, scrupulously silent. She began a new novel while she was here.

[353815] One's impression at a distance, trying to collect all information, is that there is a tendency at home to make too much of the catastrophe. But then I never believed in Parnell, until, as you most truly say, he stood in the last ditch and showed the strong man he is. At this moment, I don't know the result of the Conference, which seemed at first a mistake. But whatever it is, I take the collapse of Parnell for certain. The question is whether, after losing his present position, he will not be able to use his influence and talents in a dangerous way, at least playing into the hands of the Tories.

[354420] Of course I expect a dissolution. I cannot even say that it would be very wrong, in the present position of Liberalism. That will be an occasion for all the Statesmanship and all the eloquence of a Statesman and orator who has always risen with the difficulty of the occasion. I cannot quite agree in your praise of the Irish members. They must have known that the chance with English constituencies was gone, if Parnell remained. M'Carthy's action seems to incapacitate him for the leadership. And I am afraid that my candidate, Dillon, is too young and innocent.

[354986] I did not telegraph this time, not to let him lose confidence in himself, because I not only don't see that he has made a miscalculation; but Parnell's assault upon him has brought out his transparent integrity and sincerity as nothing else in the world could have done. I am so glad of all you tell me about him.

[355301] Could you tell me what you remember about this? In 1883 I begged him to see Scherer when he came to Paris. My recollection is that I since asked if there was anybody he cared to see, that he mentioned Scherer, saw him, and thought that he had not met a more intelligent man in France. Is my memory correct?

[355609] All things increase in gravity, in intensity, after eighty; and I see that the late events, with the momentary eclipse of the party for purposes of action, have made a profound impression.

[355799] It is just possible that we, out here, seeing things and hearing them from a distance, at intervals, and not in the constant dust and din, incline slightly to underrate the catastrophe. But at any rate, we are not despondent and not taken by surprise, and we see the back of the cloud.

[356086] I have remarked that Hampden is as hopeful as myself, and as fully satisfied that the right thing has been done. For myself, I am as hopeful as ever; and I never was more mathematically convinced that the line taken by your father was the best and highest If we are, for the moment, baffled and weakened, we should have been, just as much, if he had not done what he did; and the loss would have been permanent, without promise of recovery and without the redeeming dignity, the moral superiority, the splendid art with which he put in the front considerations not personal to himself.

[356673] Once or twice I have certainly thought, and to you perhaps have said, that he seemed to fail where Chatham or Bismarck would have imposed his will, by extreme deference, delicacy, consideration, and reliance upon others. What I love to observe at last is that there are no others, and that his resolutions are as much his own as his reasoning.

[357018] Indeed I don't authentically know what our friends have thought. Except Bryce, who, I fear, did not agree with me.

[357134] As it was I who asked Mr. Hutton for his articles, which he politely sent me, being a stranger, I scarcely had a right to mix my thanks with censure. I said what there was to say in acknowledgment, I think with the necessary limitation if not with sufficient drawback. Something that was meant as a sort of warning may have been in a second letter which you did not see. Dick, who started your belongings from Charing Cross, told me that Hutton had shown your father what I wrote him; but I know not whether it all went by the underground communication between N.L.C. and Hawarden. He mentioned your disapproval without explanatory detail.

[357775] Did he tell you that Manning is so well pleased that he has invited him to write his Life too? I read enough of Rosebery to write about him to Morley. It is very well done indeed, for the general reader, and assuming the reader to be a Tory, ought to satisfy him. In London I found people open-mouthed against it, and I hope I induced one angry and aggressive critic to hold his avenging hand.

[358170] There is little fault for enemies to find in the way of fact. I think it was at Fontainebleau, not at Versailles, that Pitt was refused by Mdme. de Staël; Napoleon decided on the Austrian campaign before he knew that his fleet had retired to Cadiz; and it is wrong, in a political book, to call Luther an apostle of freedom, as he was an apostle of authority and divine right, and promoted freedom in the other, the spiritual sense.

[358604] As England was saved from invasion, not by the superiority of our admirals, but by treaties with Russia and Austria, which were the triumphs of the subsidising policy, it should have been pointed out in a life of Pitt.

[358824] There is a graver objection, not so easy to define. The book is, from end to end, a panegyric. Pitt appears to have been right all along his main lines of thought, if not of action. To admit this is to admit the essentials of the Conservative case, to yield almost all that we live and fight for, all that for the sake of which your father gave up power, and spent the six most precious years of his life in opposition, after breaking up his party. When this is written by Rosebery, and edited by Morley, one asks oneself for what sufficient reason, then, they are not Secretaries of State.

[359416] Whilst there is little criticism of Pitt's views of State policy, there is constant and repeated answer of his opponents, there is a caricature of the Whig creed, and a definite attack on the notion of political principle (by which I don't mean principle in politics). There is hardly a good word for Burke; Windham, figuring as a Whig, is a mediocrity; Grenville, after his conversion, is deliberately depreciated; and Fox is treated with injustice for the greater glory of Pitt His opposition to the War is treated as if it was worthless and factious, as he went on with it just the same, when in office. And yet Fox immediately opened negotiations, and underwent not a little humiliation in his quest of peace.

[360131] As I have not read all, I don't know what there is to counterbalance these things, and to correct the impression they naturally make.

[360266] My own quarrel with Rosebery is for spoiling my favourite story. I very well remember Macaulay telling me Pitt's last speech. He had it from Sturges Bourne, and was so much struck that he made him repeat the words. They were these: “England has saved herself by her own energy, and I hope that after having saved herself by her own energy, she will save Europe by her example.” Rosebery misses the resounding repetition which caught the ear of Macaulay. I suppose he takes it from his uncle, who also had it from Macaulay, but without the point. At the Congress of Vienna, when Pitt's proud hope had been fulfilled, the Regent struck a medal with this inscription: Seipsam virtute Europeam exemplo. It is the whole speech, in sublime concentration. The word virtute corresponds with energy better than with exertions.

[361085] I write a line which, in the circumstances in which I find the country, can be only congratulation.

[361186] First, because your father's health and force are admirable. Argyll said to me just now that he is as formidable as ever; and Stead tells me that he was carried off his Nonconformist feet by the Clapham speech. How much I hope that he will not overwork himself at Edinburgh, and will escape the cold blast and sudden shower of the ancestral climate.

[361537] Every day since I arrived, last Friday, my impression as to immediate prospects has grown more favourable and sure; and I observe that calculations made by different and unconnected men, like Cook and Giffen, nearly agree, and lie between Schnadhorst's limits. The most modest estimate is the one which Herbert and Trevelyan allow to circulate. As even Balfour says that our defeat would be a misfortune for the country, it is clear what they are expecting.

[361996] I called just now in Berkeley Square, but Rosebery had not returned. One of my alarms—I have several—comes from his want of touch with the left wing, and their wish to have Kimberley in his place (at the F.O.). Here is Egypt coming on again, and Ribot not at all pleased at our accession. He told me, with evident satisfaction, that Waddington prophesied against us, and I find that that is his tone here, and that in spite of your father's attack on the Triple Alliance. It forebodes mischief, and mischief founded on ill-will and a wish to be arrogant and aggressive; for I find that the numerous small holders of Egyptians in France dread the consequences of evacuation.

[362671] My comfort is that Morley stands much nearer the chief than before Armitstead—to whom I vote a statue.

[362775] I find my friend Lefevre eager to discredit Rosebery as an authority on diplomatic history; and I must admit that his book seemed to me suspicious and unsound. The Irish Bar, rather uneasy lest, after they have been six years out in the cold, Russell should be made their Chancellor. But I learn on the best authority that Coleridge is ready to make way, at your father's wish. I was glad to find Justice Mathew content with the Belfast language and with the results of a recent visit to Ireland, and he says that whereas he was the only Home Ruler on the Bench, there are now 2 1/2, if not 3.

[363370] It is provoking to find that a great friend of yours, and of mine, who is exceedingly intelligent in politics, and not unfaithful to the cause, has so little hold on the party. But one detects envy a little way below the surface of most people if one scratches long enough.

[363645] It was immensely kind to let me see the graphic record of those grim days at Dalmeny. I did not see everything so clearly, and they certainly knew how to disguise what they went through even from the familiar eye of friendship.

[363874] You do not overestimate our present prosperity; opposition makes no way with its attacks, and the party is admirably consolidated. The Conference on Monday showed it. Mr. G. imposed the supremacy of the Home Rule Bill upon them all, and there was no note of discord, although so many of them dislike the policy, and regret their own measures, offered in sacrifice.

[364240] The strangest note was the Repentance of Labouchere, who was made to speak as one of the ministerial group, and went beyond them all in submission and eager loyalty. Next to that, the hearty and universal acceptance of Harcourt, who has made progress, as occasional leader, and stands better than in any former Parliament.

[364564] Mr. Gladstone's final declaration, of devotion to the cause and to his friends, puts all notion of anything like an early retirement out of sight.

[364712] There is a want of vigour in the management of his colleagues, and a tendency to postpone things. But he never showed such mastery in public, such authority, such severity and ease, and he is best in moments of trouble.

[364933] The last two days have been an extraordinary triumph. The Secretaries were much impressed at his dealing with the Deputations. It was, perhaps, a drawn battle. I am to dine there this evening, and take leave before they start for the maritime realm of Armitstead.

[365198] Morley has stood fire well, but scarcely makes way. Accounts from Ireland depress him, and he is prepared for broken heads. And then a disturbing question arises: If we see no prospect of the Bill becoming law, and are only striving to redeem our pledges, it is hard to let men risk their lives for what, in the opinion of many, is only a phantom. In a couple of months I am afraid that this dim feeling will begin to tell, and will relax our efforts, and repress our spirit.

[365675] Your argument is perfectly just. The imprudence of this Ulster policy is great. But it may serve a purpose, and help the Lords to reject the Bill.

[365823] I dined on Monday next to Chamberlain, at Grillion's; and Welby was surprised how long I took to warm him up; but I succeeded at last.

[365959] We had an apparent loss of ground this evening, as the Evicted Tenants Bill did not pass the Second Reading. But the Government only accepted it with such reservations that it is no defeat for us.

[366157] Stress of politics keeps me in town this week; and on Saturday I go with Asquith to the Humphry Wards, on my way north.

[366278] The Life of Burton is dreadfully ill-constructed, and I believe the hero to have been a great rogue, so that I am a little impatient of so much admiration and so much exclamation. I knew her a little, during the visit to Cannes which she commemorates.

[366531] Knowing how easily he is bored, I don't suppose you will have read my long letter to him. These things are certain: that a mistake would be irreparable; that the consequences of his intended action would fall heavily on colleagues who have been faithful to him; that it will ruin permanently, as far as we can see, the cause to which he has devoted his later years in parliament, and for which he has extended them; and that every one of his best friends is against him—reasons for a Christian to distrust himself.

[367047] I am anxious to report what will be a satisfaction to your father, that, cold, perfunctory, artificial as the tone of proceedings was at the F.O., in the evening Rosebery made a speech in reply to Salisbury, so serious, so strong, so convinced, and so victorious and confident as to alter his position and raise him to a higher level in the country and in Ireland. Everybody I saw was deeply impressed.

[367451] It was a come down afterwards to hear Harcourt, although he spoke well too. Salisbury spoke of your father, as it seemed to me, with exact and perfect justice. In the Commons I found them all émus at Balfour's tribute, which I failed to hear.

[367695] The Speaker was very good-natured and friendly, even thinking too well of modern English writers. He missed the point, that my notion of history is as of a thing the same for all men, not open to treatment from special and exclusive standpoints.

[367942] I am sorry that Morley will not write either of the Gladstonian chapters. Luckily his book on Home Rule is coming out, and will tell (most of) what he knows, and we shall go on painting on his canvas with such material as we possess.

[368177] Bryce, I think, would be my next choice, Trevelyan being out of it. Sixty historians have already promised assistance, and I have not got through half my list, or received answers from America.

[368372] This is to be a whole choir of Madonnas.

[368414] When you are settled, and at leisure, if at all, I shall be anxious to obtain your advice, on a subject which does not interest you, but which I cannot suppress as perfectly as I should wish. For the next few years I have to lecture on all Modern History, and I presume a rather big book will be the result, besides the other, bigger, book that I am expected to inspire and direct. Both of them raise the question of the Gladstonian era.

[368853] I have asked John Morley to write Home Rule, which will be the last chapter of English History, from 1880 to the end. He declines, for the sufficient reason that he is bringing out a book of his own on the subject. For other, less convincing, reasons, Rosebery and Trevelyan are not to be obtained.

[369153] As I am trying, as far as possible, to obtain new matter, and highest authority, I do not wish to leave this department to be filled up by the aid of Morley's book, of the new MacCarthy, and the like.

[369355] But I cannot undertake it myself, without your father's sanction, or without the assistance of such papers as he might care to let me see, for the years 1880 to 1894.

[369523] And I do not think it would be right for me to ask for his sanction, or for permission to consult any portion of the Hawarden archives. It would be asking for too much, and taking an unfair advantage of his overwhelming kindness.

[369754] Therefore I want you to advise, and tell me what he would like best to be done, if you know. I should not be afraid to ask Lady Granville for your father's letters in her possession, but I can only do that if he authorises me. She would be quite right to refuse.

[370018] The Prince promises that I shall see the Windsor papers, but I know not when. As the offer comes from him, I can take no active step in the matter.

[370167] The volume of the Cambridge History will not be out for a number of years, but I intend that my lectures shall be published when I have delivered them two or three times.

[370339] I am infinitely grateful to you. And please thank your father for me.

[370410] For I take this to be contained or implied in your letter.

[370470] First, that he does not disapprove of this eventful history being in my hands, as Morley, Trevelyan, and Rosebery are barred; and does not propose any other alternative.

[370641] Next, that he considers the daily letters to the Queen which the Prince has offered me as the central authority on the subject.

[370770] And lastly, that he will allow me to consult him about it, and will consider what further material he will let me use.

[370890] With the corollary, that I may come to Hawarden and discuss the matter at headquarters.

[370979] Of course, the essential thing for me now is to be sure that I shall write with your father's assent, and upon consultation with him.

[371114] If what I said just now about Morley and the two others suggests to you that I offered Home Rule to all three, I must correct the looseness of my language. Morley declined it because of his forthcoming book. I did not propose it to the others, who refused to write for me at all.

[371395] If you can help me, and if you do rather care that that final chapter should be written by a devoted and grateful friend, I shall' succeed in doing it. But if he has a misgiving, I can find some fit man, who will be fitter than I, to write without confidential matter—beyond what, of course, I possess already. Morley's narrative, I think, is to appear soon.

[371755] I am sorry to say that Lord Peel will not do his father's last Ministry, and I hesitate to ask his son George, whose article in the National Biography is good, but not founded on esoteric information.

[371957] Morley gives the Romanes, this day fortnight, on Machiavelli; and if my colleagues will let me off a day's examinations, I hope to get across. On Friday next I hasten back, to get a beating on the Rights of Women.

[372172] I saw Margot at dinner yesterday, much to her advantage. But can you imagine a party made up of Asquiths, Bryces, Reays, Peel, Lyall, and Kimberley not being very pleasant?

[372346] The veiled passage was the answer to a definite question, so that Herbert is responsible for what seems an allusion. His letter did not authorise me to raise the question of the biographer, and I did not specially mean Morley, though he was obvious in the line of vision.

[372619] As your letter does authorise the discussion it cannot now be presumptuous to say exactly what occurs to me, and to many of your friends.

[372758] Several very capable men are, I think, excluded by the conditions of the contract—the important contract—to be made, with English and American houses.

[372910] Its success will depend largely on three things: the completeness with which the family undertakes to supply the materials; the date when the book is to appear; and the name of the writer.

[373100] More will be offered if he is well known, especially in the United States. Godley, George Russell, MacColl, would do very well, but for this; and for the further reason, that Godley is a permanent official, and that MacColl, surely, is predestined for another function than the one I am speaking of.

[373401] Two other names suggest themselves legitimately, that must, for valid reasons, be put aside. Courtney is unfitted for work, besides being an adversary, though the least adverse of adversaries, in the one thing that gives unity to your father's career. Walpole, sound and thorough as he is, has neither enough power nor enough depth, and is probably disqualified by his office.

[373779] Three men remain, any one of whom would, in my opinion, do the work admirably, and against whom I see no preliminary objection.

[373908] Morley is the one who knew him best, and had most of his confidence, both as to men and things. He would set up many obstacles, including that of revealing Cabinet secrets. The answer to that is that he has already written, has already printed, a book on the history of Home Rule, in which he has got over that difficulty. It is true, he is keeping it back. But, for that, there may be motives which would not prevent his undertaking the much more splendid and historic work.

[374385] Trevelyan knew him much less intimately; but he lives for Parliamentary history, and has shown himself capable of writing a biography which is one of the best in the language—better than the Life of Cobden. Unlike Morley, he is out of public life, and has not got to weigh every word he says about Harcourt or Devonshire.

[374708] Bryce has, I think, greater knowledge of politics than anybody, and proved his power of appreciating your father by what he said at the time. He thinks that there ought to be no life since 1865. If it is settled against him, he would probably give way.

[374962] I am assuming that the documentary matter would be known to the writer, not displayed in the book; that the bulk of ecclesiastical things would be reserved; that the family would give not only the archives, but all the oral information in their power, including extracts from your own diaries; that all friends would help — Godley, Hamilton, Gurdon, West, Welby, Rendel, Talbot, etc. If the thing is put before him in this way it would be difficult for any one of the three to decline.

[375449] In the long main gallery of the Museum [Madrid] you will see two striking pictures: Charles V., by Titian, on a horse, whose feet are too near the ground, and the surrender of Breda. The former has been reproduced, I think in Stirling's “Don Juan.” The other is wonderful. The very grumpy defender, angry at having to give up the keys of the fortress, and the charming figure of the victorious Spinola politely assuring him that he has done well—and then the contrast between the draggled Dutchmen and the serene and easy Spaniards, and in the distance the captured town. I forget who lately selected it as his favourite among all pictures. Perhaps the guide will point out Velasquez himself in the group. Then, in the room containing the treasures, a Cardinal of Raphael. In all, eight paintings by him, including one very fine Madonna. All the Raphaels have been terribly retouched.

[376335] Take note of the almost perfect, and most unattractive, portrait of Mary Tudor.

[376416] I did not see the Goyas upstairs. They are the summit of Spanish art towards 1800, and, I believe, horribly powerful.

[376535] With a little more time than I had you will see much more. There is not much in the way of fine churches. But there is the Palace, and an important collection of historic armour.

[376715] I hope the fair grandchild will enjoy it.

[376758] After S. Sebastian you pass near Loyola; and at the nek between Pyrenees and Cantabrigian mountains, you come down on Vittoria, and understand the battle, north of the town. You cross the Ebro at Miranda; and see at some distance from the line the grand Cathedral of Burgos. At Valladolid you turn to the south, and, after Avila, enter the dreary Guadarrama. One of the most striking scenes in Europe is the point where, still pretty high up, you emerge from the mountains, and see the plain of Castile before you, the Escurial to your left, Madrid forty miles away to your right, and, far beyond, the hazy mountains of Toledo. If you do not pass that spot by day, going, try to do it returning.

[377455] It is all rather bare; and in the Guadarrama below you to the right, it is pleasant to see a forest belonging to the Medinas.

[377582] We are expecting bad news of the Empress. When Seckendorff was here for the funeral at Frogmore, he told me that the end must be very near. You know how her attitude touched your father at the moment when he parted from the Queen.

[377814] The Government did what they could to turn the ceremonial to their advantage and the promotion of Imperialism. I fancy the King agrees, and it is one bond with his nephew. He takes his work seriously, and gives himself pains.

[378041] The country is going to pieces, as the old country gentlemen used to say; but it is what doctors call a beautiful case, coming out normally and regularly.

[378197] From time to time Morley makes an appointment to lunch or dine, and we go into points. He grows more and more eager and is working rapidly. His health seems to me better.

[378369] Printed by R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, Edinburgh.

[378416] By LORD ACTON

[378431] LECTURES ON THE FRENCH REVOLUTION

[378466] Edited by John Neville Figgis, Litt.D., and Reginald Vere Laurence, M.A.

[378540] 8vo. 10S. net.

[378556] TIMES.—“A conspicuous merit of this volume of lectures is the way in which the author manages to combine a narrative history with a reflective treatment of his subject. The story of the Revolution is almost all told, of course, not without studied compression, but with elements of dramatic and picturesque detail, and sometimes even of minute archseological curiosity which, apart from the high moral atmosphere, make it a book of great fascination as well as of valuable instruction.”

[379044] DAILY NEWS.—“Constitutes perhaps the most impressive legacy of the great scholar. No brief review can convey an adequate idea of the strength, the eloquence, the boundless knowledge, the sureness of touch, the piercing Insight of this wonderful book.”

[379297] LECTURES ON MODERN HISTORY

[379325] Edited with an Introduction by John Neville Figgis, Litt.D., and Reginald Vere Laurence, M.A.

[379420] TIMES.—“The treatment is personal, fresh, and original throughout. Lucidity is unfailing. Learning is marshalled behind every paragraph, and almost behind every sentence, and yet is never obtrusive. The lectures are equally adapted to illuminate the scholar and to introduce the novice to the study of the mighty scheme of human affairs in its dynamic Bow. The selection of detail is governed by consummate judgment; and frequently information drawn from sources alien to the matter in hand is dropped into its place with a sureness and precision which astonishes; controversial questions, when introduced, are legitimately brought forward as an illustration of historical method, and not as the diversions and digressions of an overstocked mind.”

[380169] ENGLISH HISTORICAL REVIEW.—“Masterpieces of lucid statement, of suggestive and stimulating criticism. Everywhere, whether the lecturer be sketching the salient features of the sixteenth century or of the eighteenth, whether he be dealing with Italy or America, we feel the sureness of touch of one who is familiar with every detail.”

[380504] MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD., LONDON.

[380538] By LORD ACTON THE HISTORY OF FREEDOM AND OTHER ESSAYS

[380593] Edited with an Introduction by John Neville Figgis, Litt.D., and Reginald Vere Laurence, M.A. With Portrait.

[380703] 8vo. 10S. net.

[380719] HISTORICAL ESSAYS AND STUDIES

[380750] Edited by John Neville Figgis, Litt.D., and Reginald Vere Laurence, M.A.

[380824] 8vo. 10s. net.

[380840] GUARDIAN.—“The publication of the literary remains of Lord Acton is gradually showing the world his true greatness as an historian, and for this we owe our wannest thanks to Mr. Figgis and Mr. Laurence. The two volumes before us reveal better than anything that has yet been published the extent of Lord Acton's knowledge and the force of his mind. … Powerful and closely reasoned essays and lectures, which bear on every page the stamp of learning and judgment and righteousness, which are worthy of a great scholar and a good man.”

[381375] TIMES.—“These volumes must be regarded, not as the support of an existing reputation, or as a bid for the establishment of posthumous renown, but as the record and memorial of a rare and attractive personality. The accurate, insatiable, and broad-rmnded student is revealed; the generous champion of a noble cause which has suffered temporary defeat is seen on the field of his eager endeavour in controversy with Popes and Cardinals for the sake of freedom and truth; and the principles which he brought to the study of history or elicited from his observation of men and affairs throughout the centuries are set forth for all to read. The resulting picture of the great student, the partisan striving for impartiality, is admirably put together in a sympathetic and lucid introduction supplied by the editors.”

[382189] A LECTURE ON THE STUDY OF HISTORY

[382224] Globe 8vo. 2S. 6d.

[382244] MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd., LONDON.

[382278] Jules Ferry, see p. 6.

[382302] Due de Broglie, statesman and historian (1821--1901).

[382357] Dr. Dollinger,

[382373] Sir Louis.

[382385] Minghetti and Bonghi.

[382408] On Mr. Gladstone.

[382427] Mr. Gladstone was an unsuccessful candidate for South-West Lancashire in 1868. He was at the same time elected for Greenwich.

[382554] The Reverend Mark Pattison, then Rector of Lincoln.

[382607] The book on which Lord Acton was then at work, and for which he amassed vast hoards of material.

[382705] The Expansion of England.

[382732] For the expulsion of the Jesuits and other unauthorised congregations from French schools.

[382824] History of Liberty.

[382845] Thorold Rogers, sometime M.P. for Southwark, and Professor of Political Economy at Oxford.

[382937] Herbert Gladstone.

[382957] He stood for Middlesex.

[382982] The late Duke of Devonshire, who lived till 1891.

[383033] In 1866, Mr. Gladstone and Mr. Lowe took opposite sides on the question of Parliamentary Reform.

[383131] Mr. Lowe, on hearing one of Mr. Herbert Gladstone's speeches during the Middlesex election, declared that in the pure gift of eloquence, there was nothing to choose between him and his father.

[383325] In Middlesex.

[383340] The Passion Play at Ammergau.

[383371] See p. 37, note 2.

[383391] Referring to two letters sent him by his correspondent.

[383448] Leaving cards.

[383464] The Zulu.

[383475] Lord Granville.

[383492] An allusion to expeditions at Tegernsee.

[383534] Small weekly evening parties in Downing Street.

[383583] Sir John Strachey had seriously under-estimated the cost of the Afghan War.

[383660] Mr. O'Donnell, an Irish member, moved the adjournment of the House for the purpose of attacking the new French Ambassador, M. Challemel Lacour Mr. Gladstone moved that he be not heard, and the debate on this motion occupied the whole sitting.

[383904] House of Lords, not History of Liberty.

[383945] That any member claiming the right to affirm instead of taking an oath should be allowed to do so, subject to any liability imposed on him by statute. Under this motion Mr. Bradlaugh took his seat provisionally for Northampton.

[384174] Littleberries, rented by Lord Aberdeen.

[384215] Trench.

[384224] Herbert Spencer.

[384242] M. Tachard.

[384255] On the Compensation for Disturbance Bill, intended to protect the Irish tenants from eviction during the winter.

[384369] The majority against the Bill was 230, of whom 51 were Liberals.

[384435] Granville.

[384447] Lowell.

[384456] Non equidera invideo; miror magis.

[384492] See p. 22, note 1.

[384512] Lord Arthur Russell.

[384534] History of Our Own Times.

[384561] Shakespeare's Sonnets, pocket edition.

[384601] Now Lady Battersea.

[384622] Richard Simpson (1820--1876), author of an Introduction to the Philosophy of Shakespeare's Sonnets (1868), and The School of Shakespeare (1872).

[384768] A letter from Mr. Gladstone on the choice of a profession.

[384828] Mr. Ruskm.

[384840] George Eliot lived in St. John's Wood.

[384880] Agrarian Laws and Ecclesiastical Establishments.

[384930] He stood by Ireland to the end, and his last letter to Sir Hercules Langrishe reaffirms the principles of his youth.

[385048] “And to party gave up what was meant for mankind.”

[385100] The editor of the Quarterly Review.

[385137] Lord Beaconsfield's Endymion, in which Nigel Penruddocke is one of the characters.

[385221] Lord Macaulay.

[385237] George Otto Trevelyan.

[385261] Life of Panizzi.

[385279] “Julian the Apostate” By the Rev. the Hon. Arthur Lyttelton, afterwards Bishop of Southampton.

[385375] Charles Stewart Parker, then M. P. for Perth.

[385422] English Land and English Landlords. By the Honble. George Brodrick, late Warden of Merton.

[385514] An allusion to Mr. Gladstone's speech on the Reform Bill of 1866.

[385581] George Eliot's death.

[385604] Arthur Lyttelton's. See his Modern Poets of Faith, Doubt and Paganism, and other Essays (Murray).

[385703] This refers to the inscription Lord Acton inserted in Ruskin's Arrows of the Chace— “From a False Believer.”

[385813] Speech on introducing the Peace Preservation Bill.

[385865] Dublin Castle.

[385881] George Eliot's husband.

[385906] On the introduction of the new rules of Procedure after the expulsion of the Irish Members.

[385999] The late Lord Stanley of Alderley.

[386035] The Editor of the Edinburgh Review.

[386072] Trevelyan

[386083] The obstruction of the Peace Preservation Bill, which ended in the autocratic intervention of the Speaker, and the removal of the Irish Members from the House.

[386244] Sir Arthur Godley, at that time private secretary to Mr. Gladstone.

[386313] Sir Erskine May.

[386331] The Jacobite description of the mole whose burrowings caused the death of William the Third by making his horse stumble.

[386453] The Comte de Serre was a Minister under Louis XVIII., and a leader of the Moderate Royalists after the Restoration.

[386570] Sir John Lubbock's.

[386591] For closing debate

[386611] At this period shadowing Mr. Gladstone's movements.

[386664] Sir John Lubbock, in conversation with Miss Gladstone, complained of the lack of a guide or supreme authority in the choice of books. She suggested Lord Acton, and mentioned this talk in writing to him.

[386868] Harold Browne

[386883] Lightfoot.

[386895] Sir James Paget, the great surgeon

[386931] By Robert Wallace, afterwards M.P. for East Edinburgh. The definition, “trust in the people, tempered by prudence,” was laid down by Mr. Gladstone himself in a speech at Oxford in 1877.

[387118] Of Liberty.

[387131] On the Peace Preservation Bill.

[387164] Mr. Brand, afterwards Lord Hampden.

[387201] Carlyle's.

[387213] John K. Ingram, Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, and author of the article on Political Economy in the Encyclopædia Britannica.

[387344] Mr. Gladstone fell on the ice as he entered the gardens of Downing Street, and cut open the back of his head.

[387455] Sir Bartle Frere, then Governor of Cape Colony.

[387504] Miss Dempster.

[387520] Sermons in a College Chapel, by J. R. Illingworth.

[387572] George Sand.

[387586] Gladstone, Tennyson, and Paget.

[387619] Leo XIII.

[387630] Dublin Castle.

[387646] Minghetti and Bonghi.

[387669] To Mr. Gladstone.

[387688] i.e. of Mr. Gladstone.

[387712] Lord Acton said elsewhere of Lee “The greatest general the world has ever seen, with the possible exception of Napoleon.”

[387835] Mr. Gladstone's.

[387853] At Cannes.

[387865] Scartazzini's.

[387881] Illingworth's In a College Chapel.

[387917] Of George Eliot.

[387935] George Sand.

[387949] Meaning the Irish Land Bill. The reference is to the agrarian laws of Tib, and C. Sempromus Gracchus.

[388052] On Carlyle.

[388065] Midhat Pacha was the head of the reforming party in Turkey at that time.

[388139] Leo XIII.

[388150] November 15, 1848. After the murder of Count Rossi, his Liberal Minister of the Interior, Plus IX. left Rome, and fled to Gaeta, from which he only returned under the protection of French bayonets.

[388349] The introduction of the Irish Land Bill.

[388391] The late Duke of Argyll's resignation.

[388431] Lord Carlingford succeeded him.

[388464] Mr. Gladstone's eleventh.

[388491] To the Academy.

[388508] See p. 36.

[388520] The first Lord Cairns.

[388544] “It is true, Holy Father, I have failed.”

[388587] Lord Beaconsfield.

[388607] The Sultan's.

[388622] See Diary in Ruskin's Letters to M. and H. G. (privately printed).

[388690] For burial in the Abbey.

[388716] Lord Lansdowne's and Lord Listowel's.

[388755] Judah Philip Benjarmn, Q.c., author of Benjamin on Sales. He left America after the defeat of the South, and attained great distinction at the English Bar.

[388912] Mr. Gladstone did not arrive in time after the Easter recess to give notice of his own motion for a public memorial to Lord Beaconsfield, who died on the 19th of April 1881. The notice was given on Mr. Gladstone's behalf by Lord Richard Grosvenor, now Lord Stalbridge.

[389182] Convicted at the Old Bailey for incitement to the murder of the German Emperor.

[389263] Mr. Gladstone's.

[389281] Of the Irish Land Bill.

[389306] Mr. Gladstone predicted that, if the Conservatives defeated the Bill and came into office, they would themselves introduce not a smaller, but a larger measure.

[389467] Sir John Skelton, K. C. B., author of Thalassa, Scottish disciple of Disraeli, a brilliant and scholarly writer.

[389581] Canon Maccoll.

[389597] His little daughter.

[389619] W. H. Gladstone, M P.

[389642] The late Duke of Argyll.

[389668] Mr. Gladstone's retirement

[389696] At Leeds.

[389707] “Like some tall bully, lifts its head and lies.”

[389757] The County Franchise Bill.

[389785] King Edward VII.

[389803] The Life of Cobden.

[389824] The late Sir Charles Gavan Duffy.

[389859] Mr. Gladstone's.

[389877] (Hawarden, 15th Nov. 1881.)—“Têete-à-tête breakfast. A long most interesting talk on the great vexed question of his retirement, started by his saying that he and Lord Granville had discussed it, Lord G. good-humouredly declaring it out of the question. I quoted to him Lord Acton's words, how it would be a serious flaw in his political career to damage and perhaps run the Liberal party, by retiring from the leadership while in full possession of health and strength. He said the same arguments had been used in Lord Palmerston's case—that it was said the power and cohesion of the party depended on one man's life; that history had proved in that case that this was not so; that in his own case he had retired in '74 for good, that his reassumption of office was accidental, conditional, and temporary; that it was undertaken for certain purposes foreshadowed in his Midlothian Speeches, that these purposes were all or nearly all accomplished; that if he did not retire after Ireland was settled, and House of Commons procedure readjusted, there was no moment in the future when it would be possible—that Lord Hartington was a man of unusual strength and ability, but that before becoming Prime Minister he required more training as House of Commons leader. (I objected that he might at any moment go to the House of Lords, which would immensely weaken his influence; and besides, who could then lead the House of Commons?) The future leader of H. of C. was a great puzzle and difficulty Sir Charles Dilke would probably be the man best fitted for it, he had shown much capacity for learning and unlearning, but he would require Cabinet training first, that as time brings nearer Lord Hartington's move into House of Lords, force was added to the argument in favour of his own retirement. That he did not foresee great difficulties ahead for the Liberal party; that the Conservative ditto had thrown away what should have been their strength —the return to the principles and policy of Sir R. Peel; that they were demoralised and degraded; that they had inherited the vices of Lord Beaconsfield without his tact and judgment (Lord B.'s climax was reached in his attack on Sir Robert Peel. What a magnificent virulence he had shown; what a power of cutting and piercing the man through a searching knowledge of his character); that this jingoism was perpetuated in them, and must eventually be their ruin. That of Forster, Harcourt, and Childers it was hard indeed to say which was best qualified for leading; that Forster would probably be the best, but that he had shown occasional incapacity; that Goschen had sadly injured himself by following up his errors as to franchise with an elaborate eulogium of weak-kneed Liberalism—(I quoted Lord A. again ‘that he might resign place, but could not resign power’). He demurred to this: for two years—1874 to 1876—he insisted he had had no influence on the Lib. party, that he should attend the H of C very rarely, and possibly begin by going abroad before the Session”

[392899] Afterwards Duke of Devonshire

[392930] The Goschens.

[392945] The late Dr. Hatch's Lectures on the “Organisation of the Early Christian Churches.”

[393031] The husband of George Eliot.

[393061] A short Life of Newman, by Mr. Jennings.

[393103] Mr. Goschen.

[393117] Sir Erskine May.

[393135] The Comte de Montlosier, a French emigrant, Royalist, historian, antiquary, feudalist, and Liberal Cathohc.

[393244] Lord Monck, first Governor-General of Federated Canada.

[393301] George Eliot.

[393316] Sir George Errington.

[393339] The vote of censure on the Lords for appointing a Committee to inquire into the operation of the Irish Land Act.

[393453] His correspondent's name for his History of Liberty. It was of course taken from the title of Mr. Henry James's delightful novel.

[393584] On the 2nd of March a lunatic named Martin fired at the Queen and Princess. Beatrice at Windsor Station.

[393690] Bradlaugh's re-election.

[393716] This refers to a conversation at Venice in October 1879.

[393774] That Mr. Bradlaugh, having been re-elected for Northampton. should be allowed to take the oath and his seat.

[393884] A protest by Cardinal Manning against the admission of Mr. Bradlaugh.

[393955] A letter from Mr. Gladstone to his daughter.

[394001] Union, fusion.

[394017] James Harrington, 1611--1677. Toland edited his work on the Theory of the State, which was seized by Cromwell.

[394129] Situated in the depth of the Inferno.—Canto XVIII. hne I,

[394188] The History of Liberty.

[394213] The letter in question was sent to Mr. Shorthouse, and was answered in detail by him.

[394300] “Ah, this thou should'st have done and not have spoken on't.

[394362] In me 'tis villainy. in thee it had been good service.”

[394419] Mr. S. R. Gardiner's review of John Inglesant.

[394467] The late Marqri of Dufferin,

[394497] On the working of the Irish Land Act, 1881.

[394542] Sent immediately after the murders in the Phœnix Park.

[394598] It need hardly be said that for this rumour there was no sort of foundation.

[394676] It was the “manifold writer.”

[394707] Home Rule.

[394719] Lord Salisbury was unsuccessful in persuading his party to throw out the Irish Arrears Bill in the House of Lords.

[394835] Mr Gladstone's.

[394852] Downing Street.

[394869] Paradiso.

[394880] Letter written by Mr. Shorthouse in answer to Lord Acton's criticism of John Inglesant.

[394969] Sara Bernhardt.

[394986] Of Gibraltar. The late Dr. Sandford.

[395024] Mr. Gladstone.

[395040] Mr. Secretary Hay.

[395060] Mrs. Hollond.

[395075] Of George Eliot.

[395093] Prime Minister.

[395110] Mr. and Mrs. Gladstone.

[395135] Mr. Herbert Gladstone's Lecture on Ireland, in which he used the words “Irish Parliament.”

[395227] The predominance of books on religion and the few on science.

[395290] The list of the hundred books given by Lord Acton to his correspondent.

[395363] “Ignorance, madam, sheer ignorance.”

[395401] On the Deceased Wife's Sister Bill.

[395438] Henry George, author of Progress and Poverty.

[395485] R. W. Church.

[395500] Liddon translated Rosmini's Five Wounds of the Church

[395555] The Master of University.

[395582] At Cambridge.

[395597] “The American Constitution.”

[395627] The hundred books.

[395647] Lord Acton's first visits to Oxford and Cambridge (to Dr. Talbot's, Warden of Keble College, and to Professor Sidgwick's) were arranged by his correspondent.

[395806] Stubbs.

[395815] Treaty of Berlin, 1878.

[395840] Dr. Liddon met Lord A. and Miss G. at the station.

[395892] Dr. Talbot.

[395905] Dr. Stubbs.

[395918] Woman's Suffrage.

[395937] Duchess of Sutherland, Countess of Sutherland in her own right, died 1839.

[396013] Forbes.

[396022] Lord Wolverton's residence near London.

[396063] A letter from Mr. Gladstone to his daughter.

[396109] Contemporary Review.

[396131] Egypt.

[396139] To Egypt. Its object was financial.

[396176] Lyttelton.

[396188] England v. Australia, Kennington Oval.

[396228] Bishop Stubbs.

[396244] Dollinger.

[396256] Church.

[396265] Scholarship (£10) for Northumberland miners, comprising a month's residence at Cambridge.

[396356] Dollinger.

[396368] Dr. Howson.

[396381] The third MIdlothian campaign.

[396413] Mr. Gladstone.

[396429] The first Lord Ampthill.

[396455] Mr. Gladstone.

[396471] Bishop Stubbs.

[396487] At Oxford.

[396499] Ruskin.

[396508] Bonamy Price.

[396523] Mr. Ruskin's playfully affectionate description of Mr. Benamy Price, Professor of the science which he most abhorred.

[396642] Afterwards Bishop of London.

[396672] Tke History of the Papacy durig the Reformation.

[396722] Life of George Eliot.

[396745] Freeman.

[396755] President Monroe formulated, at the suggestion of Mr. Canning, the doctrine that the American continents were not to be colonised in the future by foreign Powers.

[396919] The Croker Papers.

[396939] Disraeli.

[396950] Bishop of London.

[396969] Walsham How, then Suffragan Bishop of Bedford.

[397017] At Cannes.

[397029] The Life of George Eliot.

[397056] Now Viscount Milner.

[397078] The present Earl Grey.

[397102] Mark Pattison's Memoirs.

[397128] The Afghan frontier. See Mr. Morley's account of the Penjdeh incident in his Life of Gladstone, vol. iii. pp. 183-5.

[397246] The reference is to Tennyson's lines on the Franchise Bill:

[397307] “Steersman, be not precipitate,” etc.

[397346] Disagreements in the Cabinet on Ireland had been cut short on June 8 by the defeat of the Government, through a combination of Tories and Irish, on the Budget.

[397507] Mr. James Stuart.

[397526] When Lord Salisbury came into office in June 1885, he required assurances of support from the Leader of the Opposition, which Mr. Gladstone refused to give.

[397684] Mr. Gladstone's Election Address, partly written in Norway, containing the Authorised Programme of the Liberal party.

[397803] i.e., ex-Prime Minister.

[397829] Mr George Russell. He stood for Fulham, but was not elected.

[397891] At his election for Hoxton.

[397920] Now Bishop of Oxford.

[397943] The General Election of November 1885, consequent on the County Franchise and Redistribution Acts.

[398043] The county voters.

[398063] The Greville Memoirs, Part III.

[398096] A wedding present.

[398116] As Clerk to the House of Commons.

[398151] In Ireland.

[398164] University.

[398177] Written to Dr. Hanna of Glenalmond in 1865.

[398222] This must mean during the Crimean War. There was no change of Government between 1855 and 1858.

[398319] The Parnell Divorce Case.

[398346] As he did after the murders in the Phoenix Park.

[398396] On Cardinal Newman. Mr. Arthur Hutton, the author, was at that time Librarian of the National Liberal Club.

[398505] Lord Stanhope, the historian.

[398536] Resignation of Premiership.

[398565] Cambridge Modern History, started and planned by Lord Acton.

[398627] “Madonna of the Future”; see letter Feb. 25, 1882.

[398679] History of the Church.

[398703] Dorothy Drew.

[398718] The Dowager Empress of Germany, Princess Royal of England.

[398778] The Emperor William.