WORK: Letters  (slug: julian-letters-720b7d)

CHAPTER: 01-letters



[109613] "One must love a guest while he is present, and send him on when he wishes to go": so the wise Homer laid down the law. But between us there is something better than the friendship of guest and host, both through such culture as we have and through reverence toward the gods; so that no one would justly charge me with transgressing the law of Homer, even though I judged it right for you to stay longer with us. But, seeing that your poor body needs more care, I have allowed you to go to your own country, and have taken thought for the ease of your journey. You may use, then, a public carriage; and may all the gods, with Asclepius, escort you on your way, and grant that we meet again.

[110305] 45. To a leader of the people

[110336] The proverb says: "Do you tell me my dream"; and I seem to be telling you your waking vision. The Nile, they say, lifted high in its cubits, has filled all Egypt; and if you long to hear the number too, by the twentieth of September it rose fifteen cubits. This Theophilus the commander reports. If, then, you did not know it, hear it from us and rejoice.

[110693] 46. To Ecdicius, prefect of Egypt

[110728] Even if for other reasons you do not write to us, at least concerning Athanasius, the enemy of the gods, you ought to have written, especially since you have long known what we have rightly resolved. I swear by the great Sarapis that, if the enemy of the gods, Athanasius, does not leave that city before the Kalends of December, or rather all Egypt, I shall fine the officials under your charge a hundred pounds of gold. And you know how slow I am to condemn, but far slower, having once condemned, to relent. And in his own hand: It vexes me much to be despised. By all the gods, there is nothing I would so gladly see, or rather hear, done by you, as that Athanasius be driven beyond the borders of Egypt—the abominable man, who under my reign dared to baptise Greek women of rank. Let him be driven out.

[111537] 47. To the Alexandrians

[111562] If any of the Galilaeans had been your founder—men who, having transgressed their own law, paid such penalties as were fitting, having chosen to live lawlessly and brought in a new preaching and a recent teaching—even so there would have been no reason for Athanasius to be sought after by you. But as it is, since Alexander is the founder of the city, and your guardian god is King Sarapis, together with the Maiden who sits beside him and the queen of all Egypt, Isis . . . You do not emulate the city in her health, but the diseased part dares to claim for itself the name of the city.

[112152] 2. I am very much ashamed, by the gods, men of Alexandria, that any Alexandrian at all confesses himself a Galilaean. The fathers of the true Hebrews were once slaves to the Egyptians; but now you, men of Alexandria, who have conquered the Egyptians—for your founder conquered Egypt—submit to a voluntary slavery to those who have despised the doctrines of their fathers, directly against the ancient ordinances. And there comes into you no memory of that old felicity, when there was fellowship with the gods for all Egypt, and we enjoyed many good things. But those who now have brought in this new preaching among you, of what good have they been authors to the city? Tell me. Your founder was a god-fearing man, Alexander the Macedonian, in no way, by Zeus, after the manner of any of these, nor after that of all the Hebrews, who were far surpassed by them. Why, even the Ptolemy son of Lagus was better than they; and Alexander, had he entered into rivalry with the Romans, would have given them a hard struggle. What then of the Ptolemies after the founder, who reared your city like a true-born daughter? It was not by the words of Jesus that they increased her, nor by the teaching of the Galilaeans, most hateful to the gods, that they wrought for her this good ordering by which she is now prosperous. Third, since we Romans became masters of her, having taken her from the Ptolemies who ruled ill, Augustus, visiting your city and conversing with your citizens, said: "Men of Alexandria, I release the city from all blame, out of reverence for the great god Sarapis, and for the sake of the people themselves and the greatness of the city; and a third cause of my goodwill toward you is my friend Arius." Now this Arius was a citizen of yours, and a companion of Caesar Augustus, a philosopher.

[113960] 3. The benefits, then, which have come to your city in particular from the Olympian gods—to speak briefly, for such they are—I pass over for the most part because of their length. But the things given in common, every day, not to a few men nor to one race nor to one city, but to all the world together, by the gods who are manifest—how is it that you do not know them? Are you alone insensible of the light that descends from Helios? Are you alone ignorant that summer and winter come from him? Are you alone ignorant that all things are quickened and grow from him? And the Moon, who is from him and through him the fashioner of all things—do you not perceive of how many good things she is the author to the city? And of these gods you dare to worship not one; but Jesus, whom neither you nor your fathers ever saw, you think must needs be God the Word. But him whom from all eternity the whole race of men beholds and sees and reveres, and reverencing prospers—the great Helios, I mean, the living image, ensouled and intelligent and beneficent, of the intelligible Father . . . if you will be persuaded by my exhortation, lead yourselves back, even a little, toward the truth. For you will not err from the right road if you obey one who himself walked that other road until his twentieth year, and now, by the grace of the gods, has walked this one for twelve years.

[115334] 4. If, then, it is your pleasure to obey, you will rejoice the more; but if you choose to abide in the superstition and instruction of cunning men, at least be at concord among yourselves, and do not long for Athanasius. There are surely many of his disciples able sufficiently to soothe your ears that itch and crave impious words. Would that, together with Athanasius, the wickedness of his impious school had been shut up. But as it is, you have a multitude not ignoble, and there is no trouble at all. For whomever of the multitude you choose, so far at least as concerns the exposition of the Scriptures, he will be in no way worse than the one you long for. But if it is for the rest of Athanasius' cleverness that you love him—for I learn that the man is a cunning fellow—and for this reason made these petitions, know that for this very thing he has been banished from the city; for a meddlesome man is by nature unfit to be the head of a people. And if he be not even a man, but a paltry manikin, like this great fellow who thinks his head is in danger, this gives the beginning of disorder. Therefore, that no such thing may happen to you, we long ago bade him depart from the city, and now from all Egypt as well.

[116560] 5. Let this be published to our fellow-citizens, the Alexandrians.

[116628] 48. To the Alexandrians

[116653] I hear that there is among you an obelisk of stone, raised to a sufficient height, but lying cast away upon the shore as though it were some most worthless thing. For this the late Constantius had a ship built, to convey it to my fatherland, the city of Constantine. But since it has befallen him, the gods willing, to go from here to there the appointed journey, the city demands of me the offering, being my fatherland and belonging to me more than to him. For he loved her as a sister, but I as a mother; for I was born there and reared there, and I cannot be ungrateful toward her. What then? Since I love you no less than my fatherland, I grant that there be set up among you also the bronze image. For there has lately been made a statue of colossal size, which, when you have set it up, you shall have in place of the stone offering a bronze image of a man whom, you say, you long for, a likeness and a form, instead of a four-cornered stone bearing Egyptian carvings. And the report, too, that there are some who tend it and sleep at its peak quite persuades me that for the sake of this superstition I ought to remove it. For those who behold the men who sleep there—since there is, as it chances, much filth and much licentiousness about the place—neither believe it to be divine, and, through the superstition of those who attend it, become the more unbelieving toward the gods. For this very reason it is the more fitting that you should lend a hand and send it to my fatherland, which entertains you well when you sail into the Pontus, and that you should contribute, as it were, to her sustenance and her outward adornment. Surely it will be no ungrateful thing that something of yours should stand among them too, upon which, as you sail in toward the city, you may gaze with gladness.

[118455] 49. To Ecdicius, prefect of Egypt

[118490] It is worth while, if anything is, to take thought also for sacred music. Choosing, then, from the people of the Alexandrians well-born youths, order that two artabae of corn be furnished to each of them monthly, and oil and wine besides; and clothing shall be provided by the overseers of the treasury. For the present let these be enrolled by voice. And if any are able to attain to the height of the science itself, let them know that very great prizes for their labour are laid up with us also. For that they themselves, before us, having had their souls purified by the divine music, will be the gainers, we must believe those who have rightly declared this before. So much, then, for the boys. As for those who are now studying under the musician Dioscorus, make them lay hold of the art more eagerly, since we are ready to aid them in whatever they wish.

[119353] 50. To Nilus, surnamed Dionysius

[119387] You were better when you kept silence before than now when you defend yourself; for you did not revile me then, though perhaps you meant to; but now, as though in travail, you have poured out all at once your abuse against me. Or must I not count it both reviling and slander, that you supposed me like your own friends, to each of whom you offered yourself uninvited—or rather, to the first uninvited, but to the second, who only hinted that he wished to take you for an ally, you submitted? But whether I am like Constans and Magnentius, the deed itself, as the saying is, will show; while you, that you praise yourself, like Astydamas, after the comic poet—"O woman," as he says—is plain from what you wrote. For your fearlessness and your great boldness, and your "Would that you knew how great and what manner of man I am," and, in a word, all such things—bah!—how great a din and clatter of words it is! But, by the Graces and by Aphrodite, if you are so bold and noble, why did you take heed not to give offence a third time, if you must? For those who incur the hatred of rulers are, in the lightest and, one might say, the pleasantest case—at least for a man of sense—quickly freed from their troubles; but if a small further penalty is exacted, they suffer in their property; and the chief part of their anger, and to suffer, as they say, the irreparable, is to give up life. Despising all this, since you have come to know the private man and the man in his common and general nature, who is unknown to us late-learners, why then, in the name of the gods, did you say you took care not to give offence a third time? For surely I shall not, by being angry, make you wicked instead of good; for he would be a man to envy who in justice could do this; since, as Plato says, he could do the contrary also. But, virtue being its own master, you ought to have reckoned none of these things. But you think it a great matter to slander everyone, and to revile all without distinction, and to make the sanctuary of peace a workshop of war. Or do you think by this to defend your old faults before all men, and to make your present courage a screen for the cowardice you once showed? You have heard the fable of Babrius: "A weasel once fell in love with a comely man." The rest learn from the book. By saying much you would persuade no man that you have not become what you are, and what many men of old knew you to be. Your present ignorance and boldness, by the gods, philosophy did not implant in you; rather, on the contrary, that double ignorance of which Plato speaks. For, since you are in danger of knowing nothing—as neither do we—you think yourself the wisest of all, not of those now living only, but of those who have been, and perhaps of those who shall be. So far, to a pitch of folly, has your conceit advanced.

[122216] 2. But on your own account these things have been said by me, more than enough; only it is perhaps necessary, because of you, to defend myself before the others, that I rashly called you to a partnership in affairs. This I was not the first nor the only one to suffer, O Dionysius. Your namesake deceived even the great Plato; and so did the Athenian Callippus. For he says that he knew him to be wicked, but that he would never have hoped for so great a magnitude of evil in him. And what need to speak of these things, when even Hippocrates, the best of the sons of Asclepius, said: "The sutures in the head deceived my judgement"? If, then, those men were deceived in matters they knew, and the rule of his art escaped the physician, is it strange if Julian, hearing that Nilus Dionysius had suddenly turned brave, was deceived? You hear of that Phaedo of Elis, and you know the story; or, if you are ignorant, inquire more carefully; but I, at any rate, will say this. He thought that nothing is incurable by philosophy, and that all men are cleansed by her of all manner of lives, pursuits, desires—absolutely all such things. For if she availed only with those well-born and well-bred, there would be nothing wonderful in her work; but if she leads even those so disposed up to the light, she seems to me to be marvellous beyond measure. From these considerations my judgement about you inclined, little by little, to the better—the gods all know it. So I ranked your case neither among the first nor among the second of the best men. You yourself, perhaps, know it; or, if you are ignorant, ask the noble Symmachus. For I am persuaded that he would never willingly lie, being by nature truthful in all things. But if you are vexed that I did not honour you above all, I blame myself for ranking you even among the last, and I am grateful to all the gods and goddesses who hindered you from sharing in affairs and becoming our friend. . . . For even if the poets say much of Rumour, that she is a goddess, and let her be, if you will, at least a daemon, this Rumour, we must not give too much heed to her, since the daemonic is by nature not wholly pure nor perfectly good, like the race of the gods, but partakes somehow of the other side too. But if of the other daemons it is not lawful to say this, of Rumour I know, when I say that she reports much falsely, and much truly, I should never be convicted of false witness.

[124648] 3. But do you think your frankness worth, as the saying is, four obols? Do you not know that Thersites too spoke freely among the Hellenes, and that the wise Odysseus struck him with his sceptre, while Agamemnon cared less for the drunken insolence of Thersites than a tortoise cares for flies, as the proverb runs? Yet it is no great thing to rebuke others and to keep oneself free from rebuke. If you have a share in this portion, show it to us. When you were young, did you give a fair account of yourself to your elders? But I, like Electra in Euripides, "pass over such fortunes in silence." But when you became a man and joined the camp, how did you act, in the name of Zeus? You say that, for the truth's sake, you gave offence and were dismissed. From what can you show this, as though it were not by many and most wicked men, by whom you yourself were driven out, that they too were banished? It is not the part of an earnest and self-controlled man, O most sagacious Dionysius, to depart in hatred from his rulers. You would have been better, if you had made men more moderate toward us by your company with them. But this is not in your power, by the gods, nor in the power of ten thousand others who emulate your manner; for rocks dashed against rocks, and stones against stones, do not help one another, but the stronger easily crushes the weaker.

[126010] 4. Do I say this in Laconian and brief fashion? Yet I think that, because of you, I have shown myself more talkative even than the Attic cicadas. As for the wanton things you have said against me, I will lay upon you a fitting penalty, the gods willing, and the lady Adrasteia. What, then, is the penalty, and what most can pain your tongue and your mind? I will try, by erring as little as possible in word and deed, to give your slanderous tongue no great occasion for chatter. And yet it has not escaped me that even Aphrodite's sandal, they say, was mocked by Momus. But you see that Momus too burst with much effort, and could scarce lay hold even of the sandal. May it be yours, too, growing old while you rub at such things, to outlive Tithonus, and to be richer than Cinyras, and more luxurious than Sardanapalus, that the proverb may be fulfilled in you: "Old men are twice children."

[126905] 5. But that wondrous Alexander—from what did he appear to you so great? Is it because, having become his imitator, you emulated all that the lad Hermolaus reproached him with? Or is no one so foolish as to suspect this of you? On the contrary, that very thing which Hermolaus bewailed as having suffered, and for which, they say, he plotted to kill Alexander—is there anyone who is not persuaded of this about you? By the gods, I have heard many who say they love you greatly making many apologies for this fault, while one even disbelieved it. But this is the one swallow; it does not make the spring. Or perhaps Alexander seemed to you great for this, that he bitterly slew Callisthenes, that Cleitus fell a victim to his drunken violence, that Philotas, and Parmenio, and Parmenio's son perished. For of the affairs of Hector, who was drowned in Egypt in the eddies of the Nile or of the Euphrates—for both are told—and of his other amusements, I say nothing, lest I seem to slander a man who, though by no means a model of right conduct, was yet a most excellent general in war. Of these things you, in purpose and in courage, have less share than fishes have of hair. Hear, then, the counsel—do not too angrily—"Not to you, my child, are warlike deeds given." What follows I do not write out for you, for I am ashamed, by the gods. Yet I bid you supply it yourself; for it is reasonable that words should follow deeds, and that he who has in no way escaped the deeds should not shun the words.

[128405] 6. But you who pretend to honour the memory of Magnentius and Constans—why do you war against the living and revile those who are in any way the best? Is it because the dead are better able to defend themselves against those who grieve them than the living? But this you cannot say; for you are, as you write, most full of confidence. But if not this, then perhaps something else; for you do not wish, it may be, to mock those who would feel it. Yet of the living, is anyone so foolish or small-minded as to think it worth his while to be reckoned of any account by you, and not rather to wish, most of all, to be wholly unknown to you, or, if that be impossible, to be reviled by you, as I am now, rather than honoured? May I never be so ill-minded; may I never lay claim to praise from you rather than blame.

[129217] 7. But this very thing, that I write to you, is perhaps the act of one who is stung? No, by the saviour gods, but of one who checks your excessive arrogance and audacity, and the licence of your tongue, and the savagery of your soul, and the madness of your wits, and your derangement in all things. For it was in my power, had I been stung, to chastise you by deeds, not words, in quite lawful fashion. For, being a citizen and a member of the senate, you refused an emperor's command; and this surely was not permitted to one who had no great necessity to plead. It would not, then, have sufficed me to fine you on this account with every kind of penalty, but I thought I ought first to write to you, supposing the case curable by a short letter. But when I found you persisting in the same course, or rather detected the madness that until now lay hidden . . . lest you be thought a man, when you are no man, and full of frankness, when you are full of stupidity, and to have shared in education, when you have not touched even a syllable of letters, so far as it is reasonable to conjecture from your letters. For "vanished" no one of the ancients used of what is in plain sight, as you now do; since the other faults of your letter no one could go through in a long book, nor that pandering and loathsome character by which you play the pander to yourself. For you say that we ought to choose, not those who come ready to hand, nor those who lie in wait for office, but those who use steadfast judgement, and on this account choose what is needful, and not those who obey readily. A fair hope you hold out to us, who need it not, that you will yield, if again we should call you to a share in affairs! But so far is this from me, that, while others were admitted, I never even addressed a word to you. And yet I did this toward many of my acquaintance, and of men unknown to me, who dwell in god-beloved Rome. So earnestly did I lay claim to your friendship, so worthy of esteem did I think you. It is likely, then, that what is to come toward you will be of the same kind. For even now I have written this letter, not for you alone to read, since I knew it would be needful for many; and I will give it to all, who will receive it, as I am persuaded, not unwillingly; for, seeing you graver and more puffed up than the life you formerly led, they are vexed.

[131582] 8. You have from us a complete answer, so that you need long for nothing more. Neither, then, do we ask anything further from you; but, having read it, use the letter for whatever you wish; for the matter of our friendship is at an end for you. Farewell, living in luxury and reviling me, much as ever.

[131886] 51. To the community of the Jews

[131920] Very burdensome to you, in times past, has been the yoke of your servitude—that you were subjected to unannounced assessments, and forced to bring in an unspeakable amount of gold to the accounts of the treasury; of which I saw much with my own eyes, and learned more by finding the registers kept against you. And further, when another levy was about to be ordered against you, I prevented it, and forced the impiety of such ill report to stop there, and gave to the fire the registers kept against you that lay in my archives, that no one might any longer be able to hurl against you such a report of impiety. And of these things he who is worthy of memory, my brother Constantius, was not so much the cause to you as the men barbarous in mind and godless in soul who feasted at his table; whom I, having taken in my own hands, thrust into a pit and destroyed, so that not even a memory of their destruction is any longer borne among us. And, wishing you to fare yet better, I have exhorted my brother Iulus, your most reverend patriarch, that the levy called the apostolē among you be stopped, and that no one any longer be able to wrong your multitudes by such exactions of tribute; so that from every side you may have freedom from care under my reign, and, enjoying peace, may make still greater prayers for my reign to him who is the highest, the Creator God, who has thought fit to crown me with his undefiled right hand. For it is natural that those who are involved in any anxiety should be straitened in mind and not dare to lift up their hands in prayer so freely; but that those who are wholly free from care should rejoice with their whole soul and make supplicating worship for the kingdom to the greater, who is able to direct our reign to the fairest ends, as we purpose. This you ought to do, that I too, when I have set the Persian war in order, may rebuild with my own labours the holy city of Jerusalem, which for many years you have longed to see inhabited, and may settle it, and with you give glory there to the Highest.

[133966] 52. To the philosopher Maximus (or to a friend)

[134015] Since you have forgotten your promise—for this is the third day now—and the philosopher Priscus himself has not come, but has sent word that he is still delayed, I remind you and demand the debt. It is a debt which, as you know, is easy for you to pay, and most pleasant for me to receive. Send, then, the discourse and the sacred counsel; but, in the name of Hermes and the Muses, quickly, since you must know that you have crushed me even in these three days, if the Sicilian poet speaks truly when he says that those who long grow old in a single day. And if this is so, as indeed it is, you have tripled my old age, my noble friend. This I have dictated to you in the midst of business; for I was not able to write, having my hand less practised than my tongue—though, indeed, my tongue too has become, through disuse, less practised and less articulate. Farewell, my most longed-for and most beloved brother.

[134930] 53. To Maximus the philosopher (or to Libanius)

[134979] You have rendered to Aristophanes the rewards of his piety toward the gods and of his zeal toward yourself, having changed and transformed his former reproaches into good repute, not for the present only, but for the time to come; since the slander of Paulus and the verdict of so-and-so are not like the discourses written by you. For those were hated even while they flourished, and died out together with those who wrought them; but your discourses are now loved by the true Hellenes, and, unless I am wholly mistaken in right judgement, will be loved in the time to come. You shall learn, then, whether you have persuaded me, or rather changed my mind, concerning Aristophanes. That I do not think him a slave to pleasures and money, I confess. Why should I not yield to the most philosophic and most truth-loving of the orators? It follows that I be further questioned by you on this: why, then, do we not change his misfortunes to a better lot, and do away with the reproaches that have fallen upon him through his adversities? "Let us two go together," as the saying is, "you and I, and take counsel." And it is just that you should counsel me not only that we ought to aid a man who has honoured the gods without guile, but also in what manner we ought to do it. And yet this too you have hinted at, in a way. But it is perhaps better not to write about such things, but to discuss them with one another. Farewell, my most longed-for and most beloved brother.

[136448] 2. I read the discourse yesterday, almost before my morning meal; and having taken my meal, before I rested, I gave back the rest of my reading. Happy are you who can so speak, or rather so think. O the eloquence, O the wit, O the understanding, O the division, O the arguments, O the arrangement, O the openings, O the diction, O the harmony, O the composition!

[136812] 54. To a man whom he made consul

[136846] Hesiod the wise thinks one should invite one's neighbours to the feasts, that they may share the joy, since they share also the grief and the anxiety whenever some unlooked-for trouble falls. But I say one must invite one's friends, not one's neighbours; and the reason is that a neighbour may be an enemy, but a friend an enemy no more than white can be black or hot cold. And that you are my friend, and have been so not now only but of old, and have continued well-disposed, even if there were no other proof, yet that we are so minded and disposed toward you would be a great sign of it. Come, then, and share the consulship yourself. The public post shall bring you, using one carriage and a spare horse. And if I must add a further prayer, we have called upon the god of the crossways to be gracious to you.

[137661] 56. An edict concerning funerals

[137695] We ought, indeed, having considered the matter at home, to confirm by law what now seems good, and to take up again the ancient custom, which the men of old, who laid down the laws well, conceiving that there is a very great difference between life and death, deemed it fitting to mark each by its proper practices in our deeds. For death is a perpetual rest—and this, then, is the "brazen sleep" hymned by the poets—while life, on the contrary, holds many things painful and many pleasant, and our doing is now in one way, now better. Considering this, they ordained that the rites toward the departed be performed apart, and that the affairs of daily life be ordered apart. Moreover, they held the gods to be the beginning and end of all things, and they thought that, living, we are under the gods, and, departing, we go again to the gods. Now whether both belong to the same gods, or whether some govern the living and others the dead, it is perhaps not even worth while to make public. But if, just as the sun is the author of day and night, of winter and summer, by his going and coming, so too the eldest of the gods himself, into whom are all things and from whom are all things, has appointed rulers over the living and allotted lords over the dead, we ought to render to each what is fitting in turn, and to imitate, through our daily life, the ordering of the gods that is in the universe.

[139097] 2. Death, then, is rest, and to rest the night is fitting. Therefore I think it fitting that in the night the burials of the dead be carried out, since to do any such thing by day must be avoided for many reasons. One man turns to one business about the city, another to another, and everything is full of men going to the courts, or to the marketplace and from the marketplace, or sitting at their crafts, or frequenting the temples that they may confirm the good hopes that come from the gods; and then certain persons, having laid a corpse upon a bier, force their way through the midst of those busied with these things. And the matter is in every way intolerable. For those who meet it are often filled with displeasure, some thinking the omen evil, while to those who are going to the temples it is not lawful to draw near before they have washed. For to the gods who are the authors of life, and of all things most alien to corruption, it is not lawful to draw near after such a sight. And I have not yet brought my heaviest charge against what is done. And what is this? The sacred enclosures and temples of the gods stand open; and often someone within is sacrificing and pouring libation and praying, while others pass close by the very temple, carrying a corpse, and the voice of lamentation and ill-omened cries is borne even to the altars.

[140451] 3. Do you not know that, before all else, the works of the day and of the night are divided? Naturally, then, this is taken from the one and assigned to the other. For surely it is not right to forbid white among one's clothing during mourning, and yet to bury the dead by day and in the light. The other course were better, if no offence at all were thereby given to any of the gods; but this does not escape being an impiety toward all the gods. For to the Olympians men assign what they ought not, and from the gods of the underworld—or however else those who govern and are lords over souls rejoice to be named—they alienate, against right, what is theirs. I know that those who are scrupulous and exact in divine things hold it right to perform the rites to the gods below by night, or at any rate after the tenth hour of the day. But if this is the better season for the worship of those gods, neither shall we assign to the service of the dead a different one.

[141420] 4. For those who willingly obey, this suffices. For having learned in what they erred, let them change to the better. But if anyone is such as to need threat and penalty, let him know that he shall undergo the heaviest punishment, if before the tenth hour of the day he dares to tend the body of any of the departed and carry it through the city. Rather let these things be done after the sun has set, and again before he rises; and let the day, pure, be set apart for pure works and for the Olympian gods.

[141928] 57. To Arsaces, satrap of Armenia (a forgery, but transmitted in the corpus)

[142006] Haste to the array of the enemy, Arsaces, swifter than a word, arming your right hand against the Persian madness. For our preparation and our zeal have determined upon one of two things: either to pay the debt of nature on the borders of the Parthians, having wrought the greatest deeds and disposed of our adversaries most terribly; or, having mastered them, the gods presiding over us, to return as glorious victors to our native land, having raised trophies over the enemy. Putting away, then, all sloth and trickery, and remembering the late Constantine, and the substance of the well-born that was lavished upon you and the barbarians of your kind by the most delicate and extravagant Constantius, think now of me—of Julian, the high priest, the Caesar, the Augustus, the servant of the gods and of Ares, the destroyer of the Franks and the barbarians, the liberator of the Gauls and the Italians. But if you should plan anything else—for I learn that you are crafty, and a bad soldier, and a braggart, as my present affairs show; for you try to keep hidden with you a certain enemy of the common good—for the present I postpone this, because of the fortune of war; for the alliance of the gods suffices us for the overthrow of the enemy. But if fate should decide otherwise—for the power of fate is the will of the gods—I shall bear it without fear and nobly. But know that you shall be a mere by-work of the Persian hand, your household joined to your ruin with all its kindred, and the rule of the Armenians; and the city of the Nisibenes shall share your misfortune, the heavenly gods having long ago foretold this to us.

[143639] 58. To Libanius the sophist

[143668] I came as far as Litarbae—it is a village of Chalcis—and I fell in with a road that still had remnants of the winter quarters of Antioch. Part of it, I think, was marsh and part hill, but the whole was rough, and in the marsh lay stones thrown down as if on purpose, fitted together by no art, in the way men are wont in other cities, when they build up the highways, to lay much rubble instead of mortar, and to set the stones close together as in a wall. When, having crossed it with difficulty, I came to the first halting-place, it was about the ninth hour, and I received within the courtyard the greater part of your council. What we said to one another you have perhaps heard; and you may learn it from us too, if you hear us, the gods willing.

[144421] 2. From Litarbae I journeyed to Beroea, and Zeus gave all favourable signs, showing me a clear token from heaven. Staying there a day, I saw the citadel, and I sacrificed to Zeus, after the royal manner, a white bull, and I discoursed a little with the council on piety. But all praised my words, while very few were persuaded by them, and these only such as even before my words seemed to be soundly minded. They were cautious, as it were, to put off and lay aside their reverence for frankness; for it remains, O gods, among men to blush at noble things—at courage of soul and at piety—and to plume themselves, as it were, on the basest—on sacrilege, and on softness of mind and body.

[145109] 3. Thence Batnae received me, a place such as I never saw among you except Daphne, which now resembles Batnae; for of late, while the temple and the statue were still preserved, I should not be ashamed to set Daphne on a level with Ossa and Pelion and the peaks of Olympus and the Thessalian Tempe, or even to prefer her above all of them together. But concerning Daphne a discourse has been written by you, such as no other of those who are now mortals, even if he set himself earnestly to toil, could produce; and I think not many of the men of old, either. Why then do I now attempt to write of her, when so brilliant a monody has been composed upon her? Would that it had never been needed! Now Batnae—a barbarous name this—is a Hellenic place, first because through all the country round vapours of frankincense rose on every side, and everywhere we saw victims made ready. This, indeed, though it pleased me greatly, seemed nevertheless too warm, and foreign to true reverence toward the gods. For things sacred and holy toward the gods ought to be done apart from the throng, and in quiet, by men who come for this very purpose and not for any other. This, then, will perhaps presently obtain the care that fits it.

[146333] 4. Batnae I found a wooded plain holding groves of young cypresses; and among them there was no aged or rotten tree, but all alike flourishing in their foliage; and the palace was by no means costly, for it was of clay only and wood, with nothing of variety; but the garden, inferior to that of Alcinous, yet like that of Laertes, and in it a very small grove, full of cypresses, and along the wall many such trees planted in rows, one after another. Then in the midst were garden-beds, and in these vegetables, and trees bearing fruit of every kind. What, then, did I do there? I sacrificed in the evening, and again at deep dawn, as I am wont to do fairly every day. And since the sacrifices were favourable, we held on toward the Holy City, and the citizens came to meet me, and a stranger received me, seen but lately, but loved by me long since. The reason you yourself, I well know, share in the knowledge of, but it is pleasant to me to tell it even so; for to hear and to speak of such things is to me as nectar. Sopater, the kinsman of the most divine Iamblichus, was his connexion by marriage; for to me it seems no less a wrong than any of the basest not to love all the affairs of those men. There is a greater reason still. For, having often received my cousin and my brother by the same father, and being often urged by them, as was natural, to forsake reverence toward the gods—which is a hard thing—he was not caught by the disease.

[147783] 5. These things I had to write to you from the Holy City concerning my own affairs. As for the military and civil administration, you ought, I think, to oversee and care for them yourself, being present; for the matter is greater than a letter, be assured, and so great that it is not easy to compass the precise account even in thrice the length of this. These too I will tell you summarily, in few words. I sent envoys to the Saracens, reminding them to come if they would. So much for one thing. As for another, I sent out men as wakeful as possible to keep watch, lest anyone slip away from here to the enemy to be an informer of our movements. From there I judged a military case, as I am persuaded, most gently and most justly. I provided spare horses and mules, gathering the army together to one place. River boats are being filled with corn, or rather with dried bread and vinegar. And how each of these was done, and what discussions arose over each, you can imagine of what length the writing would be. And as for all the letters and books to which I have set my hand—for these too follow me about everywhere like a shadow—why need I trouble myself now to count them up?

[148966] 59. To Libanius

[148983] The fable makes the eagle, when he would test the genuineness of his young, carry them still unfledged toward the upper air and hold them up to the rays of the sun, becoming, as it were, with the god for witness, the father of a true nestling and disowning a spurious brood. So I put my words into your hands as into those of Hermes the eloquent. And if they endure your hearing, it is for you to judge of them, whether they can take wing toward others also; but if not, cast them away at random as alien to the Muses, or drown them in a river as spurious. Surely the Rhine too does no wrong to the Celts, who sinks the spurious infants beneath his eddies, a fitting avenger of an unchaste bed; but those he recognises to be of pure seed he buoys up above the water and gives back into the hands of the trembling mother, granting her the safety of her child as an incorruptible witness of a pure and blameless marriage.

[149904] 60. To Libanius

[149921] They say that Daedalus dared to do violence to nature by art, fashioning wings of wax for Icarus. As for him, even if I praise his art, I do not admire his judgement; for he alone endured to trust the safety of his child to wax that melts. But if it were lawful for me, as for that Teian lyric poet, to change the nature of birds, I should not fly toward Olympus, nor for any reproach of love, but to the very foot of your mountains, that I might enfold you, my care, as Sappho says. But since nature, having shut me in the chains of a human body, will not suffer me to spread my wings toward the upper air, I come to you with such wings as I have, the wings of words, and write, and am with you in the only way I can. Surely Homer too names them "winged" for no other reason than this, that they can range everywhere, like the swiftest of birds, darting wherever they will. Do you yourself write also, my friend; for yours, surely, is an equal, if not a greater, plumage of words, by which you can pass to your comrades and from every side gladden them as though present.

[150995] 61. To Libanius

[151012] There is a fuller occasion of pleasure when one may greet one's friends through a familiar man, so that you may fit the image of your own soul not only to those to whom you write, but to those who meet him. This very thing I myself do. For sending to you Antiochus, the tutor of my children, I could not bear to leave you ungreeted; so that, if you long for anything of our affairs, you may learn it more intimately from him. And if you too care anything for your lovers—as I believe you do—you will show it by never failing to write while you are able.

[151567] 62. To Libanius

[151584] For when were you ever parted from us, that we should write, or when do we not behold you, as though present, with the eyes of the soul? We who not only seem always to be with you and to converse with you, but, in the present concerns of those near you, take such care of them as is fitting, as though under your presence. But if you wish to be written to by us as one absent, take care lest you yourself, by your very wish to be written to, rather reveal that you seem to be absent from us; only, if it is dear to you, even to this we willingly consent. By all means, as the saying goes, "you will be driving a running horse to the plain" by your bidding. Come, then, and render us like for like, and at our counter-summons do not be slow in the constant exchange. And yet I, for my part, do not wish to disturb the zeal you spend on the common good; rather, the more I guard you in your hunting of noble things, the more I should seem not only to do no wrong, but to benefit the whole Hellenic cause together, when, like a noble hound, I let you, undisturbed, devote yourself with whole spirit to the tracks of letters. But if you have such swiftness to spare that you neither neglect your friends nor fall short of those pursuits, come, use your speed for both.

[152850] 63. To Libanius

[152867] Pindar thinks the Muses are silvern, likening, as it were, the conspicuous and brilliant quality of their art to the brightness of the metal; while the wise Homer calls silver "gleaming," and names water "silvery," as though, with the pure rays of the sun, it sparkled with the very brightness of the image; and the fair Sappho says the moon is silvern, and that for this reason it hides the face of the other stars. So one might judge that silver befits the gods rather than gold; yet for men, since silver is more useful than gold and is more with them—not, like gold, hidden beneath the earth or fleeing their sight, but both fair to behold and better in daily use—this saying is not my own, but the saying of men of old. And if, in return for the gold coin you sent, we give you another of silver of equal value, do not judge the favour the less, nor think, as in the case of Glaucus, that the exchange is to the worse; since not even Diomede, perhaps, would have given silver for gold, seeing that the silver was far more useful than the other and knew how to turn aside spear-points as though they were lead. These things we play with you, taking from your own writing the lead for frankness toward you. But if you really wish to send us gifts more precious than gold, write, and do not cease doing this continually; for to me even a small letter from you is judged fairer than whatever good thing one might name.

[154288] 64. To Libanius

[154305] I both write and claim to receive the like in return. But if I do wrong by writing continually, I ask to be wronged in turn by suffering the same.

[154453] 65. To Libanius

[154470] There is even in a small letter a greater pleasure, when the goodwill of the writer is measured not by the smallness of the letter so much as by the greatness of his soul. And if now too the words of greeting from us have been brief, do not, even so, judge by them the longing they carry; but, knowing how far the love we bear toward you is stretched, grant pardon for the brevity of the letter, and be not slow to repay us in kind. For everything you give, even if it be small, preserves with us the mark of every good.

[154992] 66. To Libanius

[155009] Let Echo be a goddess, as you say, and a chatterer, and, if you will, the consort of Pan too; for I shall not contend. For though Nature would teach me that Echo is the answering sound of a voice, struck back from the air to the hearing in the opposite direction, yet, obeying men of old and of recent times no less than your own argument, I am put to shame to deny that Echo is a goddess. What, then, would this be to us, if by a great measure we surpass Echo in our friendly offices toward you? For she answers not to all that she hears, but rather to the last of the voice, like a stingy beloved who returns the lover's kiss only with the tips of her lips; but we both begin gladly the offices toward you, and again, at your challenge, send back the like, as it were a ball. So you would not be beforehand in being yourself liable to what you write, and in ranking yourself—you who, receiving more, give back least—rather than us, who are eager to have the advantage on both sides, as like to the image you draw. Yet whether you give in equal measure to what you receive, or not, to us whatever it is permitted to receive from you is pleasant, and is believed to suffice for the whole.

[156199] 67. To Libanius

[156216] "You have come, Telemachus," says the verse; and I have already seen you in your letters, and have taken the impress of the image of your sacred soul as on a small seal the stamp of a great character. For in a little space much may be shown; since Pheidias the wise was known not from the statue at Olympia or at Athens alone, but knew also how to enclose the work of great art in a small carving, such as they say his cicada was, and his bee, and, if you will, his fly too; of which each, though by nature it was wrought in bronze, was by his art given a soul. But in those works, perhaps, the very smallness of the creatures lent something fitting to his proportioned art; but do you, if you please, consider the Alexander hunting on horseback, whose whole measure is no greater than a fingernail. So is the marvel of the art poured over each, that Alexander already smites the beast and frightens the beholder, awing him through the whole figure, while the horse, balanced upon the very tips of his feet, escaping a fixed stand, is moved, by the stealthy artifice of energy, by the art itself. This very thing, my noble friend, you too do for us. For, as one already crowned often through the whole course in the lists of Hermes the eloquent, by what you write in a few words you display the height of your excellence, and in truth you rival the Odysseus of Homer, who, by saying only who he was, sufficed to amaze the Phaeacians. And if you need from us, too, something of the friendly smoke of your own kind, there is no grudging. Surely even from the weaker something good may come, as the mouse that saved the lion in the fable sufficiently shows.

[157872] 68. To Eumenius and Pharianus

[157903] I was near to weeping; and yet I ought to have spoken well-omened words when I uttered your name. For I was reminded of our noble and wholly admirable father; and if you emulate him, you yourself will be happy, and will give to the world, as he did, something to take pride in; but if you are slothful, you will grieve me, and yourself you will blame when there is no longer any profit in it.

[158297] 69. To Himerius

[158314] Not without tears did I read your letter, which you wrote upon the death of your wife, announcing the excess of your grief. For, besides that the event in itself is worthy of grief—that a wife young and chaste and dear to her husband, and besides the mother of holy children, should be snatched away before her time, like a torch brightly kindled and then in a little while letting fall its flame—still further, that the suffering reaches to you seems to me no less grievous. For least of all men did our noble Himerius deserve to come to the trial of anything painful, a man both excellent in eloquence and to us the most longed-for of friends. Yet, if it were another to whom I had to write of these things, I should surely need many words for this—that what has befallen is human, and that to bear it is necessary, and that nothing more is gained by grieving the more, and all that seemed fitting for the consolation of grief, as though teaching one who did not know. But since I count it shameful, toward a man who knows how to admonish others, to make those speeches by which one must school the ignorant to self-control, come, leaving the rest aside, I will tell you the tale—whether of a wise man, or rather a true account—not strange to you, perhaps, but unknown, as is likely, to most; using which alone, as a grief-assuaging drug, you may find release from your suffering not less than that of the cup which the Laconian woman is believed to have offered to Telemachus for an equal need. For they say that Democritus of Abdera, when Darius grieved for the death of a fair wife, and he had nothing to say that would suffice for consolation, promised him to bring her back to the light, if he were willing to furnish whatever was needed for the purpose. Darius bade him spare nothing, but take whatever he might and make good his promise; and Democritus, having paused a little while, said that everything for the doing of the deed was provided him, save one thing only, which he himself knew not how to get, but which Darius, as king of all Asia, would perhaps not find hard to discover. And when Darius asked what so great a thing it was that the king alone might know, Democritus, they say, answered and said: if he should inscribe upon the tomb of his wife the names of three men who had never mourned, she would straightway come to life again, being shamed by the law of the rite. And Darius being at a loss, and unable to find anyone to whom no grievous thing had ever befallen, Democritus, laughing as was his wont, said: "Why then, O strangest of men, do you mourn without measure, as though you alone were entangled in so great a grief, you who cannot find even one of all who have ever lived without his share of a private sorrow?" But these things Darius needed to hear, a barbarian and uneducated man, given over to pleasure and passion; but you, a Hellene and one who honours true education, ought to have the remedy from yourself, since otherwise it would be a shame to your reason, if it had not the same power as time.

[161358] 70. To Dositheus

[161376] Your son Diogenes, having shown himself to me after your departure, and having said that you were angry with him, as a father might be vexed with a son, begged me to become a mediator of his reconciliation with you. If, then, his fault was moderate and such as you can bear, yield to nature, and, knowing that you are a father, return in your judgement toward your son; but if he has stumbled in something too great for pardon to reach, you yourself would be the juster judge, whether you ought, having borne even this nobly, to overcome your son's purpose by a better judgement, or whether you should entrust the trial of his fault to the chastening of a longer time.

[162046] 71. To Plutarchus

[162065] To me even a small letter from you suffices to court the occasion of great pleasure. And so, being greatly pleased with what you wrote, I give back the like myself, judging that the friendships of comrades ought to be repaid not by the length of letters so much as by the greatness of goodwill.

[162361] 72. To Eugenius

[162378] In all respects my body is moderately well, and besides, the affairs of my mind too go well. And I think there can be no better proem to a letter sent by friend to friend. Of what, then, is it the proem? Of a request, I think. And what is the request? Of letters in return; which I would they might agree in their thought also with mine, announcing the same favourable tidings from you to us.

[162772] 73. To the governor of Greece (or to a curator)

[162821] I have given order that ships be built at Cenchreae. As to how many, the governor of the Hellenes will tell you; but as to how the care of the matter should be taken, hear it from us: free of all bribe-taking, and quickly. And that you may not repent of such a service, I myself, with the gods' help, will take thought.

[163142] 74. To Libanius

[163159] We ought, indeed, obeying the Delphic precept, to know ourselves, and not dare to be over-confident in face of the hearing of so great a man, against whom even to look, when merely seen, is hard, much less to come to a level with him when he sets in motion his all-wise harmony; since, even if Pan should sound a clear melody, anyone might stand aside in awe, were he even Aristaeus, and at Apollo's playing upon the cithara anyone might be still, even if he knew the music of Orpheus. For the lesser ought justly to give way to the greater, so far as it is the lesser, if it is to know what is its own and what is not. But whoever has hoped to set a mortal melody against an inspired music has not learned, it seems, the fate of Marsyas the Phrygian, nor of the river named after him, which bears witness to the punishment of the maddened flute-player; nor has he heard of the death of Thamyris the Thracian, who set his voice against the Muses with no good fortune. Why need I speak of the Sirens, whose feathers still the victorious Muses bear upon their brows? But of those each, for his unmusical daring, even now pays a sufficient penalty in men's memory; whereas we ought, as I said, to stand within our own borders, and, while we drink our fill of your music, to be still, like those who receive in quiet the oracle of Apollo as it comes forth from the holy shrine. But since you yourself woo from us the keynote of the song, and, as it were with the wand of Hermes, with your own words you move and rouse us from sleep, come, just as those who, when Dionysus strikes his thyrsus, are borne, unloosed, to the dance, so too let us, under your plectrum, sound back what is fitting, like those who attend the leader of the chorus at the recall of the rhythm. And first let us begin for you with the discourse which lately, at the king's command, we wrought upon the famous bridging of the strait—since this is what seems good to you—giving small in return for great, and in truth bronze for gold, but feasting our own Hermes with such gifts of hospitality as we have. Surely not even Theseus disdained Hecale's plain supper, but knew how to be content with little for what was needful. And Pan, the god of shepherds, did not scorn to set the herdboy's pipe to his lips. Receive, then, the discourse with a gracious nod, and do not shrink from lending a great ear to a little song. But if it has anything skilful in it, the discourse itself is fortunate, and its maker has gained the witness of Athena's vote besides. But if it needs still a perfect hand for the filling-up of the whole, do not yourself disdain to add what is wanting. Surely the god, when called upon by an archer, has stood beside him and laid his hand to the dart, and to a lyre-singer chanting the high-pitched strain the Pythian, with the help of a cicada, sounded the like for the lacking string.

[166034] 75. To Iamblichus (a fictitious composition transmitted in the corpus)

[166106] O Zeus, how is it well that we should pass our days in the heart of Thrace and winter in the silos there, while from the fair Iamblichus, as from some morning spring, letters are sent us instead of swallows, and yet it is permitted neither to us to come to him nor to him to come to us? Who would willingly accept this, unless he were some Thracian, a worthy match for Tereus? "Lord Zeus, but do you deliver from Thrace the Achaeans; make a clear sky, and grant our eyes at last to see" our own Hermes, and to greet his halls and to cling to his shrines, as they say Odysseus did when, after his wandering, he saw Ithaca. But him the Phaeacians set down still sleeping, like some piece of merchandise, out of the ship, and departed; whereas us not even sleep takes hold of, until it be granted us to see you, the great benefit of the world. And yet you jest that you have transported all the East—both me and my comrade Sopater—into Thrace; but for us, if I must speak the truth, so long as Iamblichus is not present, a Cimmerian fog dwells with us. And you ask one of two things: either that we come to you, or that you come to us. For us the one is at once to be prayed for and profitable, to return to you ourselves and to enjoy your good things; but the other is better than every prayer. But since for you at least it is impossible and unprofitable, do you stay at home and rejoice and keep the quiet that you have, while we will bear nobly whatever the god grants. For it is the part of good men, they say, both to keep good hope and to do what is needful, but to follow the necessities of fortune.

[167712] 76. To Iamblichus (transmitted in the corpus)

[167759] I confess that I have paid a sufficient penalty for your absence, not only by the hardships that befell me during my travels, but, more than these, by this very thing, that I have been parted from you for so long a time, though I have met with many and various fortunes everywhere, so as to leave nothing untried. For though I have endured the tumults of wars, and the constraint of a siege, and the wandering of flight, and fears of every kind, and besides the extremities of winters and the dangers of sicknesses, and from upper Pannonia to the crossing of the Calchedonian strait countless and manifold misfortunes, I would say that nothing has happened to me so painful or so hard to bear as that I, having left in the East you, the common good of the Hellenes, have for so long a time not seen you; so that, if I should say that a mist and a great cloud lie about my eyes, do not wonder. For then will calm air, and the brightest light of the sun, and as it were the truest and fairest spring of life surround me, when I embrace you, the great glory of the world, and, like a true-born son to a good father, seen against all hope returning from some war or sea-storm, and having told all that I suffered and through what dangers I came, and being, as it were, moored upon a sacred anchor, may find at last a sufficient solace for my pains. For it consoles, naturally, and lightens misfortunes, when one, making known to others what he has suffered, divides the knowledge of his trouble in the fellowship of speech. Meanwhile, with such means as I have, I attend to you according to my power; for I will not cease, during the time of our separation, to tend you with the token of letters. And if I should receive the like from you in return, I shall relax a little, holding converse with your letters as with some saving symbol. Do you receive graciously what comes from us, and show yourself the more gracious in return; for whatever you signify of good or write to us, this is judged by us in place of the voice of Hermes the eloquent, or the hand of Asclepius.

[169828] 77. To Iamblichus (transmitted in the corpus)

[169875] "You have come, you have done well"; for you have come, even in your absence, by what you write; and I longed for you, and you set my heart aflame, burning with desire. So neither do I deny the love-charm, nor do I leave you in anything; but I behold you as present to my soul, and am with you though absent, and nothing suffices to bring me to satiety. Yet you do not cease both doing good to the present, ever, and to the absent giving, by what you write, not gladness only but very life. When, for instance, someone reported to me lately that a comrade had come bringing letters from you, I chanced to be on the third day of a disorder of the stomach, and was somewhat sorely afflicted in body, so as not to be even free of fever; but when it was signified, as I said, that the bearer of the letters was at my doors, I, like a man not master of himself and possessed, leapt up and rushed out before what was needful could be brought. And when I had but taken the letter into my hands, I swear by the gods themselves and by the desire for you that has kindled in me, at once my pains fled, and the fever too left me straightway, as though abashed by some manifest presence of the saviour. And when I had broken the seal and read, what soul do you think I had then, or with how much pleasure was I filled, praising and justly loving the dearest of winds, as you say, the truly amorous, the minister of fair things, because he became to me the servant of your letters, having directed your letter to us like a winged thing with a fair and conducting breeze, through which it was granted me not only to be gladdened, learning the natural tidings of you, but also, sick as I was, to be saved by you? But as for the rest—how shall I tell what I felt at first toward the letter, or how sufficiently make known my love? How often did I run back from the middle to the beginning? How often was I afraid lest, having finished, I should unawares...? How often, as in some circle and round of revolution, did I draw the close of the conclusion back to the beginning, as in a musical song giving back to the end the melody that led to the beginning of the rhythm? Yes, and by Zeus, what followed these things—how often did I press the letter to my mouth, as mothers embrace their children; how often did I cling to it with my mouth as though kissing my own dearest beloved; how often did I greet and kiss the very superscription, which had been sealed by your hand as by a clear signet, and then set it upon my eyes, as one clinging to the traces of the letters as to the fingers of that sacred right hand! Hail, then, yourself to us many times, as the fair Sappho says, and not only as many times as the time during which we have been parted from one another, but hail always, and write and remember us as is fitting. For us no time shall fail in which we shall not, everywhere and on every occasion and in every discourse, hold you in memory. But if anywhere "Zeus should grant us to come to our native land," and if again we should come beneath that sacred hearth of yours, spare us no longer as a fugitive, but bind us, if it please you, to your own dearest seats, as one who has caught a deserter from the Muses, and then chasten us with such penalties as suffice. Surely not even unwillingly shall I undergo the sentence, but willingly indeed and rejoicing, as the provident and saving correction of a good father. And if you should be willing to trust me even with the judgement against myself, and grant me to carry out the sentence I wish, I would gladly fasten myself, my noble friend, to your little tunic, that I might in no way be parted from you, but be ever with you and everywhere borne about, like those whom the fables fashion as men of double nature. Unless that too the fables tell as in play, but hint at the special quality of friendship, showing, in the bond of fellowship, the kinship of soul that runs through both.

[173807] 78. To Iamblichus (transmitted in the corpus)

[173854] I perceive the sweetness of your reproach, and how you do both things at once, both honouring by what you write and instructing by what you charge against me. For my part, if I were conscious to myself of having failed, even a little, in my duty toward you, I should certainly either, by alleging reasonable excuses, try to escape the reproach, or, having erred, should not refuse to ask pardon, since I know you are not otherwise unforgiving toward your own, if we have offended in any of the friendly duties toward you against our will. But as it is—for it was neither lawful that you should be overlooked, nor we negligent, that we might obtain what, ever seeking, we long for—come, let me defend myself to you as in a written charge, and show that I have neither overlooked any of the things I ought toward you, nor even dared to delay.

[174696] 2. I came from Pannonia this third year now, scarcely saved from the dangers and labours you know of. And having crossed the Calchedonian strait and halted at the city of Nicomedes, to you first, as to an ancestral god, I rendered the first-fruits of my own deliverance, sending to you, as a token of my arrival, in place of a sacred offering, my greeting. And the bearer of the letter was one of the imperial guards, Julian by name, son of Bacchylus, an Apamean by birth, to whom I entrusted the letter especially because he undertook both to come to you and to know you well. After this there came to me from you, as from Apollo, a sacred letter, making plain that you had gladly heard of our arrival; and this was to me a happy omen and the beginning of good hopes—Iamblichus the wise, and the letters of Iamblichus to us. Why need I tell how I rejoiced, or signify what I felt about the letter? For if you received what was written by us on this account—it was sent to you by a courier from those who had come from there—you fully knew, from what they made plain, how great a pleasure I had in them. Again, when the tutor of my children was returning home, I began another letter to you, at once confessing my gratitude for the former ones and asking the return in equal measure for the future. After this the fair Sopater came to us as an envoy; and I, when I knew it, at once leapt up and rushed out, and, embracing him, wept for joy, dreaming of nothing else but you and the letters from you to us. And when I received them, I kissed them and held them to my eyes, and clung to them fast, as though fearing that, in the reading of the letters, the image of your likeness might fly away from me unawares. And indeed I wrote back at once, not to you only but also to the holy Sopater, his son, as though making much of it that we had received the common comrade from Apamea as a kind of pledge for your absence. Since then, having now written to you a third time, I have myself received no other letter than the one in which you seem to reproach me.

[176752] 3. If, then, you accuse me for this reason, that under the form of a charge you may procure for us more occasions of writing, I receive the reproach very gladly, and in what I receive I appropriate to myself the whole of the favour; but if you truly accuse me of having fallen short in some duty toward you, who could be more wretched than I, through the injustice or sloth of letter-carriers, when I least of all men deserve to meet with this? And yet I, even if I do not write often, am justly worthy of pardon from you—not, I would say, because of the business I have in hand; may I never fare so ill as not to count your concerns above all business, as Pindar says—but because, toward so great a man, of whom even to make mention is awe, he who shrinks from writing is more temperate than he who is over-bold beyond what is fitting. For as those who dare to look continually at the dazzling rays of Helios, unless they be in some sort divine and, like the true-born of eagles, take courage against his beams, neither can behold what it is not lawful to see, and, the more they strive, the more they show that they cannot attain it, so too he who dares to write to you, the more he wishes to be bold, the more clearly he shows that he ought to fear. Yet for you, my noble friend, who are, one might say, the saviour of all the Hellenic world, it were fitting both to write to us ungrudgingly and to allay, so far as you can, the shrinking on our part. For as Helios—that the discourse may again take the image for you from the god—as Helios, then, when he shines whole with pure rays, withholds nothing from him who comes to his radiance, but does his own proper work, so too you ought, watering ungrudgingly the Hellenic world with your fair things as with light, not to shrink, if anyone, for shame or fear, is abashed at making the return to you. For neither does Asclepius heal men in hope of recompense, but everywhere fulfils his own loving-kindness. This you ought to do, being as it were a physician of cultured souls, and to preserve through all things the precept of virtue, like a good archer, who, even if he has no adversary, none the less ever exercises his hand toward the mark. Since the aim is not the same for both of us: ours is to obtain your good gifts, and yours to meet with what is given by us. But we, even if we write ten thousand times, play like the children of Homer, who, by the seashore, let whatever they have shaped of clay be washed away; whereas from you even a small letter is better than any fruitful stream, and I, for one, would rather possess one letter of Iamblichus than the gold of Lydia. If, then, you care anything for your lovers—and you do, unless I am mistaken—do not overlook us, who, like nestlings, ever stand in need of nurture from you; but write continually and do not shrink from feasting us with your fair things. And if we fall short, do you yourself appropriate the office of both, both of what you give and of what, on our behalf, you discharge in equal measure. It befits one who is a disciple, or, if you will, a foster-child, of Hermes the eloquent, not to keep that god's wand in sleeping, but rather to choose to imitate him in moving and rousing up.

[179971] 79. To Iamblichus (transmitted in the corpus)

[180018] For Odysseus it sufficed, when checking his son's notion concerning him, to say: "No god am I; why do you liken me to the immortals?" But I would say that I am not even among men at all, so long as I am not with Iamblichus. Yet I confess to be your lover, as he was the father of Telemachus. For even if someone should say I am unworthy, not even so will he take from me my longing; since I hear that of fair statues many have become lovers, who not only did no harm to the art of the maker, but, by their passion for them, added to the work a living pleasure. As for the men of old and wise, among whom you wish in play to enrol me, I would say I fall as far short of them as I believe you yourself share in those men's company. And yet you—not Pindar only, nor Democritus, nor Orpheus the most ancient, but the whole Hellenic world together, all that is remembered to have come to the summit of philosophy—you hold blended, as in a lyre, by the harmonious composition of varied notes, to the perfection of music. And as Argus the guardian of Io, the fables, having care of Zeus's darling, fence about on every side with the sleepless dartings of his eyes, so too the discourse lights you up, the true guardian of virtue, with ten thousand eyes of culture. Proteus the Egyptian, they say, changed himself into varied shapes, as if fearing lest he should unawares reveal to those who sought him how wise he was; but I, if Proteus was really wise and such as to know many things, as Homer says, praise his nature, but do not admire his judgement, because he did the work not of any lover of mankind, but of a deceiver, hiding himself, that he might not be useful to men. But you, my noble friend, who would not truly admire, that you are in no way less than the wise Proteus—nay rather greater—since, perfected to the summit of virtue, you do not grudge men your fair things, but, like pure Helios, lead the rays of unmixed wisdom upon all, not only being with the present as is fitting, but glorifying the absent, so far as you can, by what comes from you? You would thus surpass even the fair Orpheus in what you do; for he spent his own music upon the ears of wild beasts, whereas you, as though born for the salvation of the common race of men, emulating everywhere the hand of Asclepius, come upon all things with a learned and saving nod. So that to me it seems that Homer too, if he came to life again, would far more justly riddle in your case the verse: "And one still somewhere is kept back alive in the wide world." For in truth, of the old mint, a kind of sacred spark of true and fruitful culture is kindled in you alone. And may it be, O Zeus the saviour and Hermes the eloquent, that the common benefit of all the inhabited world, the fair Iamblichus, be preserved for the longest time. Surely, in the case of Homer and Plato and Socrates and any other worthy of that company, the granting of a just prayer, when it was the good fortune of those before, so increased their times to greater things. Nothing, then, hinders that in our day too a man worthy, both in word and in life, of those men, should, by like prayers, be escorted to the uttermost of old age, for the happiness of mankind.

[183224] 80. To Serapion the elder (on figs and on the number one hundred)

[183291] Others keep festivals in various ways, but I send to you, as a token of a sweet feast, a pleasant gift, a hundred long-stemmed figs of our country, courting for you a pleasure small in the greatness of the gift, but, in its excellence, perhaps sufficient. Now Aristophanes thinks the fig, save for honey, sweeter than all other things, and does not even allow that to be sweeter than the fig, as he says, judging the matter himself; while to Herodotus the historian, for the showing of a true desolation, it sufficed to say: "Among whom there are neither figs nor any other good thing," as though no other good thing among fruits were of more account than figs, nor any good thing at all needed by those among whom the fig is found. And the wise Homer praises the other fruits for size or colour or beauty, but to the fig alone he grants the title of sweetness. And honey he calls "green," fearing lest unawares he should call sweet what often befalls to be bitter; but to the fig alone he renders its proper praise, as to nectar, since it alone of all is sweet. And honey, Hippocrates says, is sweet to the taste, but altogether bitter in the digestion; and I do not disbelieve the saying; for all agree that it is productive of bile and turns the humours to the contrary of the taste. And this the more accuses its nature of an inborn bitterness; for it would not change into what is bitter, unless this had altogether belonged to it from the beginning, from which it passed over to the other. But the fig is sweet not to the taste only, but is better also in the digestion. So beneficial is it to men that Aristotle says it is even an antidote against every deadly poison, and that for this reason at banquets it is set out before the other dishes and eaten after them as a relish, as though, in place of some sacred safeguard, it embraced the wrongs done by foods. And further, that the fig is dedicated to the gods, and is the offering laid on the altar at every sacrifice, and that it is better than all frankincense for the preparing of incense, this is no peculiar saying of mine, but whoever has learned its use knows that it is the saying of a wise man and hierophant. And the fair Theophrastus, in his precepts of husbandry, setting forth the generations of grafted trees, and what yield to graftings of one with another, praises, I think, above all plants, the tree of the fig, as being receptive of varied and diverse generation, and alone of the rest easily bearing the growth of every kind, if one, cutting off each of its branches, and then breaking it, should fit into the several stocks another sprouting growth, so that often the sight of it alone suffices in place of a whole garden, as though, in some most graceful meadow, it sent back from itself a varied and manifold splendour of fruits. And the other tree-fruits are short-lived and do not endure to be kept; but the fig alone may be carried over the year and meet the generation of the coming fruit; so that Homer too says that in the garden of Alcinous the fruits grow old upon one another. With the others, perhaps, this would seem a poetic fable; but with the fig alone it would agree with the plain truth, since it alone of the other fruits is more lasting. Such, I think, being the nature of the fig, far better is its growth among us, so that, while it is more precious than the other plants, that of our country is more wonderful than the fig elsewhere; and that, while it surpasses the others in its generation, it is itself, in turn, surpassed by ours, and again, by its inclusion under both heads, is preserved—like to the victor, while in the things in which it seems to be surpassed, again, on the whole, being the victor. And this not unreasonably befalls among us alone; for it was fitting, I think, that the city truly of Zeus, and the eye of all the East—I mean the sacred and greatest Damascus—which surpasses all other places in everything, in the beauty of her temples and the greatness of her shrines and the temperate blending of her seasons and the splendour of her springs and the multitude of her rivers and the fertility of her soil, should alone suffice, even with such a plant, for the surpassing of the marvel. For the tree endures no transplanting, nor passes beyond the bounds of its native growth, but, by the law of an indigenous plant, refuses generation from abroad. And gold, I think, and silver, the same, grow in many places; but our land alone bears a plant unable to grow elsewhere. And as the imports from the Indians, and the Persian silks, or whatever is born in the land of the Ethiopians—born and so reported—pass everywhere by the law of commerce, so too our fig, growing nowhere else of the earth, is sent everywhere by us, and there is neither city nor island which it does not visit with the marvel of its sweetness. Nay, it adorns even a royal table, and is a stately ornament of every feast; and neither cake, nor twist, nor any newly-baked bread, nor any other kind of seasoned dainty, is its equal wherever it comes; so great is its excellence over the other dishes and over the figs of every place. And the other figs either are eaten in their autumn season or, when dried, go into the storehouse; but ours alone serves both uses, and is fair upon the tree, but far fairer if it come to the drying. And if you should take in with the eye its beauty upon the trees, and how it hangs from each of the stocks by long stems, as it were after the manner of buds, or how the tree runs round in a circle with its fruit, one upon another in a row, forming a circular variegated splendour, you would say it contrives this as it were a necklace upon a throat. The plucking of them from the trees, too, and the contrivance for their long keeping, hold an ambition not less than the pleasure of their use; for they are not, like the other figs, thrown together all at once, nor dried in a heap or loosely in the sun, but first they are gently plucked from the trees by the hands, then hung upon the walls by twigs or thorny rods, that they may whiten as they come into contact with the pure sun, and remain unmolested by beasts and birds, guarded, as it were, by the protection of their thorns. And concerning their generation and sweetness and season and preparation and use, these things our letter plays out to you.

[189629] 2. As for the number one hundred, that it is more honourable than the others and circumscribes within itself the perfection of numbers, one might learn by considering thus. And I am not ignorant that it is the saying of men of old and wise, that the odd is set before the even, nor that they say the beginning of increase is the uncombined; for the like, abiding with the other, remains such as the other is, but when two have come to be, the third is the oddness. But I, even if the saying be too bold, would say nevertheless: the numbers are altogether dependent upon a beginning, and would carry continually their successive increase; yet I think it far juster to assign the cause of increase to the even rather than to the odd. For the number one could not be odd, having nothing in respect to which it might become odd; but the conjunction of the dyad gives birth to a twofold oddness, and from the two numbers the third reasonably comes to increase. And again, in the mixture of another dyad, it takes the excess of the tetrad; and in general the fellowship of the numbers with one another, showing the oddness from each, is enclosed within the number of the dyad. This being granted, I would say, I think, that, the first decad rolling round its revolution into itself, the whole passes over into the number of the hundred, so that, while the increase from the one would extend to ten, again the decad, ascending through itself, is completed into the number of the hundred. And thence again, from hundreds, the whole reaps the power of numbers, the one never resting, unless the dyad in the mixture ever begets the odd and recalls it again into itself, until once more, by another hundred, it shut up the gathered sum of the numbers, and, attaching to it perfection, creep again from it toward the other, by the appellations of hundreds ever carrying up the whole to the infinity of comprehension. And it seems to me that Homer too, neither simply nor idly, in his verses set about Zeus the aegis with its hundred tassels, but riddled this with some higher and unspeakable meaning, saying, as it were, that to the most perfect god he attached the most perfect number, and that with which alone, beyond the others, he might more justly be adorned; or because the whole universe, which he comprehended into the figure of the aegis by the roundness of the image, no other number circumscribes than the number of the hundred, fitting to the comprehension of the whole intelligible the hundred that runs in a circle. This same argument also seats the hundred-handed Briareus beside Zeus as his assessor, and allows him to contend against the power of the father, giving him, as it were, in the perfection of the number, the perfection of his strength. And further, Pindar the Theban, proclaiming in his epinicians the slaying of Typhoeus, and attributing the conquest of this greatest of giants to the greatest king of the gods, confirms the surpassing greatness of his eulogy from no other source than this, that he sufficed to bring down the hundred-headed giant with a single blow; as though no other giant were thought to have come to the hand of Zeus as an antagonist than him whom his mother alone of all armed with a hundred heads, nor any other of the gods more worthy of victory for the overthrow of so great a giant than Zeus alone. And to Simonides the lyric poet, for the praise of Apollo, it suffices to call the god "Hekatos" (god of the hundred), and, as it were in place of some other sacred token, to adorn him with the name, because, they say, he subdued the Python, the serpent, with a hundred arrows, and that he rejoices to be called Hekatos rather than Pythian, addressed, as it were, by the symbol of some perfect appellation. And the island that nursed Zeus, Crete, as though having received the nursing in return for her reception of Zeus, has been honoured with the number of a hundred cities. And Thebes too, the hundred-gated, Homer praises for no other reason than this, that in its hundred gates there was a wondrous beauty. And I pass over the hecatombs of the gods, and temples a hundred feet long, and altars with a hundred steps, and the men's halls that hold a hundred, and the fields of a hundred plethra, and all the other things, divine and human, that are comprised under the appellation of this number. This number, indeed, knows how to adorn both the military order and the order of peace, and it brightens the company of a hundred men under their captain, and honours, too, the bench of judges that comes to the same equal number. And though I have more than these to say, the law of the letter turns me back; but do you grant pardon to my discourse, because even these things have been said beyond what is sufficient. And if the attempt has any moderate beauty, in your judgement, it shall by all means be made open to the rest also, receiving the witness of your vote; but if it needs another hand for the filling-up of the aim, who could better than you, having refined the writing to beauty, polish it to the pleasure of the beholder?

[194713] 81. To Sapor, king of the Persians (a forgery, transmitted in the corpus)

[194788] Showing, as I have until now, my inborn calm and love of mankind from childhood, I have received as subjects all who dwell beneath the sun. For behold, every race of barbarians, even to the borders of the river Ocean, has come bearing gifts to my feet; and likewise the Sagadares, reared by the Danube, and the Goths of varied and shaven aspect, who have no appearance like to men but a savage form: these in the present time grovel at my footsteps, promising to do whatever befits my empire. And not in this alone am I drawn on, but I must with all speed overtake the land of the Persians and put to flight that Sapor, the descendant of Darius, until he become tributary and subject to me; and thence to lay waste the dwelling-places of the Indians and of the Saracens, until they too all become, in the second rank of my empire, tributary and subject. But you have thought beyond their power, alleging that you have clothed yourself in piety, while you put forward shamelessness, and everywhere proclaim that I have proved unworthy of the empire of the Romans. Or do you yourself not know that I am the descendant of the most mighty Constans? And though these things are thus known to us, on your account I have not departed from my former disposition, in which, while still young in years, I and you together shared. But with calm mind I decree that ten times a hundred pounds of gold be sent to me by you at my passage by Caesarea, while I am still upon the highway, being about with all speed to march upon the Persian war, ready, if you do not do this, to overturn every place of Caesarea, and to raze to the ground the fair-wrought monuments long since raised in it, and to set up temples and statues, that I may persuade all to yield to the king of the Romans and not be lifted up. The gold above named, therefore, having weighed and measured it out by number on the Campanian balance with security, send to me by some servant trusty to you, sealed with your own ring, so that, when I have recognised the inexorableness of the occasion, even though it be late, I may be made calm toward you concerning your offences. For what I have read, I have learned and condemned.

[196966] 82. To Eustathius (a letter on piety, transmitted in the corpus)

[197032] The nearness of your land—I mean Ionia—has brought us very great gain. For when we were grieved and distressed at the first reports, it consoled us. What it is that I mean, you shall learn. It came to our ears that you had revolted from your former religion, handed down from your forefathers, and had driven on toward a vain superstition, lured to this by some evil counsellor of a gadfly. And what was I likely to suffer in my displeasure? For as, if I should learn that some good thing of yours was being proclaimed, I count it my own gain, so too any grievous thing—which I do not believe—I likewise reckon rather my own loss. Being grieved, then, at these things, the presence of our father Aetius gladdened me, announcing the contrary, things to be prayed for by us; for he said that you were earnest about houses of prayer, and were not far drawn away from the remembrance of those athletic men, and altogether he affirmed that you hold to the god-fearing ways of our own. And I would say to you, after the Homeric manner: "Strike thus," and by such remembrances gladden those who love you, remembering that there is nothing higher than reverence for the gods. For virtue at its summit teaches us to hate falsehood as deceitful, and to cling to the truth, which is shown most of all in the worship concerning the divine. For the multitude is altogether contentious and unstable; but that which alone, with one, is the minister and rules over the whole, not from a portioning-out and a lot, like the children of Cronos, but being its own beginning, and ruling over all, neither having received it by force from another, but being before all things—this is truly God, whom, with the worship that is owing, one ought to adore. Farewell.

[198774] 83. To a friend (or to Libanius)

[198808] How profitable to us was the delay of the warrant! For instead of trembling and being afraid as I was borne along on the public carriage and fell in with drunken muleteers and with mules, "barley-fed," in Homer's phrase, through idleness and surfeit, and instead of enduring dust and strange cries and the cracking of whips, it has befallen me to journey at leisure, by a way overarched and shady, holding many springs and many resting-places suited to the season, in which to relieve my weariness; so that there appeared to me a halting-place, airy and ample, beneath certain plane-trees or cypresses, with the Phaedrus in my hands, or some other of the discourses of Plato. These things, then, dear friend, while I enjoy the freedom of my travel, I thought it strange not to share with you also and signify to you.