WORK: Daphnis and Chloe  (slug: longus-daphnis-and-chloe-09b265)

CHAPTER: 02-book-2



[0] 1.1. By now the autumn fruit was at its height and the vintage was pressing, and everyone in the fields was at work: one was repairing the wine-presses, one was scouring out the jars, one was plaiting wicker baskets.

[218] 1.2. One was concerned with a little sickle for cutting the clusters, another with a stone for crushing the juice-laden grapes, another with dry osier shredded by beating, so that the must might be carried by torchlight at night.

[449] 1.3. So Daphnis and Chloe too neglected the goats and the sheep and lent the help of their hands to others. He carried clusters in baskets, threw them into the presses and trod them, and bore the wine to the jars; she prepared food for the grape-pickers and poured them older wine to drink, and gathered the grapes from the lower vines.

[787] 1.4. For all the vines in Lesbos are low, not high, nor trained up trees, but stretching their shoots down low and spreading like ivy; even a child with hands just freed from swaddling-clothes could reach a cluster.

[1004] 2.1. So, as is natural at the festival of Dionysus and the birth of wine, the women, who had been called in from the neighbouring fields to help, cast their eyes on Daphnis and praised his beauty as like that of Dionysus; and one of the bolder ones even kissed him, and this stirred Daphnis but grieved Chloe;

[1315] 2.2. while the men in the presses flung all manner of words at Chloe, and leapt about more wildly, like Satyrs round some Bacchant, and prayed to become flocks and be pastured by her; so that this time it was she who took pleasure, and Daphnis who was grieved.

[1577] 2.3. And they prayed that the vintage might quickly end and they might get back to their familiar places, and hear, instead of unmusical shouting, the pipe or the very bleating of their flocks.

[1772] 2.4. And when, after a few days, the vines had been harvested and the jars held the must and there was no longer any need of many hands, they drove their flocks down to the plain and, full of joy, did reverence to the Nymphs, bringing them clusters on the vine-shoots, the first-fruits of the vintage.

[2075] 2.5. Nor had they ever in earlier days passed them by carelessly, but always at the start of pasturing they paid their respects, and on coming up from pasturing they did reverence; and they always brought something, a flower or fruit or green leafage or a libation of milk. And for these things they afterward received their reward from the gods;

[2423] 2.6. but then, like dogs let loose from their chains, they gambolled, they piped, they sang, they wrestled with the goats and the sheep.

[2561] 3.1. While they were taking their delight, an old man came up to them, dressed in a goatskin, with rawhide shoes on his feet and a wallet slung about him, and the wallet was an old one. He sat down near them and spoke as follows: "I am Philetas,

[2808] 3.2. children, the old man, I who once sang many songs to these Nymphs, and piped many tunes to that Pan, and led a great herd of cattle by music alone. I have come to tell you what I have seen, to report to you what I have heard.

[3040] 3.3. I have a garden made by my own hands, which I have worked at ever since age made me cease to herd; and whatever the seasons bring, I have it all in there, each in its season.

[3221] 3.4. In spring roses and lilies and hyacinths and violets of both kinds; in summer poppies and wild pears and apples of every sort; now vines and figs and pomegranates and green myrtles.

[3409] 3.5. Into this garden flocks of birds come together at dawn, some for food, some for song; for it is closely shaded and overspread with shade and watered by three springs. If one were to take away the wall, one would think one was looking at a grove."

[3662] 4.1. "As I entered it today about midday, a boy was seen beneath the pomegranates and the myrtles, holding myrtle-berries and pomegranates, white as milk, golden as fire, gleaming as though just bathed. He was naked, he was alone;

[3894] 4.2. he was playing as though gathering fruit from his own garden. So I rushed at him to lay hold of him, fearing that in his wantonness he might break the myrtles and the pomegranates; but he slipped away from me lightly and easily, now running beneath the rose-beds, now hiding under the poppies,

[4194] 4.3. like a young partridge. And yet I have often had trouble chasing sucking kids, and often been worn out running down newborn calves; but this was a slippery thing and beyond catching. So, growing weary as an old man does, and leaning on my staff, while at the same time watching that he should not escape, I asked him whose son he was among the neighbours, and what he meant by gathering fruit from another's garden.

[4616] 4.4. He answered nothing, but standing near he laughed very softly and pelted me with the myrtle-berries, and somehow charmed me out of being angry any longer. So I begged him to come into my hands and fear nothing more, and I swore by the myrtles that I would let him go, and would give him apples and pomegranates and always allow him to gather the fruit and pluck the flowers, if I might win from him a single kiss."

[5037] 5.1. "At that, laughing very merrily, he uttered a voice such as neither swallow nor nightingale nor swan, even when grown old like me: 'For my part, Philetas, I grudge you no kiss; for I wish to be kissed more than you wish to be young again. But consider whether the gift suits your years;

[5330] 5.2. for your old age will be no help to you against chasing me after the one kiss. I am hard to catch for the hawk and the eagle and any other bird swifter than these. I am no boy, even if I seem a boy, but older than Cronus and than the whole of time itself.

[5592] 5.3. And I know that, as a stripling, you pastured your broad herd on yonder mountain, and I was beside you as you piped by those oaks, when you were in love with Amaryllis; but you did not see me, though I stood very close to the girl. Well, I gave her to you; and now you have children, good herdsmen and farmers.

[5909] 5.4. Now I am the shepherd of Daphnis and Chloe; and when I have brought them together in the morning, I come into your garden and delight in the flowers and the plants, and bathe in these springs. That is why your flowers and plants are beautiful, watered by my bathing.

[6182] 5.5. See now whether any of your plants is broken, whether any fruit is plucked, whether any flower-root is trampled, whether any spring is troubled; and rejoice that you alone of men have looked, in your old age, upon this boy.'"

[6414] 6.1. "With these words he sprang up like a young nightingale onto the myrtles, and passing from branch to branch through the leaves climbed to the top. I saw too the wings on his shoulders and little bows between the wings,

[6639] 6.2. and then I saw neither these nor him any more. So if I have not grown these grey hairs for nothing, nor in growing old acquired the more witless a mind, you, children, are vowed to Love, and you are Love's concern."

[6861] 7.1. They were greatly delighted, as though hearing a tale and not a true account, and they asked what in the world Love was, whether a boy or a bird, and what his power was. So Philetas said again: "Love, children, is a god, young and beautiful and winged; that is why he delights in youth and pursues beauty and gives wings to the soul.

[7201] 7.2. And his power is so great that not even Zeus has the like. He rules over the elements, he rules over the stars, he rules over the gods who are his peers; not even you have so much power over the goats and the sheep.

[7423] 7.3. The flowers are all the works of Love; the plants are all his creations; through him the rivers flow and the winds blow.

[7550] 7.4. I have known a bull fall in love, and bellow as though stung by the gadfly; and a he-goat love a she-goat, and follow her everywhere. I myself was young and loved Amaryllis; and I remembered neither food nor took drink nor chose sleep.

[7792] 7.5. My soul was in pain, my heart leapt, my body grew chill; I cried out as though I were being beaten, I fell silent as though I were dead, I went into the rivers as though I were burning.

[7984] 7.6. I called on Pan to help, since he too had loved Pitys; I praised Echo for calling Amaryllis's name after me; I broke my pipes, because they charmed the cows for me but did not bring me Amaryllis.

[8186] 7.7. For there is no remedy for Love, none to be drunk, none to be eaten, none to be spoken in songs, except a kiss and an embrace and lying down together with naked bodies."

[8362] 8.1. Having taught them so much, Philetas departed, taking from them some cheeses and a kid that already had horns. And they, left alone, and then for the first time hearing the name of Love, were drawn together in their souls by grief, and on returning at night to their farmsteads they compared what they had heard with their own case.

[8701] 8.2. "Lovers are in pain; and we are in pain. They neglect their food; we likewise have neglected ours. They cannot sleep; this is what we now suffer too. They seem to burn; the fire is in us as well. They long to look upon each other; that is why we pray for the day to come sooner.

[8986] 8.3. This is more or less what love is, and we are in love with each other without knowing it. For if this is not love, and I am not the beloved, why then do we suffer thus, and why do we seek each other? Everything Philetas said was true.

[9227] 8.4. That boy from the garden was seen in a dream by our fathers too, and bade us pasture the flocks. How could one catch him? He is small and will flee. And how could one flee from him? He has wings and will overtake one.

[9451] 8.5. We must flee to the Nymphs for help. But Pan did not help even Philetas when he loved Amaryllis. The remedies, then, that he named—these we must seek: a kiss and an embrace and lying naked on the ground. It is cold, but we will endure it, after Philetas, as the next to do so."

[9735] 9.1. This became for them a nightly school. And leading their flocks to pasture the next day, they kissed each other on seeing each other and—what they had never done before—threw their arms about each other in an embrace; but the third remedy they shrank from, to strip and lie down; for that is bolder than befits not only a girl but a young goatherd.

[10090] 9.2. So again came a night spent in sleeplessness and in pondering what had happened and reproaching themselves for what they had left undone. "We have kissed, and it is no use; we have embraced, and we are no better off; the only remedy for love, then, is lying down together. We must try this too; surely in it there is something more potent than a kiss."

[10449] 10.1. With such reasonings, as was natural, they had amorous dreams too, of the kisses, of the embraces; and what they had not done by day, this they did in their dreams: they lay naked with each other.

[10653] 10.2. So they rose more god-possessed the next day and drove their flocks down with a rush, hurrying to their kisses; and on seeing each other they ran up with a smile.

[10823] 10.3. So the kisses came to pass, and the embrace of arms followed, but the third remedy held back, since neither did Daphnis dare to speak of it nor did Chloe wish to make the beginning, until by chance they did even this.

[11048] 11.1. Sitting beneath the trunk of an oak close to each other, and having tasted the delight in a kiss, they took their fill insatiably of the pleasure. There were embraces of arms too that pressed their bodies together.

[11270] 11.2. And in the embrace of arms, when Daphnis drew her somewhat more forcefully, Chloe somehow leaned over onto her side; and he too lay down together with her, following the kiss. And recognizing the image of their dreams, they lay there a long while as though bound together.

[11550] 11.3. But knowing nothing of what should come next, and thinking this to be the limit of amorous enjoyment, they spent the greater part of the day to no purpose and broke off and drove their flocks away, hating the night. And perhaps they would even have done something of the truth, had not a disturbance of this kind fallen upon all that countryside.

[11904] 12.1. Some rich young men of Methymna, wishing to spend the vintage in foreign pleasure, launched a small ship and seated household slaves at the oars and sailed along the fields of the Mytileneans, all those near the sea.

[12128] 12.2. For the coast has good harbours and is furnished with costly dwellings, and there are continuous baths, and parks and groves—some the works of nature, some the art of men;

[12307] 12.3. all fine for youth to enjoy. And as they sailed along and put in, they did no harm, but took their various pleasures: now fishing for rock-fish from a low rock with hooks of reed hung from fine line, now taking with dogs and nets the hares that fled the noise in the vineyards;

[12592] 12.4. and presently they busied themselves too with the catching of birds, and took with snares wild geese and ducks and bustards, so that their pleasure provided benefit to their table as well. And if they needed anything more, they got it from the people in the fields, paying more obols than it was worth.

[12902] 12.5. They needed only bread and wine and shelter; for it did not seem safe, with the autumn season now upon them, to be at sea; so they even hauled their ship up onto the land, fearing a stormy night.

[13105] 13.1. Now one of the country folk, needing a rope for hauling up the stone that crushed the trodden grapes, since the earlier one had broken, went secretly down to the sea, came to the unguarded ship, loosed the cable,

[13325] 13.2. carried it home, and used it for what he needed. So at dawn the young men of Methymna made a search for the cable, and—since no one confessed to the theft—with a few reproaches to their hosts they sailed on; and after rowing thirty stades they put in at the fields in which Daphnis and Chloe lived; for the plain seemed to them good for hunting hares.

[13684] 13.3. Now they had no rope with which to fasten a cable; so twisting a long green osier into the likeness of a rope, they tied the ship by this from the very stern to the land. Then they loosed the dogs to follow the scent and stationed their nets along the paths that seemed convenient.

[13973] 13.4. So the dogs, running about with barking, frightened the goats, and they, leaving the high ground, made rather toward the sea; but having nothing to nibble in the sand, the bolder of them came to the ship and ate up the green osier by which the ship was tied.

[14239] 14.1. There was also a little swell on the sea, since a wind had risen from the mountains. So very quickly the ebb of the wave bore the loosened ship away and carried it out high upon the open sea.

[14438] 14.2. When the Methymnaeans became aware of this, some ran to the sea, others gathered the dogs; and all shouted, so that everyone in the neighbouring fields heard and came together. But it was no use; for as the wind was at its height, the ship was carried along the current with irresistible speed.

[14740] 14.3. So the Methymnaeans, robbed of no small property, sought for the one who pastured the goats; and finding Daphnis, they beat him and stripped him; and one of them, taking up a dog-leash, brought his hands round behind him as though to bind him.

[14991] 14.4. He cried out as he was beaten and begged the country folk, and first of all called on Lamon and Dryas to help. They held their ground, tough old men with hands made strong by farm-work, and demanded that the matter be argued out justly concerning what had happened.

[15264] 15.1. And when the others too demanded the same, they seated Philetas the cowherd as judge; for he was the oldest of those present and had a name among the villagers for exceptional justice. The Methymnaeans accused first, clearly and briefly, since they had a cowherd for judge.

[15545] 15.2. "We came to these fields wishing to hunt. We tied our ship with a green osier and left it on the shore, while we ourselves made a search for game with our dogs. In the meantime this fellow's goats came down to the sea and ate up the osier and set the ship adrift.

[15816] 15.3. You saw it carried out to sea; with how many goods do you think it was full? What clothing has been lost, what array of vessels, how much silver! A man who had these could buy these fields. In return for which we claim the right to take this fellow off, a worthless goatherd who pastures his goats on the seashore like a sailor."

[16153] 16.1. So much the Methymnaeans charged; but Daphnis, though in a sorry state from the blows, seeing Chloe present, made nothing of it all and spoke as follows: "I pasture my goats well. Never has a single villager complained that any goat of mine grazed his garden or broke a budding vine.

[16444] 16.2. But these are bad hunters and have ill-trained dogs, which, running much and barking harshly, chased my goats from the hills and the plains to the sea, like wolves.

[16616] 16.3. But they ate the osier; yes, for they had no grass in the sand, nor arbutus, nor thyme. But the ship was lost by the wind and the sea; these are the works of the storm, not of goats. But there was clothing and silver in it; and who in his right mind will believe that a ship carrying so much had an osier for a cable?"

[16942] 17.1. At this Daphnis wept and moved the country folk to much pity, so that Philetas the judge swore by Pan and the Nymphs that Daphnis was guilty of no wrong, and neither were the goats, but the sea and the wind, of which there were other judges.

[17191] 17.2. Saying this, Philetas did not persuade the Methymnaeans, but in their anger they rushed forward and again seized Daphnis and wished to bind him.

[17343] 17.3. At this the villagers, in their agitation, sprang upon them like starlings or jackdaws; and quickly they rescued Daphnis, now fighting himself as well, and quickly, beating the others with sticks, they put them to flight; nor did they leave off until they had driven them out of their borders into other fields.

[17662] 18.1. While they pursued the Methymnaeans, Chloe in great calm led Daphnis to the Nymphs and washed his face, bloodied from his nostrils that had been broken by a blow; and taking from his wallet a piece of leavened bread and a slice of cheese, she gave it to him to eat; and—what was most likely to restore him—she kissed him a honey-sweet kiss with soft lips.

[18025] 19.1. So at that time Daphnis came near to disaster. But the matter did not end there; the Methymnaeans, reaching home with difficulty—wayfarers instead of sailors, wounded instead of luxuriating—called an assembly of their citizens and, laying down suppliant boughs, begged to be granted vengeance;

[18326] 19.2. saying not one word of the truth, lest besides everything else they should be laughed at for having suffered such things and so many at the hands of shepherds, but accusing the Mytileneans of having seized their ship and plundered their goods by the law of war.

[18595] 19.3. And the Methymnaeans, believing them because of their wounds, and thinking it just to avenge young men of the foremost houses among them, voted war on the Mytileneans without a herald; and they bade the general launch ten ships and ravage their coast; for, winter being near, it was not safe to entrust a larger fleet to the sea.

[18932] 20.1. So the next day he put to sea with soldiers at the oars and sailed against the seaside fields of the Mytileneans. And he seized many flocks, and much grain and wine, the vintage having just ended, and not a few men too, those who worked these things.

[19190] 20.2. He sailed also against the fields of Chloe and Daphnis, and, making a swift landing, drove off as booty whatever lay underfoot. Now Daphnis was not pasturing his goats, but had gone up into the wood and was cutting green leafage, so that he might have feed to give the kids in winter; so that, seeing the raid from above, he hid himself in the hollow trunk of a dry beech;

[19570] 20.3. but Chloe was with the flocks, and, being pursued, fled as a suppliant to the Nymphs and begged them to spare both what she pastured and herself, for the goddesses' sake. But it was no use; for the Methymnaeans, after mocking the statues with many taunts, drove off the flocks and led her away too, beating her with osiers like a goat or a sheep.

[19924] 21.1. Having now their ships full of plunder of every kind, they decided to sail no farther, but made their voyage home, fearing both the winter and the enemy. So they sailed off, toiling at the oars;

[20126] 21.2. for there was no wind. And Daphnis, when quiet had come, went to the plain where they used to pasture, and seeing neither the goats nor finding the sheep nor coming upon Chloe, but only a great desolation and the pipe thrown down

[20363] 21.3. with which Chloe was wont to take delight, he cried out aloud and wailed piteously, and now ran to the oak where they used to sit, now to the sea, as though to see her, now to the Nymphs, to whom she had fled when dragged away. There too he threw himself on the ground and reproached the Nymphs as having betrayed him.

[20689] 22.1. "From you Chloe was seized, and could you bear to see this? She who wove garlands for you, who poured libations of her first milk, whose pipe too is this offering hanging here?

[20873] 22.2. Not one single goat did a wolf ever take from me, but the enemy have taken the flock and her who pastured it with me. And the goats they will flay and the sheep they will slaughter,

[21062] 22.3. while Chloe from now on will live in a city. With what feet shall I go off to my father and mother without the goats, without Chloe, a beggar made? For I have nothing left to pasture.

[21253] 22.4. Here I will lie and wait for either death or a second war. Do you too, Chloe, suffer such things? Do you remember this plain and these Nymphs and me? Or do the sheep and the goats console you, made captive along with you?"

[21483] 23.1. As he spoke such things, a deep sleep took hold of him out of his tears and his grief. And the three Nymphs stood over him, tall women and beautiful, half-naked and barefoot, with their hair loose and like the statues.

[21709] 23.2. At first they seemed to pity Daphnis; then the eldest said, encouraging him: "Reproach us not at all, Daphnis; for Chloe is more our care than yours. We pitied her when she was a baby and reared her when she lay in this cave.

[21942] 23.3. She has nothing in common with the plains. And now too her case has been our concern, so that she should neither be carried off to Methymna into slavery nor become a part of the spoils of war.

[22142] 23.4. That Pan, set up beneath the pine, whom you never honoured even with flowers—him we have asked to become Chloe's helper; for he is more familiar with armies than we, and has already fought many wars, leaving the country behind; and he goes against the Methymnaeans as no kindly enemy.

[22434] 23.5. Be troubled at nothing, but rise and show yourself to Lamon and Myrtale, who also lie on the ground, thinking that you too have become part of the plunder; for Chloe will come back to you tomorrow with the goats, with the sheep, and you shall pasture together and pipe together; the rest shall be Love's concern for you."

[22763] 24.1. Having seen and heard such things, Daphnis sprang up from his sleep, and full of tears from both joy and grief, did reverence to the statues of the Nymphs and vowed that, if Chloe were saved, he would sacrifice the best of his goats.

[23004] 24.2. And running too to the pine, where the statue of Pan was set up, horned and goat-legged, holding in one hand a pipe and in the other a leaping he-goat, he did reverence to him also and prayed for Chloe and vowed to sacrifice a he-goat.

[23247] 24.3. And scarcely at last, about sunset, ceasing from his tears and prayers, he took up the leafage he had cut and returned to the farmstead, and freeing Lamon's household from mourning,

[23436] 24.4. and filling them with gladness, he tasted food and set out for sleep—not even that without tears, but praying again to see the Nymphs in a dream, and praying that the day might come quickly on which they had promised him Chloe. That night seemed of all the longest; and on it these things were done.

[23743] 25.1. The general of the Methymnaeans, having sailed off some ten stades, wished to give his soldiers, wearied by the raid, a rest. So taking a headland that ran out into the sea, stretching out in a crescent,

[23954] 25.2. within which the sea made an anchorage calmer than any harbour, there he moored the ships at anchor riding offshore, so that not one of the country folk from the land should trouble them, and let the Methymnaeans loose for peaceful enjoyment.

[24204] 25.3. And they, having abundance of everything from the plunder, drank, played, and acted out a festival of victory. But just as day was ending and the merriment was fading into night, suddenly the whole earth seemed to blaze with fire, and a rushing din of oars was heard, as of a great fleet sailing up.

[24511] 25.4. Someone cried to the general to arm; one called to another; and one seemed to be wounded, and one lay in the posture of a corpse, feigning. One would have thought he was watching a battle by night, with no enemy present.

[24739] 26.1. After such a night came on a day far more fearful than the night. The he-goats of Daphnis and the she-goats had ivy with clustering berries on their horns, and the rams and the ewes of Chloe howled the howl of wolves.

[24964] 26.2. And she herself was seen crowned with pine. About the sea itself too many strange things happened. For the anchors, when they tried to raise them, stayed fast at the bottom, and the oars, when they let them down to row, were broken; and dolphins, leaping from the sea and striking the ships with their tails, loosened the fastenings.

[25305] 26.3. There was heard too, from the sheer rock above the headland, a sound of a pipe; but it did not delight like a pipe, but frightened the hearers like a trumpet.

[25471] 26.4. So they were thrown into confusion and ran to their arms and called those they could not see the enemy, so that again they prayed for night to come on, expecting to find a truce in it.

[25663] 26.5. Now to all who reasoned rightly the things that happened were intelligible, that the apparitions and the sounds came from Pan, who was angry about something with the sailors; but they could not guess the cause (for no holy thing of Pan's had been despoiled), until, about midday, when the general had fallen—not without the god's will—into sleep, Pan himself appeared, saying such things as these:

[26068] 27.1. "O most unholy and impious of all men, what have you dared to do with your maddened minds? You have filled with war the countryside that is dear to me, and you have driven off herds of cattle and goats and sheep that are my care;

[26305] 27.2. you have dragged from the altars a girl of whom Love wishes to make a tale; and you reverenced neither the Nymphs who saw nor me, Pan. So you shall not see Methymna while you sail with such spoils, nor shall you escape this pipe that has confounded you;

[26566] 27.3. but I will make you food for the fishes by sinking you, unless with all speed you give Chloe back to the Nymphs, and the flocks of Chloe. Rise up then and set the girl ashore with what I have said. And I myself will be guide both to you of your voyage and to her of her way."

[26849] 28.1. So Bryaxis (for that was the general's name), in great agitation, sprang up and, calling the leaders of the ships, ordered Chloe to be sought with all speed among the captives.

[27033] 28.2. They quickly found her and brought her before his eyes; for she was sitting crowned with the pine. Taking this too as a token of the vision in his dreams, he conveyed her to the land on the very flagship.

[27245] 28.3. And she had just disembarked when a sound of a pipe was heard again from the rock, no longer warlike and fearful, but pastoral and such as leads flocks to pasture. And the sheep ran out down the gangway, slipping with the horny tips of their hooves, and the goats far more boldly, since they were used to walking on cliffs.

[27576] 29.1. And these gathered in a circle round Chloe like a chorus, gambolling and bleating and behaving like things that rejoice; but the goats and the sheep and the cattle of the other goatherds stayed in their place in the hollow ship, as though the tune did not call them.

[27850] 29.2. And while all were held by wonder and were praising Pan, things more wonderful than these were seen in both elements.

[27975] 29.3. For the ships of the Methymnaeans sailed before the anchors had been weighed, and a dolphin, leaping from the sea, led the flagship; while a most sweet sound of a pipe led the goats and the sheep, and no one could see the one who piped, so that the flocks and the goats went forward together and grazed, delighting in the tune.

[28310] 30.1. It was about the time of the second pasturing, and Daphnis, gazing from a high watch-place at the flocks and Chloe, with a great cry of "O Nymphs and Pan!" ran down to the plain and, flinging his arms about Chloe, fell down in a faint.

[28553] 30.2. Scarcely brought back to life by Chloe's kissing him and warming him with her embraces, he went to the accustomed oak; and sitting beneath the trunk he asked how she had escaped so many enemies.

[28755] 30.3. And she told him everything: the ivy on the goats, the howling of the sheep, the pine that blossomed on her head, the fire on the land, the din on the sea, the two pipings, the warlike and the peaceful, the fearful night, and how, when she knew not the way, music had led her on her way.

[29050] 30.4. So Daphnis, recognizing the dreams of the Nymphs and the deeds of Pan, told in his turn all that he had seen and heard: that, being about to die, he had lived because of the Nymphs.

[29239] 30.5. And he sent her off to fetch Dryas and Lamon and their households and all that befits a sacrifice; while he meanwhile took the best of his goats and crowned it with ivy, as they had appeared to the enemy, and pouring milk over its horns, sacrificed it to the Nymphs, and hanging it up flayed it and dedicated the hide.

[29565] 31.1. And when Chloe and her people were now present, he kindled a fire and, boiling some of the meat and roasting some, offered first-fruits to the Nymphs and poured a libation of a mixing-bowl full of must; and spreading couches of leafage beneath, from then on he gave himself to food and drink and play; and at the same time he watched the flocks, lest a wolf fall upon them and do the deeds of enemies.

[29974] 31.2. They sang too certain songs to the Nymphs, the compositions of shepherds of old. And when night came on, they slept there in the field, and the next day they remembered Pan, and crowning the leader of the he-goats with pine, they led him to the pine, and pouring a libation of wine and praising the god, they sacrificed him, hung him up, flayed him;

[30331] 31.3. and the meat, roasting and boiling some, they set down nearby in the meadow on the leaves; but the hide, horns and all, they fixed to the pine beside the statue, a shepherd's offering to a shepherd god. They offered first-fruits of the meat too, and poured a libation from a larger mixing-bowl; Chloe sang, Daphnis piped.

[30660] 32.1. After this they reclined and ate; and there came up to them Philetas the cowherd, who happened to be bringing some little garlands to Pan and grape-clusters still on the leaves and shoots; and the youngest of his sons followed him, Tityrus, a child ruddy and grey-eyed, white-skinned and high-spirited; and he leapt lightly, walking like a kid.

[31012] 32.2. So they sprang up and helped to crown Pan and hung the shoots from the foliage of the pine, and making them recline near them they made them their fellow-drinkers.

[31183] 32.3. And, as old men do when slightly mellow, they said much to one another: how they pastured when they were young, how they escaped many raids of pirates; one boasted of having killed a wolf, another of having piped second only to Pan—this was the boast of Philetas.

[31454] 33.1. So Daphnis and Chloe brought every entreaty to bear that he should impart to them too his art, and pipe at the festival of a god who delights in the pipe. Philetas promised, though complaining of his old age as out of breath, and took the pipe of Daphnis.

[31717] 33.2. But it was small for so great an art, since it was made to be blown by the mouth of a boy. So he sent Tityrus for his own pipe,

[31852] 33.3. his farmstead being ten stades distant. So the boy threw off his cloak and rushed off naked to run, like a fawn; and Lamon promised to tell them the tale about the pipe, which a Sicilian goatherd had sung to him for a fee of a he-goat and a pipe.

[32106] 34.1. "This pipe, the instrument, was once no instrument but a beautiful maiden, musical in her voice. She pastured goats, played with the Nymphs, sang as now. While she was pasturing, playing, singing, Pan came to her and tried to persuade her to what he desired, and promised to make all her goats bear twins.

[32419] 34.2. But she laughed at his love, and said she would not accept as a lover one who was neither a he-goat nor a whole man. Pan rushed to pursue her by force; Syrinx fled both Pan and his force; fleeing, growing weary, she hid herself among the reeds, vanished into a marsh.

[32694] 34.3. Pan, cutting the reeds in his anger, not finding the girl, and learning her fate, devised the instrument, binding the reeds together with wax, unequal, even as their love too was unequal; and she who was then a beautiful maiden is now a musical pipe."

[32953] 35.1. Lamon had just ended his tale, and Philetas was praising him as having told a story sweeter than song, when Tityrus came up, bringing his father the pipe, a great instrument and of great pipes,

[33154] 35.2. and where it was waxed, it was inlaid with bronze. One would have thought it was that very pipe which Pan first made. So Philetas, roused, and sitting upright on his seat, first tried the reeds to see if they were of good breath;

[33391] 35.3. then, finding that the breath ran through unhindered, he blew thereafter much and vigorously. One would have thought one was hearing pipes playing in concert; so loud rang the piping. Then, little by little taking away the force, he changed the tune to something more delightful.

[33678] 35.4. And displaying every art of musical herding, he piped what befits a herd of cattle, what is suited to a flock of goats, what is dear to sheep. Delightful was the tune of the sheep, great that of the cattle, shrill that of the goats; in short, one pipe imitated all pipes.

[33957] 36.1. So the others lay in silence, taking their delight; but Dryas rose up and, bidding him pipe a Dionysiac tune, danced for them a vintage dance; and now he seemed like one gathering grapes, now like one carrying baskets,

[34183] 36.2. then like one treading the clusters, then like one filling the jars, then like one drinking of the must. All these things Dryas danced so gracefully and so vividly that they seemed to see the vines themselves and the press and the jars, and Dryas truly drinking.

[34453] 37.1. So this third old man, having won good repute for his dancing, kissed Chloe and Daphnis; and they, rising very quickly, danced the tale of Lamon. Daphnis played Pan, Chloe Syrinx; he entreated, trying to persuade, while she, heedless, smiled;

[34703] 37.2. he pursued and ran on the tips of his toes, imitating the hooves, while she showed the maiden growing weary in flight. Then Chloe hid herself in the wood as into a marsh, and Daphnis,

[34894] 37.3. taking the great pipe of Philetas, piped something mournful as one in love, amorous as one persuading, summoning as one seeking; so that Philetas, marvelling, sprang up and kissed him, and made him a present of the pipe with a kiss, and prayed that Daphnis too might leave it to a like successor.

[35198] 38.1. And he, dedicating his own small pipe to Pan, and kissing Chloe as though found again from a true flight, drove off his flock piping, night now coming on; and Chloe too drove off her flock, singing in harmony with the tune of the pipe;

[35441] 38.2. and the goats went near the sheep, and Daphnis walked near Chloe, so that they filled themselves with each other until nightfall and agreed to drive their flocks down earlier the next day;

[35637] 38.3. and so they did. Indeed, just as day was beginning they came to the pasture; and greeting first the Nymphs, then Pan, they thereafter sat beneath the oak and piped; then they kissed each other, embraced, lay down, and, having done nothing more, rose up. They gave thought to food too, and drank wine mixed with milk.

[35961] 39.1. And, made warmer and bolder by all this, they contended with each other in an amorous contest, and after a little came to the assurance of oaths. Daphnis, then, going to the pine, swore by Pan that he would not live alone without Chloe even for the space of a single day;

[36240] 39.2. and Chloe, entering the cave, swore by the Nymphs that she would share with Daphnis both death and life. But so much simplicity belonged to Chloe, as to a girl, that coming out of the cave she demanded a second oath from him, saying: "Daphnis, the god Pan is amorous and faithless;

[36529] 39.3. he loved Pitys, he loved Syrinx; and he never ceases troubling the Dryad and giving trouble to the Epimelid Nymphs. So this god, if neglected in the matter of oaths, will neglect to punish you, even if you go to more women than there are reeds in the pipe;

[36793] 39.4. but do you swear to me by this herd of goats and by that goat which reared you, not to forsake Chloe so long as she remains faithful to you; but if she becomes unjust to you and to the Nymphs, then flee her and hate her and kill her like a wolf."

[37047] 39.5. Daphnis was glad to be doubted, and standing in the midst of the herd of goats, and laying one of his hands on a she-goat and the other on a he-goat, swore that he would love Chloe while she loved him; and if she should prefer another to Daphnis, he would kill himself instead of her.

[37339] 39.6. And she rejoiced and believed him, as a girl, and thinking that the goats and the sheep were the special gods of shepherds and goatherds.