WORK: Naturalis Historia  (slug: pliny-the-elder-naturalis-historia-631445)

CHAPTER: 33



[109377] It is a remarkable fact that the art of chasing gold should have conferred no celebrity upon any person, while that of embossing silver has rendered many illustrious. The greatest renown, however, has been acquired by Mentor, of whom mention has been made already. Four pairs [of vases] were all that were ever made by him; and at the present day, not one of these, it is said, is any longer in existence, owing to the conflagrations of the Temple of Diana at Ephesus and of that in the Capitol. Varro informs us in his writings that he also was in possession of a bronze statue, the work of this artist. Next to Mentor, the most admired artists were Acra- gas, Bo&euml;thus, and Mys. Works of all these artists are still extant in the Isle of Rhodes; of Bo&euml;thus, in the Temple of Minerva, at Lindus; of Acragas, in the Temple of Father Liber, at Rhodes, consisting of cups engraved with figures in relief of Centaurs and Bacchantes; and of Mys, in the same temple, figures of Sileni and Cupids. Representations also of the chase by Acragas on drinking cups were held in high estimation.

[110471] Next to these in repute comes Calamis. Antipater too, it has been said, laid, rather than engraved, a Sleeping Satyr upon a drinking-bowl. Next to these come Stratonicus of Cyzicus, and Tauriscus: Ariston also, and Eunicus, of Mytilene are highly praised; Hecat&aelig;us also, and, about the age of Pompeius Magnus, Pasiteles, Posidonius of Ephesus, Hedystratides who engraved battle-scenes and armed warriors, and Zopyrus, who represented the Court of the Areopa- gus and the trial of Orestes, upon two cups valued at twelve thousand sesterces. There was Pytheas also, a work of whose sold at the rate of ten thousand denarii for two ounces: it was a drinking-bowl, the figures on which represented Ulysses and Diomedes stealing the Palladium. The same artist engraved also, upon some small drinking-vessels, kitchen scenes, known as "magiriscia;" of such remarkably fine workmanship and so liable to injury, that it was quite impossible to take copies of them. Teucer too, the inlayer, enjoyed a great reputation.

[111488] All at once, however, this art became so lost in point of excellence, that at the present day ancient specimens are the only ones at all valued; and only those pieces of plate are held in esteem the designs on which are so much worn that the figures cannot be distinguished.

[111764] Silver becomes tainted by the contact of mineral waters, and of the salt exhalations from them, as in the interior of Spain, for instance.

[111904] In the mines of gold and silver there are some other pigments also found, sil and c&aelig;ruleum. Sil is, properly speaking, a sort of slime. The best kind is that known as Attic sil; the price of which is two denarii per pound. The next best kind is the marbled sil, the price of which is half that of the Attic kind. A third sort is the compressed sil, known to some persons as Scyric sil, it coming from the Isle of Scyros. Then, too, there is the sil of Achaia, which painters make use of for shadow-painting, and the price of which is two sesterces per pound. At a price of two asses less per pound, is sold the clear sil, which comes from Gaul. This last kind, as well as the Attic sil, is used for painting strong lights: but the marbled sil only is employed for colouring compartitions, the marble in it offering a resistance to the natural acridity of the lime. This last kind is extracted also from some mountains twenty miles distant from the City. When thus extracted, it is submitted to the action of fire; in which form it is adulterated by some, and sold for compressed sil. That it has been burnt, however, and adulterated, may be very easily detected by its acridity, and the fact that it very soon crumbles into dust.

[113141] Polygnotus and Micon were the first to employ sil in painting, but that of Attica solely. The succeeding age used this last kind for strong lights only, and employed the Scyric and Lydian kinds for shadow painting. The Lydian sil used to be bought at Sardes; but at the present day we hear nothing of it.

[113447] C&aelig;ruleum is a kind of sand. In former times there were three kinds of it; the Egyptian, which was the most esteemed of all; the Scythian, which is easily dissolved, and which produces four colours when pounded, one of a lighter blue and one of a darker blue, one of a thicker consistency and one comparatively thin; and the Cyprian, which is now preferred as a colour to the preceding. Since then, the kinds imported from Puteoli and Spain have been added to the list, this sand having of late been prepared there. Every kind, however, is submitted to a dyeing process, it being boiled with a plant used particularly for this purpose, and imbibing its juices. In other respects, the mode of preparing it is similar to that of chrysocolla. From c&aelig;ruleum, too, is prepared the substance known as "lomentum," it being washed and ground for the purpose. Lomentum is of a paler tint than c&aelig;ruleum; the price of it is ten denarii per pound, and that of c&aelig;ruleum but eight. C&aelig;ruleum is used upon a surface of clay, for upon lime it will not hold. A more recent invention is the Vestorian c&aelig;ruleum, so called from the person who first manufactured it: it is prepared from the finer parts of Egyptian c&aelig;ruleum, and the price of it is eleven denarii per pound. That of Puteoli is used in a similar manner, as also for windows: it is known as "cylon."

[114831] It is not so long since that indicum was first imported to Rome, the price being seventeen denarii per pound. Painters make use of it for incisures, or in other words, the division of shadows from light. There is also a lomentum of very inferior quality, known to us as "ground" lomentum, and valued at only five asses per pound.

[115162] The mode of testing the genuineness of c&aelig;ruleum, is to see whether it emits a flame, on being laid upon burning coals. One method of adulterating it is to boil dried violets in water, and then to strain the liquor through linen into Eretrian clay.

[115417] C&aelig;ruleum has the medicinal property of acting as a detergent upon ulcers. Hence it is, that it is used as an ingredient in plasters, as also in cauteries. As to sil, it is pounded with the greatest difficulty: viewed as a medicament, it is slightly mordent and astringent, and fills up the cavities left by ulcers. To make it the more serviceable, it is burnt in earthen vessels.

[115804] The prices of things, which I have in different places annexed, vary, I am well aware, according to the locality, and experience a change almost every year: variations dependent upon the opportunities afforded for navigation, and the terms upon which the merchant may have purchased the article. It may so happen, too, that some wealthy dealer has engrossed the market, and so enhanced the price: for I am by no means forgetful of the case of Demetrius, who in the reign of the Emperor Nero was accused before the consuls by the whole community of the Seplasia. Still, however, I have thought it necessary to annex the usual price of each commodity at Rome, in order to give some idea of their relative values.

[116516] SUMMARY.&mdash;Remedies, narratives, and observations, one thousand one hundred and twenty-five.

[116614] ROMAN AUTHORS QUOTED.&mdash;Domitianus C&aelig;sar, Junius Gracchanus, L. Piso, Verrius, M. Varro, Corvinus, Atticus Pomponius, Calvus Licinius, Cornelius Nepos, Mucianus, Bocchus, Fetialis, Fenestella, Valerius Maximus, Julius Bassus who wrote on Medicine in Greek, Sextius Niger who did the same.

[116914] FOREIGN AUTHORS QUOTED.&mdash;Theophrastus, Democritus,

[116971] Juba, Tim&aelig;us the historian, who wrote on Metallic Medicines, Heraclides, Andreas, Diagoras, Botrys, Archidemus, Dionysius, Aristogenes, Democles, Mnesides, Attalus the physician, Xenocrates the son of Zeno, Theomnestus, Nymphodorus, Iollas, Apollodorus, Pasiteles who wrote on Wonderful Works, Antigonus who wrote on the Toreutic art, Men&aelig;chmus who did the same, Xenocrates who did the same, Duris who did the same, Menander who wrote on Toreutics, Heliodorus who wrote on the Votive Offerings of the Athenians, Metrodorus of Scepsis.