WORK: Naturalis Historia  (slug: pliny-the-elder-naturalis-historia-631445)

CHAPTER: 22



[110213] "Miliaria" is the name given to a plant which kills millet: this plant, it is said, is a cure for gout in beasts of burden, beaten up and administered in wine, with the aid of a horn.

[110398] Bromos is the seed also of a plant which bears an ear. It is a kind of oat which grows among corn, to which it is injurious; the leaves and stalk of it resemble those of wheat, and at the extremity it bears seeds, hanging down, something like small locusts in appearance. The seed of this plant is useful for plasters, like barley and other grain of a similar nature. A decoction of it is good for coughs.

[110805] We have mentioned orobanche as the name of a plant which kills the fitch and other leguminous plants. Some persons have called it "cynomorion," from the resemblance which it bears to the genitals of a dog. The stem of it is leafless, thick, and red. It is eaten either raw, or boiled in the saucepan, while young and tender.

[111131] There are some venomous insects also, of the solipuga kind, which breed upon leguminous plants, and which, by stinging the hands, endanger life. For these stings all those remedies are efficacious which have been mentioned for the bite of the spider and the phalangium. Such, then, are the medicinal properties for which the cereals are employed.

[111479] Different beverages, too, are made from the cereals, zythum in Egypt, c&aelig;lia and cerea in Spain, cervesia and numerous liquors in Gaul and other provinces. The yeast of all of these is used by women as a cosmetic for the face.&mdash;But as we are now speaking of beverages, it will be the best plan to pass on to the various uses of wine, and to make a beginning with the vine of our account of the medicinal properties of the trees.

[111919] Summary.&mdash;Remedies, narratives, and observations, nine hundred and six.

[111997] Authors quoted.&mdash;All those mentioned in the preceding Book: and, in addition to them, Chrysermus, Eratosthenes, and Alc&aelig;us.