WORK: Naturalis Historia  (slug: pliny-the-elder-naturalis-historia-631445)

CHAPTER: 27



[0] THE further I proceed in this work, the more I am impressed with admiration of the ancients; and the greater the number of plants that remain to be described, the more I am induced to venerate the zeal displayed by the men of former times in their researches, and the kindly spirit manifested by them in transmitting to us the results thereof. Indeed their bounteousness in this respect would almost seem to have surpassed the munificent disposition even of Nature herself, if our knowledge of plants had depended solely upon man's spirit of discovery: but as it is, it is evident beyond all doubt that this knowledge has emanated from the gods themselves, or, at all events, has been the result of divine inspiration, even in those cases where man has been instrumental in communicating it to us. In other words, if we must confess the truth&mdash;a marvel surpassed by nothing in our daily experience&mdash;Nature herself, that common parent of all things, has at once produced them, and has discovered to us their properties.

[1030] Wondrous indeed is it, that a Scythian plant should be brought from the shores of the Palus M&aelig;otis, and the euphorbia from Mount Atlas and the regions beyond the Pillars of Hercules, localities where the operations of Nature have reached their utmost limit! That in another direction, the plant britannica should be conveyed to us from isles of the Ocean situate beyond the confines of the earth! That the &aelig;thiopis should reach us from a climate scorched by the luminaries of heaven! And then, in addition to all this, that there should be a perpetual interchange going on between all parts of the earth, of productions so instrumental to the welfare of mankind! Results, all of them, ensured to us by the peace that reigns under the majestic sway of the Roman power, a peace which brings in presence of each other, not individuals only, belonging to lands and nations far separate, but mountains even, and heights towering above the clouds, their plants and their various productions! That this great bounteousness of the gods may know no end, is my prayer, a bounteousness which seems to have granted the Roman sway as a second luminary for the benefit of mankind.

[2210] But who, I say, can sufficiently venerate the zeal and spirit of research displayed by the ancients? It is they who have shown us that aconite is the most prompt of all poisons in its effects &mdash;so much so indeed, that female animals, if the sexual parts are but touched with it, will not survive a single day. With this poison it was that M. C&aelig;cilius accused Calpurnius Bestia of killing his wives in their sleep, and this it was that gave rise to that fearful peroration of his, denouncing the murderous finger of the accused. According to the fables of mythology, this plant was originally produced from the foam of the dog Cerberus, when dragged by Hercules from the Infernal Regions; for which reason, it is said, it is still so remarkably abundant in the vicinity of Heraclea in Pontus, a spot where the entrance is still pointed out to the shades below.

[3082] And yet, noxious as it is, the ancients have shown us how to employ aconite for the benefit of mankind, and have taught us as the result of their experience, that, taken in mulled wine, it neutralizes the venom of the scorpion: indeed such is the nature of this deadly plant, that it kills man, unless it can find in man something else to kill. When such is the case, as though it had discovered in the body a fit rival to contend with, that substance is the sole object of its attack; finding another poison in the viscera, to it alone it confines its onslaught; and thus, a truly marvellous thing! two poisons, each of them of a deadly nature, destroy one another within the body, and the man survives. Even more than this, the ancients have handed down to us remedies employed by the animals themselves, and have shown how that venomous creatures even effect their own cure. By the contact of aconite the scorpion is struck with torpor, is quite benumbed, assumes a pallid hue, and so confesses itself vanquished. When this is the case, white hellebore is its great auxiliary: the very touch of it dispels its torpor, and the aconite is forced to yield before two foes, its own enemy and the common enemy of all.

[4299] Now, after this, if any one should be of opinion that man could, by any chance or possibility, make such discoveries as these, he must surely be guilty of ingratitude in thus appreciating the beneficence of the gods! In countries frequented by the panther, they rub meat with aconite, and if one of those animals should but taste it, its effects are fatal: indeed were not these means adopted, the country would soon be overrun by them. It is for this reason, too, that some persons have given to hellebore the name of "pardalianches." It has been well ascertained, however, that the panther instantaneously recovers if it can find the opportunity of eating human ordure. So far as these animals are concerned, who can entertain a doubt that it was chance only that first led them to this discovery; and that as often as this happens the discovery is only a mere repetition of the accident, there being neither reason nor an appreciation of experience to ensure its transmission among them?

[5291] (3.) It is chance, yes, it is chance that is the Deity who has made to us these numerous revelations for our practical benefit; always understanding that under this name we mean Nature, that great parent and mistress of all things: and this is evident, whether we come to the conclusion, that these wild beasts make the discovery from day to day, or that they are gifted from the first with these powers of perception. Regarded in another point of view, it really is a disgrace that all animated beings should have an exact knowledge of what is beneficial to them, with the exception of man!

[5884] The ancients, openly professing their belief that there is no evil without some admixture of good, have asserted that aconite is a remarkably useful ingredient in compositions for the eyes. It may therefore be permitted me, though I have hitherto omitted a description of the poisonous plants, to point out the characteristics of aconite, if only that it may be the more easily detected. Aconite has leaves like those of cyclaminos or of the cucumber, never more than four in number, slightly hairy, and rising from near the root. This root, which is of moderate size, resembles the sea-fish known as the "cammarus," a circumstance owing to which the plant has received the name of "cammaron" from some; while others, for the reason already mentioned, have called it "thelyphonon." The root is slightly curved, like a scorpion's tail, for which reason some persons have given it the name of "scorpio." Others, again, have preferred giving it the name of "myoctonon," from the fact that the odour of it kills mice at a considerable distance even.

[6931] This plant is found growing upon the naked rocks known as "aeon&aelig;;" and hence it is, according to some authorities, that it is called "aconitum," there being not so much as dust even about it to conduce to its nutriment. Such is the reason given for its name by some: but according to others, it receives this appellation from the fact that it fatally exercises the same effects upon the body that the whetstone does upon the edge of iron, being no sooner employed than its effects are felt.

[7429] &AElig;thiopis is a plant with leaves resembling those of phlomos, large, numerous, hairy, and springing from the root. The stem is square, rough, similar to that of arction in appearance, and with numerous axillary concavities. The seed resembles that of the fitch, being white and twofold; the roots are several in number, long, fleshy, soft, and of a viscous taste; when dry they turn black and hard, and might easily be taken for horns. In addition to &AElig;thiopia, this plant grows upon Mount Ida in Troas, and in Messenia. The roots are gathered in autumn, and left to dry for some days in the sun, to prevent them from turning mouldy. Taken in white wine they are curative of affections of the uterus, and a decoction of them is administered for sciatica, pleurisy, and eruptions of the throat. The kind, however, which comes from &AElig;thiopia, is by far the best, and gives instantaneous relief.

[8338] Ageraton is a ferulaceous plant, a couple of palms in height, similar to origanum in appearance, and bearing flowers like balls of gold. Used as a fumigation, this plant acts as a diuretic; and as a detergent upon the uterus, when used in a sitting bath more particularly. Its name has been given to it, from the circumstance that it keeps a very long time without fading.

[8712] The aloe bears a resemblance to the squill, except that it is larger, and has more substantial leaves, with streaks running obliquely. The stem is tender, red in the middle, and not unlike that of the anthericus. It has a single root, which runs straight downwards, like a stake driven into the ground; its smell is powerful, and it has a bitter taste. The most esteemed aloes are those imported from India, but it grows in the Asiatic provinces as well. This last kind, however, is never used, except that the leaves are applied fresh to wounds; indeed, these leaves, as well as the juice, are glutinous to a marvellous degree, and it is for this property that it is grown in vessels of a conical form, in the same way as the greater Aizo&uuml;m. Some persons make incisions in the stem to obtain the juice, before the seed is ripe, while others, again, make them in the leaves as well. Tearlike drops are also found adhering to it, which exude spontaneously: hence it is that some recommend that the place should be paved where it is grown, to prevent this juice from being absorbed.

[9799] Some authors have stated, that there is found in Jud&aelig;a, beyond Hierosolyma, a mineral aloe, but that it is inferior to the other kinds, being of a darker colour and more humid than any of the rest. Aloes of the finest quality should be unctuous and shining, of a red colour, brittle, compact, like the substance of liver, and easily liquefied. That which is hard and black should be rejected; the same, too, when it is mixed with sand or adulterated with gum and acacia, a fraud which may be easily detected by the taste.

[10328] This plant is of an astringent nature, binding, and slightly calorific. It is employed for numerous purposes, but principally as a purgative, it being almost the only one of all the medica- ments which produce that effect, that is at the same time a good stomachic, and does not exercise the slightest noxious influence upon the stomach. It is taken in doses of one drachma, and, in cases of derangement of the stomach, it is administered two or three times a day, in the proportion of one spoonful to two cyathi of warm or cold water, at intervals, according to the nature of the emergency. As a purgative it is mostly taken in doses of three drachm&aelig;; and it operates still more efficaciously, if food is eaten directly afterwards. Used with astringent wine, it prevents the hair from falling off, the head being rubbed with it the contrary way of the hair, in the sun. Applied to the temples and forehead with rose oil and vinegar, or used as an infusion, in a more diluted form, it allays head-ache. It is generally agreed that it is remedial for all diseases of the eyes, but more particularly for prurigo and scaly eruptions of the eye-lids; as also for marks and bruises, applied in combination with honey, Pontic honey in particular.

[11576] It is employed, also, for affections of the tonsillary glands and gums, for all ulcerations of the mouth, and for spitting of blood, if not in excess&mdash;the proper dose being one drachma, taken in water or else vinegar. Used by itself, or in combination with vinegar, it arrests h&aelig;morrhage, whether proceeding front wounds or from other causes. In addition to these properties, it is extremely efficacious for the cure of wounds, producing cicatrization very rapidly: it is sprinkled also upon ulcerations of the male organs, and is applied to condylomata and chaps of the fundament, either in common wine, raisin wine, or by itself in a dry state, according as a mollifying or restrictive treatment is required. It has the effect, also, of gently arresting h&aelig;morrhoidal bleeding, when in excess. In cases of dysentery, it is used as an injection, and where the digestion is imperfect it is taken shortly after the evening meal. For jaundice, it is administered in doses of three oboli, in water. As a purgative for the bowels, it is taken in pills, with boiled honey or turpentine. It is good also for the removal of hangnails. When employed in ophthalmic preparations, it is first washed, that the more gravelly portions of it may subside;

[12834] or else it is put over the fire in a pipkin, and stirred with a feather from time to time, that the whole of it may be equally warmed.

[12970] Alcea is a plant with leaves, resembling those of vervain, known also as "peristereon," some three or four stems covered with leaves, a flower like that of the rose, and white roots, at most six in number, a cubit in length, and running obliquely. It grows in a soil that is rich without being dry. The root is given in wine or water, for dysentery, diarrh&oelig;a, ruptures, and convulsions.

[13364] The alypon has a small stem, with a soft head, and is not unlike beet in appearance. It has an acrid, viscous taste. extremely pungent and burning. Taken in hydromel, with a little salt, it acts as a purgative. The smallest dose is two drachm&aelig;, a moderate dose, four, and the largest, six. When used as a purgative, it is taken in chicken broth.

[13717] Alsine, a plant known as "myosoton" to some, grows in the woods, to which fact it is indebted for its name of "alsine." It begins to make its appearance at mid-winter, and withers in the middle of summer. When it first puts forth, the leaves bear a strong resemblance to the ears of mice. We shall have occasion, however, to speak of another plant, which may, with much more justice, be called "myosotis." As for alsine, it would be the same thing as helxine, were it not that it is smaller and not so hairy. It grows in gardens, and upon walls more particularly: when rubbed, it emits a smell like that of cucumber. It is used for abscesses, inflammations, and all those purposes for which helxine is employed; its properties, however, are not so active. It is applied topically, also, to defluxions of the eyes, and to sores upon the generative organs, and ulcerations, with barley meal. The juice is used as an injection for the ears.

[14656] The androsaces is a white plant, bitter, without leaves, and bearing arms surmounted with follicules, containing the seed. It grows in the maritime parts of Syria, more particularly. This plant is administered for dropsy, in doses of two drachm&aelig;, pounded or boiled, in either water, wine, or vinegar: it acts most powerfully as a diuretic. It is used also for gout, either taken internally or used as a liniment. The seed is possessed of similar properties.

[15121] Andros&aelig;mon or, as some persons call it, "ascyron," is not unlike hypericon, a plant of which we have spoken already: the stems, however, are larger, redder, and lie more closely together. The leaves are of a white colour, and like those of rue in shape; the seed resembles that of the black poppy, and the upper branches, when bruised, emit a red juice the colour of blood: these branches have also a resinous smell.

[15545] This plant grows in vineyards, and it is usually in the middle of autumn that it is taken up and hung to dry. Used as a purgative, it is bruised with the seed, and taken in the morning or just after the evening meal, in doses of two drachm&aelig;, in hydromel, wine, or pure water, the draught amounting to one sextarius in all. It carries off bile, and is particularly good for sciatica; but in this last case, caper root must be taken with resin the day after, the dose being one drachma, to be repeated every four days: after being purged, it is the practice for the patient, if in robust health, to take wine, but if in a weak state of body, water. It is employed topically, also, for gout, burns, and wounds, as it tends to arrest the flow of blood.

[16301] Ambrosia is a vague name, which has fluctuated between various plants: there is one, however, which has been more particularly designated by this appellation, a branchy, shrublike plant, with a thin stem, some three palms in height; the root of it is one third shorter, and the leaves, towards the lower part of the stem, resemble those of rue. Its diminutive branches bear a seed which hangs down in clusters, and has a vinous smell: hence it is that by some persons the plant is called "botrys," while to others it is known as "artemisia." The people of Cappadocia use it for garlands. It is employed in medicine as a resolvent.

[16933] The anonis, by some called "ononis" in preference, is a branchy plant, and similar to fenugreek in appearance, except that it is more shrub-like and more hairy. It has an agreeable smell, and becomes prickly after spring. It is pickled in brine for eating. Applied fresh to ulcers, it cauterizes the margins of them. For the cure of tooth-ache, the root is boiled in oxycrate: taken in drink, with honey, the root expels urinary calcuii. For epilepsy, it is administered in oxymel, boiled down to one half.

[17441] The anagyros, known to some by the name of "aco- pon," is a shrub-like plant, with an offensive smell, and a blossom like that of the cabbage. The seed grows in small hornlike pods of considerable length, and resembles a kidney in shape; it hardens about the time of harvest. The leaves of this plant are applied to gatherings, and are attached to the person in cases of difficult parturition, care being taken to remove them the moment after delivery. In cases where the extraction of the dead f&oelig;tus is attended with difficulty, or where the after-birth or catamenia are retarded, the leaves are taken, in doses of one drachma, in raisin wine. The leaves are administered in the same manner for asthma: they are prescribed also in old wine, for injuries inflicted by the phalangium. The root is employed medicinally as a resolvent and maturative: the seed, chewed, acts as an emetic.

[18333] The anonymos, through not having a name, has at last found one. It is brought from Scythia, and has been highly extolled by Hicesius, a physician of no small repute, as also by Aristogiton. Bruised in water and applied, it is remarkably useful for wounds, and taken in drink it is good for blows upon the chest or mamill&aelig;, as also for spitting of blood: it has been thought, too, that it might be advantageously taken in a potion for wounds. I am of opinion that the additional statement, to the effect that, burnt fresh, it acts as a solder to iron or copper, is wholly fabulous.

[18921] Aparine, otherwise called "omphalocarpos" or "philanthropos," is a ramose, hairy, plant, with five or six leaves at regular intervals, arranged circularly around the branches.

[19098] The seed is round, hard, concave, and of a sweetish taste. It grows in cornfields, gardens, and meadows, and, by the aid of its prickly points, adheres to the clothes. The seed is employed to neutralize the venom of serpents, being taken in doses of one drachma, in wine: it is useful also for the bite of the phalangium. The leaves, applied topically, arrest hamorrhage from wounds. The juice is used as an injection for the ears.

[19531] The arction is by some called "arcturum" in preference: the leaves of it are like those of verbascum, except that they are more hairy; the stem is long and soft, and the seed resembles that of cummin. It grows in rocky localities, and has a tender root, white and sweet. A decoction of it is made with wine for tooth-ache, being retained for that purpose in the mouth. The plant is taken in drink for sciatica and strangury, and is applied with wine to burns and chilblains, which are fomented also with the root and seed bruised in wine.

[20071] Some persons call the asplenon by the name of "hemionion." It has numerous leaves, a third of a foot in length, and a slimy root, pierced with holes like that of fern, white, and hairy, It is destitute of stem, flower, and and is found growing upon rocks or sheltered damp walls. The most approved kind is that of Crete. A decoction of the leaves in vinegar, taken in drink for a period of thirty days, will consume the spleen, it is said, the leaves being applied simultaneously. The leaves give relief also in hiccup. This plant should never be given to females, being productive of sterility.

[20668] The asclepias has leaves like those of ivy, long branches, and numerous roots, thin, and odoriferous. The flower has a strong offensive smell, and the seed is like that of securidaca: it is found growing in mountainous districts. The roots are used for the cure of griping pains in the bowels, and of stings inflicted by serpents, either taken in drink or applied topically.

[21044] The aster is called "bubonion" by some, from the circumstance of its being a sovereign remedy for diseases of the groin. It has a diminutive stem with oblong leaves, two or three in number; and at the summit it is surmounted with small radiated heads, like stars. This plant is taken also in drink as an antidote to the venom of serpents: but if required for the cure of inguinal complaints, it is recommended that it should be gathered with the left hand, and attached to the body near the girdle. It is of great service also, worn as an amulet, for sciatica.

[21606] Ascyron and ascyro&iuml;des are plants similar to one another, and to hypericon as well, except that the plant known as ascyro&iuml;des" has larger branches, ferulaceous, red all over, and bearing small yellow heads. The seed, enclosed in small calyces, is diminutive, black, and resinous. The tops of the branches, when bruised, stain like blood; for which reason some persons have given it the name of "andros&aelig;mon." The seed is used for the cure of sciatica, being taken in doses of two drachm&aelig;, in one sextarius of hydromel. It relaxes the bowels, and carries off bile: it is applied also to burns.

[22221] The aphaca has remarkably diminutive leaves, and is but little taller than the lentil. The pods are of a larger size, and enclose some three or four seeds, of a darker colour, moister, and more diminutive than those of the lentil: it grows in cultivated fields. It is naturally more astringent than the lentil, but in other respects is applied to much the same purposes. The seed, used in a decoction, arrests fluxes of the stomach and bowels.

[22666] I have not found it stated by authors what kind of plant alcibium is; but the root, I find, and the leaves, are pounded and employed, both externally and internally, for injuries inflicted by serpents. When the leaves are used, a handful of them is bruised in three cyathi of undiluted wine: the root is employed in the proportion of three drachm&aelig; to the same quantity of wine.

[23051] Alectoroslophos, or crista, as we call it, has numerous leaves resembling a cock's comb, a thin stem, and a black seed enclosed in pods. Boiled with broken beans and honey, it is useful for cough and for films upon the eyes. The seed, too, is sprinkled whole into the eyes, and so far is it from injuring them, that it attracts and collects the filmy matter. When thus used, it changes colour, and from black becomes white, gradually swells, and comes out of itself.

[23519] The plant which we call "alum," and which is known to the Greeks as "symphyton petr&aelig;on," is similar to cunila bubula in appearance, having a diminutive leaf and three or four branches springing from the root, with tops like those of thyme. It is a ligneous plant, odoriferous, of a sweet flavour, and provocative of saliva: the root of it is long and red. It grows upon rocks, to which circumstance it is indebted for its additional name of "petr&aelig;on;" and is extremely useful for affections of the sides and kidneys, griping pains in the bowels, diseases of the chest and lungs, spitting of blood, and eruptions of the fauces. The root is pounded and taken in drink, or else a decoction is made of it in wine; sometimes, also, it is applied externally. Chewed, it allays thirst, and is particularly refreshing to the pulmonary organs. It is employed topically for sprains and contusions, and has a soothing effect upon the intestines.

[24467] Cooked upon hot ashes, with the follicules removed, and then beaten up with nine peppercorns and taken in water, it acts astringently upon the bowels. For the cure of wounds it is remarkably efficacious, being possessed of agglutinating properties to such a remarkable degree as to solder pieces of meat together with which it is boiled; to which, in fact, it is indebted for its Greek name. It is used also for the cure of fractured bones.

[24909] Red sea-weed is useful as an application for the sting of the scorpion.

[24982] Act&aelig;a has leaves with a powerful smell, rough knotted stems, a black seed like that of ivy, and soft berries. It grows in umbrageous, rugged, watery localities; and is used, in doses of one full acetabulum, for female complaints.

[25219] Ampelos agria, or wild vine, is the name of a plant with leaves of an ashy colour, as already stated in our description of the cultivated plants, and long, tough twigs of a red hut, like that of the flower which we have mentioned, when speaking of violets, under the name of "flame of Jove." It bears a seed which resembles the grains of the pomegranate. The root, boiled in three cyathi of water, with the addition of two cyathi of Coan wine, is slightly laxative to the bowels, and is consequently given for dropsy. It is curative also of uterine affections, and of spots upon the face in females. It is found a good plan for patients afflicted with sciatica to use the juice of this plant, bruised, applied topically, with the leaves.

[25958] There are numerous kinds of absinthium; the Santonic, for instance, so called from a city in Gaul, and the Pontic, which comes from Pontus, where the cattle are fattened upon it&mdash;a diet which causes them to be destitute of gall. The Pontic wormwood, we may remark, is of the finest quality, superior to that of Italy, and much more bitter; the pith, however, of the Pontic wormwood is sweet. As to its general utility, a plant so commonly found and applied to such numerous uses, people are universally agreed; but with the Romans more particularly it has been always held in the highest esteem, from the fact of its being employed in their religious ceremonials. Thus, for instance, upon the Latin Festival, it is the custom to have a race of four-horsed chariots in the Capital, and for the conqueror to be presented with a draught of wormwood; from the circumstance, no doubt, that our forefathers were of opinion that good health was the most valuable reward they could bestow upon his skill.

[26961] This plant is very strengthening to the stomach, and hence it is that wines are flavoured with it, as already stated. A decoction of it in water is also taken, the following being the method employed in preparing it. Six drachm&aelig; of the leaves are boiled, with the branches, in three sextarii of rain water, and the preparation is then left to cool in the open air a day and a night. Salt, too, should be added to it. When old, it is utterly useless. A dilution of wormwood steeped in water is also used, such being the name given to this method of preparing it. This dilution is made by leaving the vessel covered up for three days, any kind of water being used. Pounded wormwood is but rarely employed, and the same with the extracted juice of the seed. In cases, however, where it is extracted, the seed is subjected to pressure as soon as it begins to swell, after which it is soaked for three days in water, if used fresh, and seven, if dry. It is then boiled in a copper vessel, in the proportion of ten hemin&aelig; to forty-five sextarii of water, after which it is strained off and boiled gently to the consistency of honey, in the same way as the juice is extracted from the smaller centaury. The juice, however, of wormwood, thus extracted, is bad for the head and stomach; whereas the decoction, on the other hand, is wholesome in the highest degree, as it acts astringently upon the stomach, carries off bile, is a powerful diuretic, has a soothing effect upon the bowels, and assuages pains in the intestines. With the addition of sile, Gallic nard, and a little vinegar, it dispels nausea and flatulency, and expels intestinal worms. It removes qualmishness, promotes the digestion, and, with the addition of rue, pepper, and salt, disperses crudities of the stomach.

[28750] The ancients were in the habit of giving wormwood as a purgative, the dose being six drachm&aelig; of the seed with three of salt and one cyathus of honey, in one sextarius of sea water kept for some time. This preparation, however, is rendered more efficacious by doubling the proportion of salt; the seed, too, must be bruised with the greatest care, as there is considerable difficulty in pounding it. Some authorities have prescribed the dose above mentioned to he given in polenta, with the addition of pennyroyal; while others recommend the leaves to be given to children in a dried fig, to disguise their bitterness. Taken with iris, wormwood acts as a detergent upon the thoracic organs: for jaundice it is used raw, with parsley or adiantum. In cases of flatulency, it is sipped every now and then, warmed in water; for liver complaints it is taken with Gallic nard, and for diseases of the spleen, with vinegar, pap, or figs. Taken in vinegar it neutralizes the bad effects of fungi and of viscus: in wine it is an antidote to the poison of hemlock, and to the bite of the shrew-mouse, and is curative of wounds inflicted by the seadragon and the scorpion. It contributes also very greatly to the improvement of the sight, and is used as an external application, with raisin wine, for defluxions of the eyes, and with honey, for bruises.

[30099] The steam of a decoction of wormwood is curative of affections of the ears; and when they are attacked with running sores, a liniment of wormwood bruised with honey is applied. Three or four sprigs of wormwood, with one root of Gallic nard, taken in six cyathi of water, act as a diuretic and as an emmenagogue; indeed, if taken with honey, or employed as a pessary with wool, it has especial virtues as an emmenagogue. In combination with honey and nitre it is useful for quinzy, and an infusion of it in water is good for epinyctis. A topical application is made of it for recent wounds, provided always they have not been touched with water: it is employed also for ulcers upon the head. In combination with Cyprian wax or figs, it is highly recommended as a plaster for the iliac regions: it is curative also of prurigo, but it must never be administered in fevers. Taken in drink, it is a preventive of sea sickness; and, worn attached to the body, beneath an apron, it arrests inguinal swellings. The smell of it induces sleep, a similar effect being produced by placing it under the pillow unknown to the party. Kept among clothes it preserves them from worms, and used as a liniment, with oil, or burnt as a fumigation, it has the effect of driving away gnats.

[31369] Writing ink, mixed with an infusion of wormwood, effectually protects the writings from the attacks of mice. Ashes of wormwood, mixed with rose unguent, stain the hair black.

[31545] There is a sea wormwood also, known as "seriphum" by some, the most esteemed being that of Taposiris in Egypt. Those initiated in the mysteries of Isis carry a branch of it in the hand. It has a narrower leaf than the preceding plant, and is not so bitter; it is injurious to the stomach, has a laxative effect upon the bowels, and expels intestinal worms. It is taken in drink with oil and salt; or else an infusion of it is taken in a pottage made of meal of three-month wheat. When employed as a decoction, a handful is used to one sextarius of water, the mixture being boiled down to one half.

[32144] The Greeks give to the ballotes the other name of "melamprasion," meaning "black leek." It is a branchy plant, with black angular stems, covered with hairy leaves, larger and darker than those of the leek, and possessed of a powerful smell. The leaves, bruised and applied with salt, are highly efficacious for bites inflicted by dogs: cooked upon hot ashes and applied in a cabbage leaf, they are curative of condylomata. Mixed with honey, this plant acts as a detergent upon sordid ulcers.

[32637] Botrys is a shrublike plant, which has small yellow branches, with the seed growing all round them, and leaves resembling those of endive. It is found upon the banks of running streams, and is used for the cure of hardness of breathing. The people of Cappadocia call this plant "ambrosia," others again, "artemisia."

[32955] The brabyla is possessed of astringent properties like those of the quince, but beyond this, authors give no particulars relative to it.

[33093] Sea bryon is a plant, no doubt, with leaves like those of the lettuce, of a wrinkled, pursed appearance, and destitute of stem, the leaves arising from a single root: it grows upon rocks more particularly, and shells sunk in the sand. It has desiccative and astringent qualities in a very high degree, properties which render it useful for reducing all kinds of abscesses and inflammations, those attendant upon gout in particular. It is good also for all affections which stand in need of cooling applications.

[33606] I find it stated that seed of bupleuron is given for injuries inflicted by serpents; and that the wound is fomented with a decoction of the plant, in combination with leaves of the mulberry or of origanum.

[33813] The catanance is a Thessalian plant, which it would be a mere loss of time to describe, seeing that it is only used as an ingredient in philtres. In order, however, to expose the follies of the magical art, it may not be out of place to remark that this plant has been selected for the above-named purpose, from the fact that, as it withers, it gradually contracts and assumes the shape of the claws of a dead kite.

[34230] For a similar reason we shall give no description of the plant called "cemos."

[34310] Of the calyx there are two kinds. One of these resembles arum, and is found growing in ploughed soils; the proper time for gathering it being before it begins to wither. It is employed for the same purposes as arum; and an infusion of the root is taken as a purgative and as an emmenagogue. The stalks, boiled with the leaves and some pulse, are curative of tenesmus.

[34679] The other kind of calyx is known by some persons as "anchusa," and by others as "onoclia." The leaves are like those of the lettuce, but longer, and with a downy surface. The root is red, and is employed topically, in combination with fine polenta, for the cure of erysipelas: taken internally with white wine, it is good for affections of the liver.

[35031] The circ&aelig;a resembles the cultivated trychnon in appearance. It has a small swarthy flower, a diminutive seed, like millet, growing in small horn-shaped pods, and a root half a foot in length, generally triple or fourfold, white, odoriferous, and hot in the mouth. It is found growing upon rocks exposed to the sun. An infusion of it is prepared with wine, and administered for pains and affections of the uterus: to make it, three ounces of the pounded root should be steeped in three sextarii of wine a day and a night. This potion is effectual also for bringing away the after-birth. The seed of this plant, taken in wine or hydromel, diminishes the milk in nursing women.

[35713] The cirsion is a plant consisting of a diminutive and delicate stem, two cubits in height, of a triangular form, and covered with prickly leaves. The prickles on the leaves are downy, and the leaves themselves resemble those of buglossos in shape, but are smaller, and of a whitish colour. At the summit of the plant there are small purple heads, which fall off in the shape of down. This plant or the root of it, worn as an amulet, it is said, is curative of the pains attendant upon varicose veins.

[36215] The crat&aelig;gonon is similar to an ear of corn in appearance. It is formed of numerous shoots, springing from a single root, and full of joints. It grows in umbrageous localities, and has a seed like that of millet, with a remarkably acrid taste. If a man and woman, before the evening meal, take three oboli of this seed in three cyathi of water, for forty days consecutively, before the conception of their issue, it will be sure to be of the male sex, they say.

[36684] There is another crat&aelig;gonon, known also as "thelygonos," and distinguished from the last mentioned plant by the mildness of the taste. Some persons assert that females, if they take the blossom of this plant in drink, will be sure to conceive before the end of forty days. These plants, used in combination with honey, are curative of black ulcers of a chronic nature; they also fill the concavities made by fistulous ulcers with new flesh, and restore such parts of the body as are wasted by atrophy. They act as a detergent upon purulent sores, disperse inflammatory tumours, and alleviate gout and all kind of abscesses, those of the mamill&aelig; in particular.

[37357] Under the name of "crat&aelig;gos" or "crat&aelig;gon," Theophrastus speaks of the tree known in Italy as the "aquifolia."

[37481] The crocodileon resembles the black cham&aelig;leon in shape: the root is long, of an uniform thickness, and possessed of a pungent smell. It is found growing in sandy soils. Taken in drink, it causes a copious discharge of coagulated blood at the nostrils, and in this way, it is said, diminishes the volume of the spleen.

[37806] The cynosorchis, by some called "orchis," has leaves like those of the olive, soft, three in number, half a foot in length, and lying upon the ground. The root is bulbous, oblong, and divided into two portions, the upper one hard, and the lower one soft. These roots are eaten boiled, like bulbs, and are mostly found growing in vineyards. If males eat the upper part, they will be parents of male issue, they say; and females, if they eat the lower part, of female. In Thessaly, the men take the soft portion in goats' milk as an aphrodisiac, and the hard part as an antaphrodisiac. Of these parts, the one effectually neutralizes the action of the other.

[38464] The chrysolachanum grows in pine plantations, and is similar to the lettuce in appearance. It heals wounds of the sinews, if applied without delay. There is another kind of chrysolachanum mentioned, with a golden flower, and a leaf like that of the cabbage: it is boiled and eaten as a laxative vegetable. This plant, worn as an amulet by a patient suffering from jaundice, provided it be always kept in sight, is a cure for that disease, it is said. I art not certain whether this is all that might be said about the chrysolachanum, but, at all events, it is all that I have found respecting it; for it is a very general fault on the part of our more recent herbalists, to confine their account of plants to the mere name, with a very meagre description of the peculiar features of the plant, &mdash;just as though, forsooth, they were universally known. Thus, they tell us, for instance, that a plant known as "coagulum terr&aelig;," acts astringently upon the bowels, and that it dispels strangury, taken in water or in wine.

[39494] The leaves of the cucubalus, they tell us, bruised with vinegar, are curative of the stings of serpents and of scorpions. Some persons call this plant by the name of "strumus," while others give it the Greek name of "strychnon:" its berries are black. The juice of these berries, administered in doses of one cyathus, in two cyathi of honied wine, is curative of lumbago; an infusion of them with rose oil is used for headache, and they are employed as an application for scrofulous sores.

[39985] The conferva is peculiar to running streams, those of the Alpine regions more particularly; receiving its name front "conferrumino," to solder together. Properly speaking, it is rather a fresh-water sponge than a moss or a plant, being a dense, porous mass of filaments. I know an instance where a man, who fell to the ground while lopping a tree of considerable height, and broke nearly every bone of his body, was cured by the agency of this plant. The patient's body was covered all over with conferva, the application being continually sprinkled with water the moment it began to dry, and only removed for the purpose of changing it when the plant gave signs of losing its virtues. It is hardly credible with what rapidity he recovered.

[40727] The Cnidian grain has just the colour of the kermes berry. It is larger than a peppercorn, and has very heating properties: hence it is that when used, it is taken in crumb of bread, that it may not burn the throat in passing downwards. It is a sovereign remedy for hemlock, and arrests looseness of the bowels.

[41040] The dipsacos has leaves like those of the lettuce, with prickly tubercles on the middle of the back. The stem of it, two cubits in length, is bristling all over with prickles of a similar nature. The joints of the stem are closely covered with two leaves, which form a concave axil in which a saltish dew-like liquid collects. At the summit of the stem there are small heads covered with prickles: it grows in watery localities.

[41470] This plant is used for the cure of chaps of the fundament and of fistula; in which latter case the root is boiled down in wine to the consistency of wax, to allow of its being introduced into the fistula in the form of a salve. It is employed; too, for the cure of all kinds of warts: as a liniment for which, the juice collected in the axils, as above mentioned, is also used by some.

[41857] The dryopteris, which resembles fern in appearance, is found growing upon trees; the leaves are of a somewhat sweetish flavour and marked with slight indentations, and the root is hairy. This plant is possessed of caustic properties, and hence the root is pounded and used as a depilatory. In using it the skin is rubbed with it till perspiration is excited, the operation being repeated a second and a third time, care being taken not to remove the perspiration.

[42322] The dryophonon is a similar plant, with thin stems a cubit in length, and surrounded on either side with leaves about as large as the thumb and like those of the oxymyrsine in appearance, only whiter and softer: the blossom is white, and similar to that of the elder. The shoots of it are eaten boiled, and the seed is used as a substitute for pepper.

[42675] The elatine has leaves like those of the helxine, diminu- tive, round, and hairy; its branches are small, half a foot in length, five or six in number, and covered with leaves from the root upwards. It grows in corn-fields, and has a rough flavour: hence it is found very useful for defluxions of the eyes, the leaves being beaten up and applied with polenta in a linen pledget. A decoction of this plant with linseed, taken in pottage, is good for dysentery.

[43136] Empetros, by the people of our country called "calcifraga," grows on mountains near the sea, and is generally found upon rocks: the nearer it grows to the sea the salter it is, acting as an evacuant of bile and pituitous secretions. That, on the other hand, which grows at a greater distance and more inland, is of a more bitter flavour. It carries off the aqueous humours of the body, being taken for that purpose in broth of some kind, or else hydromel. When old, it loses its strength; but used fresh, either boiled in water or pounded, it acts as a diuretic, and disperses urinary calculi. Authorities who wish full credence to be given to this asserted property, assure us that pebbles boiled with it will split asunder.

[43863] The epipactis, called "elleborine" by some, is a diminutive plant with small leaves. Taken in drink, it is extremely useful for diseases of the liver, and as an antidote to poisons.

[44046] The epimedion consists of a stem of moderate size, with ten or twelve leaves like those of ivy: it never flowers, and has a thin, black root, with a powerful smell. It grows in humid soils. This plant also has certain astringent and cooling properties, but females must be on their guard against it. The leaves, beaten up in wine, prevent the bosom from growing too large in young girls.

[44435] The enneaphyllon has nine long leaves, and is of a caustic nature. It is employed topically, but when used it is wrapped in wool to prevent it from cauterizing further than desirable, for it blisters immediately. For lumbago and sciatica it is of the greatest utility.

[44705] Of fern there are two varieties, equally destitute of blossom and of seed. The Greeks give the name of "pteris," and sometimes "blachnon," to the kind in which numerous shoots take their rise from a single root, exceeding two cubits even in length, and with a not unpleasant smell: this plant is thought to be the male fern.

[45031] The other kind is known to the Greeks as "thelypteris," and sometimes, "nymph&aelig;a pteris:" it has a single stem only, with comparatively few branches, is shorter, softer, and more tufted than the other, and has channelled leaves growing near the root. Swine are fattened upon the roots of either kind. The leaves of both kinds are arranged on either side in the form of wings, whence the Greek name "pteris." The roots are long, run obliquely, and are of a swarthy colour, more par- ticularly when dried: when wanted for use,. they should be dried in the sun. These plants are found growing everywhere, but in cold soils more particularly; they should be taken up, too, at the setting of the Vergili&aelig;. The root is only used at the end of three years, neither before that period nor after. They act as an expellent of intestinal worms; for tapeworm honey is taken with them, but in other cases sweet wine, for three days.

[45963] They are, both of them, extremely detrimental to the stomach, but are laxative to the bowels, carrying off first the bile and then the aqueous humours of the body. When used for tapeworm, it is the best plan to take scammony with them, in equal proportions. For rheumatic defluxions, the root is taken in doses of two oboli, in water, after a day's abstinence from food, a little honey being taken first. Neither kind must ever be given to females; for in pregnancy they are productive of abortion, and in other cases entail sterility. Powdered fern is sprinkled upon sordid ulcers, as also upon the necks of beasts of burden, when chafed. Fern-leaves kill bugs, and serpents will never harbour among them: hence it is a good plan to strew them in places where the presence of those reptiles is suspected. The very smell, too, of burnt fern will put serpents to flight. Medical men have made this distinction as to ferns; that of Macedonia, they say, is the best, and that of Cassiope the next.

[46959] The name of femur bubulum is given to a plant which is good for the sinews, applied fresh, and beaten up with salt and vinegar.

[47088] Galeopsis, or as some call it, "galeobdolon" or "galion,"

[47147] is a plant with a stem and leaves like those of the nettle, only smaller; and which, when bruised, emit a powerful smell. The flower is purple, and the plant is found growing everywhere, about hedges and foot-paths. The leaves and stems, bruised in vinegar, and applied topically, are curative of indurations, carcinomata, and scrofulous sores. They disperse also inflamnatory tumours and imposthumes of the parotid glands, and it is found a useful plan to foment the parts affected with a decoction of them. Applied with salt, this plant is curative of putrid ulcers and gangrenous sores.

[47738] The glaux was known in ancient times as the "eugalacton." In the leaves it resembles the cytisus and the lentil, only that they are whiter beneath. The branches, five or six in number, are extremely thin, and, springing from the root, creep upon the ground, with small purple blossoms upon them. This plan is found in localities near the sea. It is boiled in a pottage made of similago, to increase the milk: females, however, after taking it, must immediately use the bath.

[48214] Glaucion grows in Syria and Parthia; it is a plant of stunted growth, and thickly covered with leaves, like those of the Poppy in appearance, only smaller and of a more repulsive aspect: it has an offensive smell, and a bitter, astringent taste. The seed, which is of a saffron colour, is put into a vessel coatd with potter's clay, and heated in an oven; when taken out, a juice is extracted, which is known by the same name as the plant. This juice and the leaves, bruised, are used for defluxins of the eyes, which disappear in an instant, under this treatment: an eye-salve, too, is prepared from the juice, known as "diaglaucia," to medical men. The milk, when the secretion of it is stopped, is restored by the agency of this plant, for which purpose it is taken in water.

[48994] The glycyside, by some called "p&aelig;onia" or "pentorobos," has a stem two cubits in length, accompanied by two or three others, and of a reddish colour, with a bark like that of the laurel. The leaves are similar to those of isatis, but more unctuous, rounder, and more diminutive; the seed is enclosed in capsules, some being red and some black, there being two varieties of the plant. The female plant is generally thought to be the one to the root of which some six or eight bulbs are attached, of an elongated form; those of the male plant being more in number, as it throws out more roots than one, a palm in length, and of a white colour: it has also an astringent taste. The leaves of the female plant smell like myrrh, and lie closer together than those of the male.

[49773] Both plants grow in the woods, and they should always be taken up at night, it is said; as it would be dangerous to do so in the day-time, the woodpecker of Mars being sure to attack the eyes of the person so engaged. It is stated also that the person, while taking up the root, runs great risk of being attacked with procidence of the anus: all this, however, I take to be so much fiction, most frivolously invented topuff off their supposed marvellous properties. Both plants are used for various purposes: the red seed, taken in red wine, about fifteen in number, arrest menstruation; while the black seed, taken in the same proportion, in either raisin or other vine, are curative of diseases of the uterus. The root, taken in vine, allays all kinds of pains in the bowels, and acts as a purgaive; it cures opisthotony also, jaundice, nephritic diseases, and affections of the bladder. Boiled in wine, it is used for diseaes of the trachea and stomach, and acts astringently upon the bowels. It is eaten also by beasts of burden, but when wanted for remedial purposes, four drachm&aelig; are sufficient.

[50882] The black seed is useful as a preventive of night-mare, being taken in wine, in number above stated: it is very good, too, to eat this seed, and to apply it externally, for gnawing pains of the stomach. Suppurations are also dispersed, when recent, with the black seed, and when of long standing, with the red: both kinds are very useful, too, for wounds inflicted by serpents, and in cases where children are troubled with calculi, being employed at the crisis when strangury first makes its appearance.

[51388] Gnaphalium is called "cham&aelig;zelon" by some: its white, soft, leaves are used as flock, and, indeed, there is no perceptible difference. This plant is administered in astringent wine, for dysentery: it arrests looseness of the bowels and the catamenia, and is used as an injection for tenesmus. It is employed topically for putrid sores.

[51731] Xenocrates gives the name of "gallidraga" to a plant which resembles the leucacanthus, and grows in the marshes. It is a prickly plant, with a tall, ferulaceous stem, surmounted with a head somewhat similar to an egg in appearance. When this head is growing, in summer, small worms, he says, are generated, which are put away in a box for keeping, and are attached as an amulet, with bread, to the arm on the side on which tooth-ache is felt; indeed it is quite wonderful, he says, how soon the pain is removed. These worms, however, are of no use after the end of a year, or in cases where they have been allowed to touch the ground.

[52367] Holcus is a plant that grows in arid, stony, spots: it has an ear at the end of a fine stem, and looks like barley that has put forth again when cut. Attached to the head or around the arm, it extracts spikes of corn adhering to the flesh; for which reason, some persons give it the name of "aristis."

[52670] Hyoseris resembles endive in appearance, but is a smaller plant, and rougher to the touch: pounded and applied to wounds, it heals them with remarkable rapidity.

[52833] The holosteon, so called by the Greeks by way of antiphrasis, (in the same way that they give the name of "sweet" to the gall,) is a plant destitute of all hardness, of such extreme fineness as to resemble hairs in appearance, four fingers in length, and very similar to hay-grass. The leaves of it are narrow, and it has a rough flavour: it grows upon elevated spots composed of humus. Taken in wine, it is used for ruptures and convulsions. It has the property, also, of closing wounds; indeed, if applied to pieces of meat it will solder them together.

[53390] The hippoph&aelig;ston is one of those prickly plants which fullers use in their coppers; it has neither stem nor flower, but only diminutive, empty heads, numerous small leaves of a grass-green colour, and small, soft, white roots. From these roots a juice is extracted in summer, which, taken in doses of three oboli, acts as a purgative; being used for this purpose in cases of epilepsy, fits of trembling, dropsy, vertigo, hardness of breathing, and incipient paralysis.

[53866] The hypoglossa is a plant with leaves like those of the wild myrtle, of a concave form, prickly, and presenting another small leaf within, resembling a tongue in shape. A wreath made of these leaves, placed upon the head, alleviates headache.

[54110] Hypeco&ouml;n is a plant found growing in corn-fields, with leaves like those of rue. Its properties are similar to those of juice of poppies.

[54254] The Id&aelig;an plant has leaves like those of the oxymyrsine; to which leaves a sort of tendril adheres, that bears a flower. This plant arrests diarrh&oelig;a, the catamenia, when in excess, and all kinds of h&aelig;morrhage. It is of an astringent and repercussive nature.

[54531] The isopyron is called "phasiolon" by some, from the circumstance that the leaf of it, which resembles that of anise, assumes a spiral form like the tendrils of the phasiolus. At the summit of the stem, it bears small heads full of a seed like that of melanthium. These heads, taken with honey or hydromel, are good for cough and other affections of the chest; they are extremely useful also for liver complaints.

[54946] The lathyris has numerous leaves like those of the lettuce, with numbers of small buds, in which the seed is contained, enclosed in envelopes like that of the caper. When these buds are dry, the seeds, about the size of a peppercorn, are taken out: they are white, sweet, and easily cleansed from the husk. Twenty of them, taken in pure water or in hydromel, are curative of dropsy, and carry off bile. Persons who require a stronger purgative, take them with the husks on. They are apt, however, to be injurious to the stomach; for which reason a plan has been adopted of taking them with fish or else chicken broth.

[55565] The leontopetalon is called "pardalion" by some: it has a leaf like that of the cabbage, and a stem half a foot in height, with numerous lateral branches, and a seed at the extremities of them, enclosed in pods like those of the chick-pea. The root resembles that of rape, and is large and black: it grows in plough lands. The root, taken in wine, neutralizes the venom of all kinds of serpents; indeed, there is nothing known that is more speedily efficacious for that purpose. It is given also for sciatica.

[56076] The lycapsos has longer and thicker leaves than those of the lettuce, and a long, hairy stem, with numerous offshoots a cubit in length; the flower is diminutive, and of a purple colour; it grows in champaign localities. In combination with barleymeal, it is used as an application for erysipelas: the juice of it, mixed with warm water, is employed as a sudorific, in fevers.

[56454] Among all the plants, however, there is none of a more marvellous nature than the lithospermum, sometimes called "exonychon," "diospyron," or "heracleos." It is about five inches in height, with leaves twice the size of those of rue, and small ligneous branches, about the thickness of a rush. It bears close to the leaves a sort of fine beard or spike, standing by itself, on the extremity of which there are small white stones, as round as a pearl, about the size of a chick-pea, and as hard as a pebble. These stones, at the part where they adhere to the stalk, have a small cavity, and contain a seed within.

[57068] This plant is found in Italy, no doubt, but that of Crete is the most esteemed. Among all the plants, there is none that I ever contemplated with greater admiration than this; so beauteous is the conformation, that it might be fancied that the hand of an artist had arranged a row of lustrous pearls alternately among the leaves; so exquisite too the nicety in thus making a stone to grow upon a plant! The authorities say that this is a creeping plant, and that it lies upon the ground; but for my own part, I have only seen it when plucked, and not while growing. It is well known that these small stones, taken in doses of one drachma, in white wine, break and expel urinary calculi, and are curative of strangury. Indeed, there is no plant that so instantaneously proclaims, at the mere sight of it, the medicinal purposes for which it was originally intended; the appearance of it, too, is such, that it can be immediately recognized, without the necessity of having recourse to any botanical authority.

[58078] There grows near running streams, a dry, white moss, upon ordinary stones. One of these stones, with the addition of human saliva, is rubbed against another; after which the first stone is used for touching impetigo, the party so doing uttering these words:&mdash;

[58344] Feu/gete xanqari/des, lu/xos a)/grios ai(=ma diw/xei. "Cantharides begone, a wild wolf seeks your blood."

[58451] Limeum is the name given by the Gauls to a plant, in a preparation of which, known to them as "deer's poison," they dip their arrows when hunting. To three modii of salivating mixture they put as much of the plant as is used for poisoning a single arrow; and a mess of it is passed down the throat, in cases where oxen are suffering from disease, due care being taken to keep them fastened to the manger till they have been purged, as they are generally rendered frantic by the dose. In case perspiration supervenes, they are drenched all over with cold water.

[59013] Leuce, a plant resembling mercurialis, has received its name from the circumstance that a white line runs through the middle of the leaf; for which reason also, some give it the name of "mesoleucon." The juice of this plant is curative of fistula, and the plant itself, bruised, is good for carcinomata. It is probably the same plant as that called "leucas," so remarkably efficacious for the venom of all kinds of marine animals. Authors have not given a description of it, beyond telling us that the wild leucas has larger leaves than the other, and has properties more strongly developed: they state also that the seed of the cultivated kind is the more acrid of the two.

[59689] I have not found a description given by any writer of the leucographis; a thing I am the more surprised at, as they tell us that it is good for the cure of spitting of blood, taken in doses of three oboli with saffron; as also that it is useful for c&oelig;liac affections, applied beaten up in water, and in cases of excessive menstruation. They state also that it enters into the composition of ophthalmic preparations, and that it fills up ulcers on the more tender parts of the body with new flesh.

[60193] The medion has leaves like those of the cultivated seris, a stem three feet in length, and a large, round, purple flower, at its extremity. The seed is diminutive, and the root half a foot in length: it grows upon umbrageous, sheltered rocks. The root, taken in doses of two drachm&aelig; with honey, arrests the catamenia, the electuary being used for some days. The seed, too, is administered in wine for a similar purpose.

[60620] The myosota or myosotis is a smooth plant, throwing out from a single root numerous hollowed stems, of a somewhat reddish colour; and bearing at the lower extremities swarthy, narrow, oblong leaves, sharp on the back, arranged in pairs at regular distances, and springing from delicate branches attached with axils to the main stems. The flower is blue, and the root, a finger in length, is provided with numerous filaments like hairs. This plant possesses certain septic and ulcerating properties, and hence is used for the cure of fistula of the eye. The Egyptians say that if upon the morning of the twenty-eight day of their month Thoth, a day which generally falls in our month of August, a person rubs himself with the juice of this plant before speaking to any one, he will be sure to have no diseases of the eyes all that year.

[61457] The myagros is a ferulaceous plant, with leaves like those of madder: the seed is of an oily nature-indeed, an oil is extracted from it. Ulcerations of the mouth are cured by rubbing them with the juice of this plant.

[61676] The plant called "nyma" bears three long leaves, like those of endive: applied to scars, it restores the skin to its natural colour.

[61810] "Natrix" is the name of a plant, the root of which, when taken out of the ground, has just the rank smell of the he-goat. It is used in Picenum for the purpose of keeping away from females what with a singular credulity they call by the name of "Fatui." For my own part, however, I should think that persons requiring to be treated with such medicaments as these, must be labouring under a sort of mental hallucination.

[62231] Odontitis is a sort of hay-grass, which throws out from a single root numerous, small, jointed. stems, of a triangular form and of a swarthy hue. At the joints there are small leaves, somewhat longer than those of the polygonos; and in the axils formed by these leaves is the seed, similar to barley in appearance. It has a purple, diminutive flower, and is found growing in meadows. A handful of the stems, boiled in astringent wine, is used for the cure of tooth-ache, the decoction being retained for some time in the mouth.

[62760] The othonna is a Syrian plant, resembling rocket in appearance; its leaves are pierced with numerous holes, and its flower resembles that of saffron, for which reason some persons have given it the name of "anemone." The juice of this plant is employed in ophthalmic preparations; it is slightly pungent, of a warming nature, and astringent as it dries. It acts as a detergent upon cicatrizations, films on the eyes, and all impediments of the sight. Some say that the plant is washed and dried, and then divided into lozenges.

[63289] The onosma has leaves some four fingers in length, lying upon the ground, and indented like those of the anchusa: it has neither stem, blossom, nor seed. A pregnant woman, they say, if she eats of this plant, or even walks over it, will be sure to miscarry.

[63548] The onopordon, it is said, has strongly carminative effects upon asses, when they eat of it. It acts as a diuretic and as an emmenagogue, arrests diarrh&oelig;a, and disperses abscesses and suppurations.

[63753] The osyris bears small, swarthy, flexible branches, covered with dark leaves like those of flax. The seed, which grows upon the branches, is black at first, but afterwards changes its colour and turns red. Cosmetics for females are prepared from these branches. A decoction of the roots, taken in drink, is curative of jaundice. The roots, cut in pieces before the seed ripens, and dried in the sun, act astringently upon the bowels: gathered after the seed has ripened, and boiled in pottage, they are curative of defluxions of the abdomen: they are taken also by themselves, bruised in rain water.

[64354] The oxys is a plant with three leaves; it is given for derangement of the stomach, and patients eat it who are suffering from intestinal hernia.

[64500] The polyanthemum, by some persons called "batrachion," by virtue of its caustic properties has an excoriating effect upon scars, and restores the skin to its proper colour. It heals white morphew also.

[64703] The Greeks give the name of "polygonos" to the plant known to us as "sanguinaria." It is but little elevated above the ground, has leaves like those of rue, and resembles grass in appearance. The juice of it, injected into the nostrils, arrests h&aelig;morrhage: taken with wine, it has a similar effect upon bleeding at any other part of the body, as also spitting of blood. Those who distinguish several kinds of polygonos, make this to be the male plant, and say that it is so called from the large number of seeds, or else from its numerous branches. Some call it "polygonatos," from the number of its joints, others, again, "teuthalis," and others, "carcinethron," "clema," or "myrtopetalos."

[65402] There are some authorities to be found, however, who say that this is the female plant, and that the male is more diminutive, less swarthy, and more jointed, with a seed protruding beneath all the leaves. However this may be, these plants are of an astringent, cooling nature. The seed is laxative, and, taken in large doses, acts as a diuretic, and arrests defluxions; indeed, if there is no defluxion, it is of no use taking it. For burning heats of the stomach, the leaves are applied topically; and they are used, in the form of a liniment, for pains in the bladder, and for erysipelas. The juice is used as an injection for suppurations of the ears, and by itself, for pains in the eyes. It is administered, also, in fevers, tertian and quartan fevers more particularly, in doses of two cyathi, just before the paroxysms come on; as also in cases of cholera, dysentery, and derangement of the stomach.

[66310] There is a third kind, which grows on the mountains, and is known as "orios," similar to a delicate reed in appearance, and having but a single stem, with numerous joints running into one another; the leaves of it are similar to those of the pitchtree, and the root is never used. This variety, however, is not so efficacious as those already mentioned, and, indeed, is used exclusively for sciatica. A fourth kind is known as the wild polygonos: it is a shrub, almost a tree in fact, with a ligneous root, a red trunk like that of the cedar, and branches resembling those of spartum, a couple of palms in length, and with three or four dark-coloured, knotted joints. This kind, also, is of an astringent nature, and has a flavour like that of the quince. It is either boiled down in water to one third, or else dried and powdered for sprinkling upon ulcerations of the mouth and excoriations: it is chewed, also, for affections of the gums. It arrests the progress of corrosive ulcers and of all sores of a serpiginous nature, or which cicatrize with difficulty, and is particularly useful for ulcerations caused by snow. Herbalists employ it also for quinzy, and use it as a chaplet for head-ache; for defluxions of the eyes, they put it round the neck.

[67567] In cases of tertian fever, some persons pull it up with the left hand, and attach it as an amulet to the body; the same, too, in cases of h&aelig;morrhage. There is no plant that is more generally kept by them in a dry state than the polygonos.

[67813] The pancratium is called by some the "little squill," in preference: it has leaves like those of the white lily, but longer and thicker, and a root composed of a large, red, bulb. The juice of it, taken with meal of fitches, relaxes the bowels, and acts as a detergent upon ulcers: for dropsy, and diseases of the spleen, it is administered with honey. Some persons boil it till the water becomes sweet; the water is then poured off, and the root is pounded and divided into tablets, which are dried in the sun and used for ulcerations of the head, and other affections which require detergents. It is sometimes given for cough, a pinch in three fingers in wine, and, in the form of an electuary, for pains in the side or peripneumony.

[68550] It is administered, also, in wine, for sciatica, griping pains in the bowels, and retardations of the catamenia.

[68664] The peplis, known by the various names of "syce," "meconion," and "mecon aphrodes," is a shrub-like plant, springing from a single, diminutive, root. The leaves of it resemble those of rue, but are a little larger; the seed, which lies beneath the leaves, is round, and smaller than that of the white poppy. It is ordinarily gathered in vineyards, at harvest-time, and is dried with the seed on, receivers being placed beneath to catch it as it falls. This seed, taken in drink, purges the bowels, and carries off bile and pituitous secretions: one acetabulum, taken in three hemin&aelig; of hydromel, is a middling dose. It is sprinkled also upon meat and other articles of food, as a laxative medicine.

[69370] The periclymenos is also a shrub-like plant, with two whitish, soft, leaves, arranged at intervals. At the extremity, among the leaves, is the seed, hard, and very difficult to pluck. It grows in ploughed fields and hedges, entwining around every object from which it can gain support. The seed is dried in the shade, pounded, and divided into lozenges. These lozenges are left to dissolve, in three cyathi of white wine, for a period of thirty days, and are given for diseases of the spleen; the volume of which is gradually diminished either by discharges of bloody urine, or else by alvine evacuation, the effects of the medicament being perceptible at the end of ten days. The leaves, boiled, act as a diuretic, and are useful for hardness of breathing. Taken in drink, in manner above- mentioned, they facilitate delivery, and bring away the afterbirth.

[70230] We have already spoken of pelecinon as growing in cornfields, a plant which throws out a number of shoots from thin stems, and has leaves like those of the chick-pea. The seed, which is contained in pods of a curved shape, like diminutive horns and three or four in number, is similar to gith in appearance, bitter, and an excellent stomachic. It is used as an ingredient in antidotes.

[70617] Polygala is a palm in height, with leaves like those of the lentil at the extremity of the stem. It has an astringent taste; taken in drink, it increases the milk in nursing women.

[70799] Poterion, or, as some call it, "phrynion" or "neuras," throws out numerous branches, is shrivelled and prickly, and covered with a thick down. The leaves of it are small and round; the branches long, soft, thin, and flexible; and the blossom elongated, and of a grass-green colour. The seed is never used, but it has a pungent flavour and a powerful smell: the plant is found growing upon moist, watery, elevations. The roots are two or three in number, some two cubits in length, sinewy, white, and firm. It is dug up in autumn, and the stem yields a juice like gum, when cut. The root is said to be of wonderful efficacy as an application for the cure of wounds, more particularly of the sinews, even when severed. A decoction of it is also taken, with honey, for relaxations of the sinews, and for weakness or wounds of those parts.

[71636] The phalangitis is by some called "phalangion," and by others "leucanthemum," or, as I find it written in some copies, "leucacantha." Its branches are diminutive, never less than two in number, and running in contrary directions: the blossom is white, and similar to the flower of the red lily; the seed dark and broad, resembling the half of a lentil, but much thinner; and the root slender and of a grass-green colour. The leaves, blossoms, or seed of this plant are employed for the cure of wounds inflicted by scorpions, serpents, and the phalangium, and for the removal of griping pains in the bowels.

[72244] As for the phyteuma, I think it a mere loss of time to describe it, it being only used as an ingredient in philtres.

[72362] The Greeks give the name of "phyllon" to a plant which grows among the rocks, in mountainous spots. The female plant is of a more grass-green colour than the other, with a thin stem, a diminutive root, and a round seed, like that of the poppy. This last kind ensures the conception of issue of the same sex; while the male plant, differing only in the seed, which resembles the olive at its first appearance, ensures the conception of male issue. They are both taken in wine.

[72839] The phellandrion grows in marshy spots, and has a leaf like that of parsley: the seed of it is taken in drink for calculi and affections of the bladder.

[72993] The phalaris has a long thin stem, like a reed, with a drooping flower at the extremity; the seed is like that of sesame. This plant, too, taken with milk and honey, in wine or vinegar, breaks urinary calculi, and is curative of diseases of the bladder.

[73248] The polyrrhizon has leaves like those of myrtle, and numerous roots. These roots are pounded and administered in wine, for injuries inflicted by serpents: they are useful, also, for cattle.

[73439] The proserpinaca, a common plant enough, is an excellent remedy for the sting of the scorpion. Powdered and mixed with brine and oil, in which the m&aelig;na has been preserved, it is an excellent cure, they say, for quinzy. It is also stated that, however fatigued a person may be, to the extent even of losing his voice, he will be sure to be refreshed, by putting this plant beneath his tongue; and that if it is eaten, a vomit will be the result, productive of good effects.

[73919] Rhacoma is imported from the regions situate beyond Pontus. The root of it is similar to black costus, but smaller and somewhat redder, inodorous, and of a hot, astringent flavour; when pounded, it yields a colour like that of wine, but inclining to saffron. Applied topically, it reduces abscesses and inflammations, and heals wounds: used with raisin wine, it allays defluxions of the eyes; with honey, ecchymosis; and with vinegar, livid marks upon the skin. Reduced to powder, it is sprinkled upon malignant ulcers, and is given internally for spitting of blood, in doses of one drachma, in water. For dysentery and c&oelig;liac affections, if unattended with fever, it is administered in wine; but if there is fever, in water. It is pounded more easily when it has been steeped in water the night before. A decoction of it is given, in doses of two drachm&aelig;, for ruptures, convulsions, contusions, and falls with violence.

[74853] In cases of pains in the chest, a little pepper and myrrh is added. When the stomach is deranged, it is taken in cold water; and the same in cases of chronic cough, purulent expectorations, liver complaint, affections of the spleen, sciatica, diseases of the kidneys, asthma, and hardness of breathing. Pounded and taken in doses of three oboli, in raisin wine, or used in the form of a decoction, it cures irritations of the trachea: applied with vinegar, it acts as a detergent upon lichens. It is taken in drink, also, for flatulency, cold shiverings, chilly fevers, hiccup, gripings of the bowels, herpetic ulcerations, oppressions of the head, vertigo attended with melancholy, lassitude accompanied with pain, and convulsions.

[75587] In the vicinity of Ariminum, there is a well-known plant called "reseda:" it disperses abscesses and all kinds of inflammations. Those who employ it for these purposes, add the following words: "Reseda," allay this disease! knowest thou not, knowest thou not, what chick it is that has torn up these roots? Let it have nor head nor feet!" This formula is repeated thrice, the party spitting on the ground each time.

[76004] The st&oelig;chas grows only in the islands of that name. It is an odoriferous plant, with leaves like those of hyssop, and of a bitter taste. Taken in drink, it promotes menstruation, and allays pains in the chest. It forms an ingredient, also, in antidotes.

[76265] The solanum, according to Cornelius Celsus, is called "strychnon" by the Greeks; it is possessed of repercussive and refrigerative properties.

[76409] Smyrnion has a stem like that of parsley, but larger leaves, and growing principally about the young shoots, which are numerous. From the midst of these shoots the leaves make their appearance, unctuous, and bending towards the ground. This plant has a medicinal smell, penetrating to a certain degree, and agreeable: the colour of it is a pale yellow, and the stems bear rounded umbels like those of dill, with a round, black seed, which dries at the beginning of summer. The root, also, is odoriferous, of an acrid, pungent flavour, soft and juicy, black on the outer coat and pale within. The smell of it partakes very much of the nature of that of myrrh, to which, in fact, it owes its name: it grows in localities of a stony nature, or covered with humus. Its medicinal properties are warming and resolvent.

[77223] The leaves and root are used as a diuretic and as an emmenagogue; the seed arrests diarrh&oelig;a; and the root, applied topically, disperses abscesses and suppurations, provided they are not inveterate, and reduces indurated tumours. It is useful, also, for injuries inflicted by the phalangium and by serpents, taken in wine, with the addition of cachrys, polium, or melissophyllum; the dose, however, must be taken a little at a time only, for otherwise it acts as an emetic, a reason for which it is sometimes administered with rue. The seed or root is curative of cough, hardness of breathing, and diseases of the thoracic organs, spleen, kidneys, and bladder; the root, too, is used for ruptures and convulsions. This plant facilitates delivery, and brings away the afterbirth; it is also given, in combination with crethmos, in wine, for sciatica. It acts as a sudorific and carminative, for which reason it is used to disperse flatulency of the stomach; it promotes, also, the cicatrization of wounds.

[78234] A juice is extracted from the root, which is very useful for female complaints, and for affections of the thoracic organs and viscera, possessing, as it does, certain calorific, digestive, and detergent properties. The seed, in particular, is given in drink for dropsy, external applications being made of the juice, and emollient poultices applied of the dried rind of the root. It is used, also, as a seasoning for food, boiled meat in particular, with the addition of honied wine, oil, and garum.

[78735] Sinon, a plant with a flavour very like that of pepper, promotes the digestion, and is highly efficacious for pains in the stomach.

[78868] Telephion resembles purslain in the stem and leaves. From the root of it there spring seven or eight small branches, covered with thick, fleshy leaves; it grows in cultivated spots, and among vines in particular. It is used as an application for freckles, being removed as soon as dry; it is employed, also, for white morphew, being applied some six hours each night or day, and the treatment continued for about three months: after removing it, barley-meal should be applied. Telephion is healing, also, for wounds and fistulas.

[79399] The trichomanes is a plant that resembles the adiantum, except that it is more slender and of a darker colour; the leaves of it, which are similar to those of the lentil, lie close together, on opposite sides, and have a bitter taste. A decoction of this plant, taken in white wine, with the addition of wild cummin, is curative of strangury. Bruised and applied to the head, it prevents the hair from falling off, and, where it has come off, restores it: pounded and applied with oil, it effects the cure of alopecy. The mere taste of it is provocative of sneezing.

[79967] The thalictrum has leaves like those of coriander, only somewhat more unctuous, and a stem resembling that of the poppy. It is found growing everywhere, in champaign localities more particularly. The leaves, applied with honey, heal ulcers.

[80209] Of thlaspi there are two kinds; the first of which has narrow leaves, about a finger in length and breadth, turned to wards the ground, and divided at the point. It has a slender stern, half a foot in length, and not wholly destitute of branches; the seed, enclosed in a crescent-shaped capsule, is similar to a lentil in shape, except that it has a jagged appearance, to which, in fact, it owes its name; the flower is white, and the plant is found near footpaths and in hedges. The seed, which has an acrid flavour, carries off bile and pituitous secretions, by vomit and by alvine evacuation, the proper dose being one acetabulum. It is used, also, for sciatica, in the form of an injection, this treatment being persevered in until it has induced a discharge of blood: it acts also as an emmenagogue, but is fatal to the f&oelig;tus.

[81048] The other thlaspi, known by some as "Persicon napy," has broad leaves and large roots, and is also very useful as an injection for sciatica. Both plants are very serviceable for inguinal complaints; it being recommended that the person who gathers them should mention that he is taking them for diseases of the groin, for abscesses of all kinds, and for wounds, and that he should pluck them with one hand only.

[81461] What sort of plant the trachinia is, the authorities do not state. I think that the assurance given by Democritus must be false: for it would be nothing less than a prodigy, for a plant, attached as an amulet, to consume the spleen in so short a time as three days.

[81728] The tragonis, or tragion, grows nowhere but in the maritime districts of the Isle of Crete; it resembles the juniper in the seed, leaf, and branches. Its milky juice, which thickens in the form of a gum, or its seed, taken in drink, expels pointed weapons from the flesh. The plant, too, is pounded fresh and applied as a liniment with wine, or, dried and powdered, with honey. It increases the milk in nursing women, and is a sovereign remedy for diseases of the mamill&aelig;.

[82208] There is another plant also, called "tragos," or "scorpion" by some, half a foot in height, branchy, destitute of leaves, and bearing diminutive red clusters, with a seed like that of wheat, but pointed at the extremity: this too grows in maritime localities. Ten or twelve tops of the branches, bruised and taken in wine, are remedial in cases of c&oelig;liac affections, dysentery, spitting of blood, and excessive menstruation.

[82640] There is the tragopogon, also, by some called "come;" a plant with a small stem, leaves like those of saffron, an elongated, sweet, root, and a large, swarthy calyx at the extremity of the stem. It grows in rugged soils, and is never used.

[82881] Such, then, is all that I have hitherto been enabled to learn or discover, worthy of mention, relative to plants. At the close of this subject, it seems to me that it will not be out of place to remind the reader, that the properties of plants vary according to their age. It is elaterium, as already stated, that preserves its properties the longest of all. The black cham&aelig;leon retains its virtues forty years, centaury not more than twelve, peucedanum and aristolochia six, and the wild vine one year&mdash;that is to say, if they are kept in the shade. I would remark, also, that beyond those animals which breed within the plants, there are none that attack the roots of any of those which have been mentioned by me; with the exception, indeed, of the sphondyle, a kind of creeping insect, which infests them all.

[83706] It is also an undoubted truth, that the virtues and properties of all roots are more feebly developed, when the fruit has been allowed to ripen; and that it is the same with the seed, when incisions have been previously made in the root, for the extraction of the juice. The efficacy, too, of all plants is impaired by making habitual use of them; and these substances, if employed daily, lose equally their good or bad properties, when required to be effectual. All plants, too, have more powerful properties, when grown in soils that are cold and exposed to the north-eastern blasts, or in dry localities.

[84315] There are certain differences, also, by no means inconsiderable, in the predispositions of the various nations of the earth. I have been informed, for instance, that the people of Egypt, Arabia, Syria, and Cilicia, are subject to tapeworm and mawworm, while those of Thracia and Phrygia, on the other hand, are totally exempt from them. This, however, is less surprising than the fact that, although Attica and B&oelig;otia are adjoining territories, the Thebans are troubled with these inflictions, while among the people of Athens they are unknown.

[84867] Considerations of this description lead me now to turn my attention to the nature of the animated beings themselves, and the medicinal properties which are inborn in them, the most assured remedies, perhaps, for all diseases.

[85094] For Nature, in fact, that parent of all things, has produced no animated being for the purpose solely of eating; she has willed that it should be born to satisfy the wants of others, and in its very vitals has implanted medicaments conducive to health. While she has implanted them in mute and inanimate objects even, she has equally willed that these, the most in- valuable aids of life, should be also derived from the life of another&mdash;a subject for contemplation, marvellous in the highest degree!

[85601] SUMMARY.&mdash;Remedies, narratives, and observations, six hundred and two.

[85678] ROMAN AUTHORS QUOTED.&mdash;Caius Valgius, Pompeius Len&aelig;us, Sextius Niger who wrote in Greek, Julius Bassus who wrote in Greek, Antonius Castor, Cornelius Celsus.

[85848] FOREIGN AUTHORS QUOTED.&mdash;Theophrastus, Apollodorus, Democritus, Aristogiton, Orpheus, Pythagoras, Mago, Menander who wrote the "Biochresta," Nicander.

[86005] MEDICAL AUTHORS QUOTED.&mdash;Mnesitheus, Timaristus, Simus, Hippocrates, Chrysippus, Diocles, Ophelion, Heraclides, Hicesius, Dionysius, Apollodorus of Citium, Apol- lodorus of Tarentum, Praxagoras, Plistonicus, Medius, Dieuches, Cleophantus, Philistion, Asclepiades, Crateuas, Petronius Diodotus, Iollas, Erasistratus, Diagoras, Andreas, Mnesides, Epicharmus, Damion, Tlepolemus, Metrodorus, Solo, Lycus, Olympias of Thebes, Philinus, Petrichus, Micton, Glaucias, Xenocrates.

[86484] *** Before quitting the Botanical Books of Pliny, it is a duty both to our author and to the reader, to call attention to the illustrations of a few passages in this work, which will he found in the Textrinum Antiquorum, by Dr. James Yates, F.R.S., a book characterized by learning, equally profound and extensive, and the most indefatigable research: it being hut recently, we are sorry to say, that we have been made acquainted with its valuable contents.

[86943] The following are selected as among the most useful and interesting results of his enquiries.

[87038] B. vi. c. 20 [V. ii. p. 36]. Dr. Yates is of opinion that Pliny has here mistranslated a passage of Aristotle, Hist. Anim. v. 19, and that he has mistaken the word bombu/kia, "cocoons," for webs, similar to those of the spider, attached to the leaves of trees. Not understanding the original, he would seem to have given a distorted account of the simple operation of winding the threads from off the cocoons of the silkworm upon bobbins, by the hands of females; the threads upon which bobbins would be afterwards unwound for the manufacture of silken fabrics. See Notes 8 and 9 on the passage in question; also B. xi. c. 26.

[87666] B. viii. c. 74 [V. ii. p. 336]. For the word "Sororiculata," Dr. Yates proposes to read "Soriculata," and he suggests that the cloth thus called may have been a velvet or plush, which received its name from its resemblance to the coat of the field-mouse, "sorex," the diminutive of which would be "soricula"

[87975] B. xix. c. 2 [V. iv. p. 133] and c. 6 [p. 138]. I)r. Yates expresses it as his opinion that the words "Carbasus" and "Carbasa" are derived from the oriental word Carpas, signifying "cotton," and thinks that Pliny, in B. xix. c. 2, may have used the word by Catachresis, as meaning linen, in the same manner as the Latin poets repeatedly use the word "carbasa," as signifying various kinds of woven textures. If this view be correct, the word "Carbasina" in B. xix. c. 6, will probably mean "awnings of woven material" generally, and not of fine linen, or cambric, as suggested in Note 55.

[88565] B. xix. c. 2 [V. iv. p. 134]. The genuineness of the passage which makes mention of the "Gossypium," is questioned by Dr. Yates, who thinks it possible that it is an interpolation: such, however, if we may judge from the result of Sillig's researches, does not appear to have been the case. If, on the other hand, the passage is genuine, Dr. Yates is of opinion that the statement is incorrect, and that cotton was not grown in Egypt. It seems just possible, however, that Pliny may have had in view the trees mentioned by him in B. xiv. c. 28.

[89111] B. xix. c. 4 [V. iv. p. 137, also p. 134, Note 37]. Dr. Yates has adduced a number of convincing arguments to prove that the "Byssus" of the ancients cannot have been cotton, but that in all probability it was a texture of fine flax. The passages of Pausanias, (B. v. c. 25, and 1. vi. c. 26) in which "Byssus" is mentioned, would certainly seem to apply to flax, a product which is still cultivated near the mouth of the river Peneus, in ancient Elis. There is no doubt, however, that Philostratus, though perhaps erroneously, has used the word "Byssus" as meaning cotton.