WORK: Naturalis Historia  (slug: pliny-the-elder-naturalis-historia-631445)

CHAPTER: 24



[110081] The plant called "exedum" is curative of lethargy. The herbaceous plant called "notia," which is used by curriers for dyeing leather a bright, cheerful colour, and known by them under various names&mdash;is curative of cancerous ulcers; I find it also stated that, taken in wine or in oxycrate, it is extremely efficacious for stings inflicted by scorpions.

[110440] The Greeks wittily give the name of "philanthropos" to a certain plant, because it attaches itself to articles of dress. A chaplet made of this plant has the effect of relieving headache.

[110629] As to the plant known as the "lappa canaria," beaten up in wine with plantago and millefolium, it effects the cure of carcinomatous sores, the application being removed at the end of three days. Taken out of the ground without the aid of iron, and thrown into their wash, or given to them wine and milk, it cures diseases in swine. Some persons add, however, that the person, as he takes it up, must say&mdash;"This is the plant argemon, a remedy discovered by Minerva for such swine as shall taste thereof."

[111139] Tordylon is, according to some authorities, the seed of sili, while according to others it is a distinct plant, as known also as "syreon." I find no particulars relative to it, except that it grows upon mountains, and that the ashes of it, taken in drink, act as an emmenagogue and facilitate expectoration. It is stated also, that for this last purpose the root is even more efficacious than the stem; that the juice of it, taken in doses of three oboli, cures diseases of the kidneys; and that the root is used as an ingredient for emollient plasters.

[111694] Gramen is of all herbaceous productions the most common. As it creeps along the ground it throws out jointed stems, from the joints of which, as well as from the extremity of the stem, fresh roots are put forth every here and there. In all other parts of the world the leaves of it are tapering, and come to a point; but upon Mount Parnassus they resemble the leaves of the ivy, the, plant throwing out a greater number of stems than elsewhere, and bearing a blossom that is white and odoriferous. There is no vegetable production that is more grateful to beasts of burden than this, whether in a green state or whether dried and made into hay, in which last case it is sprinkled with water when given to them. It is said that on Mount Parnassus a juice is extracted from it, which is very abundant and of a sweet flavour.

[112518] In other parts of the world, instead of this juice a decoction of it is employed for closing wounds; an effect equally produced by the plant itself, which is beaten up for the purpose and attached to the part affected, thereby preventing inflammation. To the decoction wine and honey are added, and in some cases, frankincense, pepper, and myrrh, in the proportion of one third of each ingredient; after which it is boiled again in a copper vessel, when required for tooth-ache or difluxions of the eyes. A decoction of the roots, in wine, is curative of griping pains in the bowels, strangury, and ulcerations of the bladder, and it disperses calculi. The seed is still more powerful as a diuretic, arrests looseness and vomiting, and is particularly useful for wounds inflicted by dragons. There are some authorities which give the following prescription for the cure of scrofulous sores and inflamed tumours:&mdash;From one, two, or three stems, as many as nine joints must be removed, which must then be wrapped in black wool with the grease in it. The party who gathers them must do so fasting, and must then go, in the same state, to the patient's house while he is from home. When the patient comes in, the other must say to him three times, "I come fasting to bring a remedy to a fasting man;" and must then attach the amulet to his person, repeating the same ceremony three consecutive days. The variety of this plant which has seven joints is considered a most excellent amulet for the cure of head-ache. For excruciating pains in the bladder, some recommend a decoction of gramen, boiled down in wine to one half, to be taken immediately after the bath.

[114184] There are some authorities who mention three varieties of the pointed gramen. That which has at the extremity five points at the utmost, is called "dactylos." Twisting these points together, persons introduce them into the nostrils and then withdraw them, with the view of preventing h&aelig;morrhage. The second kind, which resembles aizo&ouml;n, is employed with axle-grease for whitlows and hangnails, and for fleshy excrescences upon the nails: this also is called "dactylos," because it is so useful as a remedy for diseases of the fingers.

[114731] The third kind, which is also known as "dactylos," is more diminutive, and is found growing upon walls or tiles. It has certain caustic properties, and arrests the progress of serpiginous ulcers. By placing a wreath of gramen round the head, bleeding at the nose is stopped. In Babylonia, it is said, the gramen which grows by the wayside is fatal to camels.

[115091] Nor is fenugreek held in less esteem. By some it is known as "telis," by others as "carphos," and by others again as "buceras," or "&aelig;goceras," the produce of it bearing some resemblance to horns. Among us it is known as "silicia." The mode of sowing it we have already described on the appropriate occasion. Its properties are desiccative, emollient, and resolvent. A decoction of it is useful for many female maladies, indurations for instance, tumours, and contractions of the uterus; in all which cases it is employed as a fomentation or used for a sitting-bath: it is serviceable also as an injection. It removes cutaneous eruptions on the face; and a decoction of it, applied topically with nitre or vinegar, cures diseases of the spleen or liver. In cases of difficult labour, Diocles recommends the seed pounded, in doses of one acetabulum, mixed with boiled must. After taking one third of the mixture, the patient must use a warm bath, and then, while in a perspiration, she must take another third, and, immediately after leaving the bath, the remainder&mdash;this, he says, will prove a most effectual means of obtaining relief.

[116238] The same authority recommends fenugreek boiled, with barley or linseed, in hydromel, as a pessary for violent pains in the uterus: he prescribes it also as an external application for the lower regions of the abdomen. He speaks also of treating leprous sores and freckles with a mixture composed of equal proportions of sulphur and meal of fenugreek, recommending it to be applied repeatedly in the course of the day, due care being taken not to rub the part affected.

[116708] For the cure of leprosy, Theodorus prescribes a mixture of fenugreek, and one fourth part of cleaned nasturtium, the whole to be steeped in the strongest vinegar. Damion used to give a potion by way of emmenagogue, consisting of half an acetabulum of fenugreek seed in nine cyathi of boiled must and water. There is no doubt too, that a decoction of it is remarkably useful for diseases of the uterus and for ulcerations of the intestines, and that the seed is beneficial for affections of the joints and chest. Boiled with mallows and then taken in honied wine, fenugreek is extolled in the highest terms, as serviceable for affections of the uterus and intestines. Indeed, the very steam that arises from the decoction may be productive of considerable benefit. A decoction too of fenugreek seed is a corrective of the rank odours of the armpits. Meal of fenugreek, with wine and nitre, speedily removes ring-worm and dandriff of the head; and a decoction of it in hydromel, with the addition of axle-grease, is used for the cure of diseases of the generative organs, inflamed tumours, imposthumes of the parotid glands, gout in the Feet and hands, maladies of the joints, and denudations of the bones. Kneaded with vinegar, it effects the cure of sprains, and, boiled in oxymel only, it is used as a liniment for affections of the spleen. Kneaded with wine, it acts as a detergent upon carcinomatous sores; after which, applied with honey, it effects a perfect cure. A pottage too is made of this meal, which is taken for ulcerations of the chest and chronic coughs; it is kept boiling a considerable time, in order to remove the bitterness, after which honey is added.

[118382] We shall now proceed to speak of the plants which have gained a higher degree of reputation.

[118476] SUMMARY.&mdash;Remedies, narratives, and observations, eleven hundred and seventy-six.

[118564] ROMAN ATUTHORS QUOTED.&mdash;C. Valgius, Pompeius Len&aelig;us, Sextius Niger who wrote in Greek, Julius Bassus who wrote in Greek, Antonius Castor, Cornelius Celsus.

[118732] FOREIGN AUTHORS QUOTED.&mdash;Theophrastus, Apollodorus, Democritus, Orpheus, Pythagoras, Mago, Menan- der who wrote the "Biochresta," Nicander, Homer, Hesiod, Mus&aelig;us, Sophocles, Anaxila&uuml;s.

[118934] MEDICAL AUTHORS QUOTED.&mdash;Mnesitheus, Callimachus, Phanias the physician, Timaristus, Simus, Hippocrates, Chrysippus, Diocles, Ophelion, Heraclides, Hicesius, Dionysius, Apollodorus of Citium, Apollodorus of Tarentum, Praxagoras, Plistonicus, Medius, Dieuches, Cleophantus, Philistion, Asclepiades, Crateuas, Petronius Diodotus, Iollas, Erasistratus, Diagoras, Andreas, Mnesides, Epicharmus, Damion, Sosimenes, Tlepolemus, Metrodorus, Solon, Lycus, Olympias of Thebes, Philinus, Petrichus, Micton, Glaucias, Xenocrates.