WORK: Naturalis Historia  (slug: pliny-the-elder-naturalis-historia-631445)

CHAPTER: 25



[109990] The larger kind exceeds a cubit in height, and is somewhat thicker than the thumb: at the extremity, the leaves are similar to a tongue in shape, and are fleshy, unctuous, full of juice, and about as broad as a person's thumb. Some are bent downwards towards the ground, while others again stand upright, the outline of them resembling an eye in shape. The smaller kind grows upon walls, old rubbish of houses, and tiled roof,; it is branchy from the root, anti covered with leaves to the extremity. These leaves are narrow, pointed, and juicy: the stem is a palm in height, and the root is never used.

[110594] A similar plant is that known to the Greeks by the name of "andrachle agria," and by the people of Italy as the "illece- bra." Its leaves, though small, are larger than those of the last-named plant, but growing on a shorter stem. It grows in craggy localities, and is gathered for use as food. All these plants have the same properties, being cooling and astringent. The leaves, applied topically, or the juice, in form of a liniment, are curative of defluxions of the eyes: this juice too acts as a detergent upon ulcers of the eyes, makes new flesh, and causes them to cicatrize; it cleanses the eyelids also of viscous matter. Applied to the temples, both the leaves and the juice of these plants are remedial for head-ache; they neutralize the venom also of the phalangium; and the greater aizo&uuml;m, in particular, is an antidote to aconite. It is asserted, too, that those who carry this last plant about them will never be stung by the scorpion.

[111551] These plants are curative of pains in the ears; which is the case also with juice of henbane, applied in moderate quantities, of achillea, of the smaller centaury and plantago, of peucedanum in combination with rose-oil and opium, and of acoron mixed with rose-leaves. In all these cases, the liquid is made warm, and introduced into the ear with the aid of a syringe. The cotyledon is good, too, for suppurations in the ears, mixed with deer's marrow made hot. The juice of pounded root of ebulum is strained through a linen cloth, and then left to thicken in the sun: when wanted for use, it is moistened with oil of roses, and made hot, being employed for the cure of imposthumes of the parotid glands. Vervain and plantago are likewise used for the cure of the same malady, as also sideritis, mixed with stale axle-grease.

[112379] Aristolochia, mixed with cyperus, is curative of polypus of the nose.

[112450] The following are remedies for diseases of the teeth: root of panaces, chewed, that of the chironion in particular, and juice of panaces, used as a collutory; root, too, of henbane, chewed with vinegar, and root of polemonia. The root of plantago is chewed for a similar purpose, or the teeth are rinsed with a decoction of the juice mixed with vinegar. The leaves, too, are said to be useful for the gums, when swollen with sanious blood, or if there are discharges of blood there-from. The seed, too, of plantago is a cure for abscesses in the gums, and for gum-boils. Aristolochia has a strengthening effect upon the gums and teeth; and the same with vervain, either chewed with the root of that plant, or boiled in wine and vinegar, the decoction being employed as a gargle. The same is the case, also, with root of cinquefoil, boiled down to one third, in wine or vinegar; before it is boiled, however, the root should be washed in sea or salt water: the decoction, too, must be kept a considerable time in the mouth. Some persons prefer cleaning the teeth with ashes of cinquefoil.

[113539] Root of verbascum is also boiled in wine, and the decoction used for rinsing the teeth. The same is done too with hyssop and juice of peucedanum, mixed with opium; or else the juice of the root of anagallis, the female plant in particular, is injected into the nostril on the opposite side to that in which the pain is felt.

[113865] Erigeron is called by our people "senecio." It is said that if a person, after tracing around this plant with an implement of iron, takes it up and touches the tooth affected with it three times, taking care to spit each time on the ground, and then replaces it in the same spot, so as to take root again, he will never experience any further pain in that tooth. This plant has just the appearance and softness of trixago, with a number of small reddish-coloured stems: it is found growing upon walls, and the tiled roofs of houses. The Greeks have given it the name of "erigeron," because it is white in spring. The head is divided into numerous downy filaments, which resemble those of the thorn, protruding from between the divisions of the head: hence it is that Callimachus has given it the name of "acanthis," while others, again, call it "pappus."

[114721] After all, however, the Greek writers are by no means agreed as to this plant; some say, for instance, that it has leaves like those of rocket, while others maintain that they resemble those of the robur, only that they are considerably smaller. Some, again, assert that the root is useless, while others aver that it is beneficial for the sinews, and others that it produces suffocation, if taken in drink. On. the other hand, some have prescribed it in wine, for jaundice and all affections of the bladder, heart, and liver, and give it as their opinion that it carries off gravel from the kidneys. It has been prescribed, also, by them for sciatica, the patient taking one drachma in oxymel, after a walk; and has been recommended as extremely useful for griping pains in the bowels, taken in raisin wine. They assert, also, that used as an aliment with vinegar, it is wholesome for the thoracic organs, and recommend it to be grown in the garden for these several purposes.

[115700] In addition to this, there are some authorities to be found, which distinguish another variety of this plant, but without mentioning its peculiar characteristics. This last they recommend to be taken in water, to neutralize the venom of serpents, and prescribe it to be eaten for the cure of epilepsy. For my own part, however, I shall only speak of it in accordance with the uses made of it among us Romans, uses based upon the results of actual experience. The down of this plant, beaten up with saffron and a little cold water, is applied to defluxions of the eyes; parched with a little salt, it is employed for the cure of scrofulous sores.

[116347] The ephemeron has leaves like those of the lily, but smaller;

[116410] a stem of the same height, a blue flower, and a seed of which no use is made. The root is single, about the thickness of one's finger, and an excellent remedy for diseases of the teeth; for which purpose it is cut up in pieces, and boiled in vinegar, the decoction being used warm as a collutory. The root, too, is employed by itself to strengthen the teeth, being inserted for the purpose in those that are hollow or carious.

[116838] Root of chelidonia is also beaten up with vinegar, and kept in the mouth. Black hellebore is sometimes inserted in carious teeth; and a decoction of either of these last-mentioned plants, in vinegar, has the effect of strengthening loose teeth.

[117084] Labrum Venereum is the name given to a plant that grows in running streams. It produces a small worm, which is crushed by being rubbed upon the teeth, or else enclosed in wax and inserted in the hollow of the tooth. Care must be taken, however, that the plant, when pulled up, does not touch the ground.

[117389] The plant known to the Greeks as "batrachion," we call ranunculus. There are four varieties of it, one of which has leaves somewhat thicker than those of coriander, nearly the size of those of the mallow, and of a livid hue: the stem of the plant is long and slender, and the root white; it grows on moist and well-shaded embankments. The second kind is more foliated than the preceding one, the leaves have more numerous incisions, and the stems of the plant are long. The third variety is smaller than the others, has a powerful smell, and a flower of a golden colour. The fourth kind is very like the one last mentioned, but the flower is milk-white.

[118044] All these plants have caustic properties: if the leaves are applied unboiled, they raise blisters like those caused by the action of fire; hence it is that they are used for the removal of leprous spots, itch-scabs, and brand marks upon the skin. They form an ingredient also in all caustic preparations, and are applied for the cure of alopecy, care being taken to remove them very speedily. The root, if chewed for some time, in cases of tooth-ache, will cause the teeth to break; dried and pulverized, it acts as a sternutatory.

[118577] Our herbalists give this plant the name of "strumus," from the circumstance of its being curative of strumous sores and inflamed tumours, for which purpose a portion of it is hung up in the smoke. It is a general belief, too, with them, that if it is replanted, the malady so cured will reappear &mdash;a criminal practice, for which the plantago is also employed. The juice of this last-mentioned plant is curative of internal ulcerations of the mouth; and the leaves and root are chewed for a similar purpose, even when the mouth is suffering from defluxions. Cinquefoil effects the cure of ulcerations and offensive breath; psyllium is used also for ulcers of the mouth.

[119252] We shall also here make mention of certain preparations for the cure of offensive breath&mdash;a most noisome inconvenience. For this purpose, leaves of myrtle and lentisk are taken in equal proportions, with one half the quantity of Syrian nut-galls; they are then pounded together and sprinkled with old wine, and the composition is chewed in the morning. In similar cases, also, ivy berries are used, in combination with cassia and myrrh; these ingredients being mixed, in equal proportions, with wine.

[119759] For offensive odours of the nostrils, even though attended with carcinoma, the most effectual remedy is seed of dracontium beaten up with honey. An application of hyssop has the effect of making bruises disappear. Brand marks in thle face are healed by rubbing them with mandragora.

[120043] SUMMARY.&mdash;Remedies, narratives, and observations, twelve hundred and ninety-two.

[120130] ROMAN AUTHORS QUOTED.&mdash;C. Valgius, Pompeius Lenn&aelig;us, Sextius Niger who wrote in Greek, Julius Bassus who wrote in Greek, Antonius Castor, Cornelius Celsus, Fabianus

[120307] FOREIGN AUTHORS QUOTED.&mdash;Theophrastus, Apollodorus, Peniocritus, Juba, Orpheus, Pythagoras, Mago, Menan- der who wrote the "Biochresta," Nicander, Homer,Hesiod, Mus&aelig;us, Sophocles, Xanthus, Anaxila&uuml;s.

[120524] MEDICAL AUTHORS QUOTED.&mdash;Mnesitheus, Callimachus, Phanias the physician, Timaristus, Simus, Hippocrates, Chrysippus, Diocles, Ophelion, Heraclides, Hicesius, Dionysius, Apollodorus of Citium, Apollodorus of Tarentum, Praxagoras, Plistonicus, Medius, Dieuches, Cleophantus, Philistion, Asclepiades, Crateuas, Petronius Diodotus, Iollas, Erasistratus, Diagoras, Andreas, Mnesides, Epicharmus, Damion, Sosimenes, Tlepolemus, Metrodorus, Solon, Lycus, Olympias of Thebes, Philinus, Petrichus, Micton, Glaucias, Xenocrates.