WORK: Naturalis Historia  (slug: pliny-the-elder-naturalis-historia-631445)

CHAPTER: 34



[109273] Molybd&aelig;na, which in another place I have called "galena," is a mineral compounded of silver and lead. It is considered better in quality the nearer it approaches to a golden colour and the less lead it contains; it is also friable, and of moderate weight. When it is melted with oil, it acquires the colour of liver. It is found adhering also to the furnaces in which gold and silver have been smelted; and in this case it is called "metallic." The most esteemed kind is that prepared at Zephyrium. Those kinds, too, are considered the best that are the least earthy and the least stony. It is used in preparing lipar&aelig;, as also for soothing or cooling ulcers, and as an ingredient in plasters, which are applied without ligatures, but are used only as a liniment for producing cicatrization on the bodies of delicate persons and the more tender parts. The composition is made of three pounds of molybd&aelig;na, one pound of wax, and three hemin&aelig; of oil; to which are added lees of olives, in the case of aged persons. Combined with scum of silver and scoria of lead, it is employed warm in fomentations for dysentery and tenesmus.

[110424] Psimithium, which is also known as ceruse, is another production of the lead-works. The most esteemed comes from Rhodes. It is made from very fine shavings of lead, placed over a vessel filled with the strongest vinegar; by which means the shavings become dissolved. That which falls into the vinegar is first dried, and then pounded and sifted, after which it is again mixed with vinegar, and is then divided into tablets and dried in the sun, during summer. It is also made in another way; the lead is thrown into jars filled with vinegar, which are kept closed for ten days; the sort of mould that forms upon the surface is then scraped off, and the lead is again put into the vinegar, until the whole of the metal is consumed. The part that has been scraped off is triturated and sifted, and then melted in shallow vessels, being stirred with ladles, until the substance becomes red, and assumes the appearance of sandarach. It is then washed with fresh water, until all the cloudy impurities have disappeared, after which it is dried as before, and divided into tablets.

[111501] Its properties are the same as those of the substances above mentioned. It is, however, the mildest of all the preparations of lead; in addition to which, it is also used by females to whiten the complexion. It is, however, like scum of silver, a deadly poison. Melted a second time, ceruse becomes red.

[111806] We have already mentioned nearly all the properties of sandarach. It is found both in gold-mines and in silver-mines. The redder it is, the more pure and friable, and the more powerful its odour, the better it is in quality. It is detergent, astringent, heating, and corrosive, but is most remarkable for its septic properties. Applied topically with vinegar, it is curative of alopecy. It is also employed as an ingredient in ophthalmic preparations. Used with honey, it cleanses the fauces and makes the voice more clear and harmonious. Taken with the food, in combination with turpentine, it is a pleasant cure for cough and asthma. In the form of a fumigation also, with cedar, it has a remedial effect upon those complaints.

[112537] Arrhenicum, too, is procured from the same sources. The best in quality is of the colour of the finest gold; that which is of a paler hue, or resembling sandarach, being less esteemed. There is a third kind also, the colour of which is a mixture of that of gold and of sandarach. The last two kinds are both of them scaly, but the other is dry and pure, and divides into delicate long veins. This substance has the same virtues as the one last mentioned, but is more active in its effects. Hence it is that it enters into the composition of cauteries and depilatory preparations. It is also used for the removal of hangnails, polypi of the nostrils, condylomatous tumours, and other kinds of excrescences. For the purpose of increasing its energies, it is heated in a new earthen vessel, until it changes its colour.

[113355] SUMMARY.&mdash;Remedies, one hundred and fifty-eight, Facts, narratives, and observations, nine hundred and fifteen.

[113473] ROMAN AUTHORS QUOTED.&mdash;L. Piso, Antias, Verrius, M. Varro, Cornelius Nepos, Messala, Rufus, the Poet Marsus, Bocchus, Julius Bassus who wrote in Greek on Medicine, Sextus Niger who did the same, Fabius Vestalis.

[113691] FOREIGN AUTHORS QUOTED.&mdash;Democritus, Metrodorus of Scepsis, Men&aelig;chmus who wrote on the Toreutic art, Xenocrates who did the same, Antigonus who did the same, Duris who did the same, Heliodorus who wrote on the Votive Offerings of the Athenians, Pasiteles who wrote on Wonderful Works, Tim&aelig;us who wrote on the Medicines de- rived from Metals, Nymphodorus, Iollas, Apollodorus, Andreas, Heraclides, Diagoras, Botrys, Archidemus, Dionysius, Aristogenes, Democles, Mnesides, Xenocrates the son of Zeno, Theomnestus.