WORK: Naturalis Historia  (slug: pliny-the-elder-naturalis-historia-631445)

CHAPTER: 37



[110016] Galaxias, by some called "galactitis," is a stone that closely resembles those next mentioned, but is interspersed with veins of blood-red or white. Galactitis is of the uniform colour of milk; other names given to it are, leucog&aelig;a, leucographitis, and synnephitis, and, when pounded in water, both in taste and colour it marvellously resembles milk. This stone promotes the secretion of the milk in nursing women, it is said; in addition to which, attached to the neck of infants, it produces saliva, and it dissolves when put into the mouth. They say, too, that it deprives persons of their memory: it is in the rivers Nilus and Achelo&uuml;s that it is produced. Some persons give the name of "galactitis" to a smaragdus surrounded with veins of white. Gallaica is a stone like argyrodamas, but of a somewhat more soiled appearance; these stones are found in twos and threes clustered together. The people of Media send us gassinade, a stone like orobus in colour, and sprinkled with flowers, as it were: it is found at Arbela. This stone, too, conceives, it is said; a fact which it admits when shaken; the conception lasting for a period of three months. Glossopetra, which resembles the human tongue, is not engendered, it is said, in the earth, but falls from the heavens during the moon's eclipse; it is considered highly necessary for the purposes of selenomancy. To render all this however, still more incredible, we have the evident untruthfulness of one assertion made about it, that it has the property of silencing the winds. Gorgonia is nothing but a coral, which has been thus named from the circumstance that, though soft in the sea, it afterwards assumes the hardness of stone: it has the property of counteracting fascinations, it is said. Goni&aelig;a, it is asserted, and with the same degree of untruthfulness, ensures vengeance upon our enemies.

[111892] Heliotropium is found in &AElig;thiopia, Africa, and Cyprus: it is of a leek-green colour, streaked with blood-red veins. It has been thus named, from the circumstance that, if placed in a vessel of water and exposed to the full light of the sun, it changes to a reflected colour like that of blood; this being the case with the stone of &AElig;thiopia more particularly. Out of the water, too, it reflects the figure of the sun like a mirror, and it discovers eclipses of that luminary by showing the moon passing over its disk. In the use of this stone, also, we have a most glaring illustration of the impudent effrontery of the adepts in magic, for they say that, if it is combined with the plant heliotropium, and certain incantations are then repeated over it, it will render the person invisible who carries it about him.

[112722] Heph&aelig;sititis also, though a radiant stone, partakes of the properties of a mirror in reflecting objects. The mode of testing it is to put it into boiling water, which should immediately become cold. If exposed to the rays of the sun, it should instantly cause dry fuel to ignite: Corycus is the place where it is found. Hermuaidoion is so called from the resemblance to the male organs which it presents, on a ground that is sometimes white, sometimes black, and sometimes of a pallid hue, with a circle surrounding it of a golden colour. Hexecontalithos receives its name from the numerous variety of colours which, small as it is, it presents: it is found in Troglodytica. Hieracitis is entirely covered with mottled streaks, resembling a kite's feathers alternately with black. Hammitis is similar in appearance to the spawn of fish: there is also one variety of it which has all the appearance of being composed of nitre, except that it is remarkably hard. Hammonis cornu is reckoned among the most sacred gems of &AElig;thiopia; it is of a golden colour, like a ram's horn in shape, and ensures prophetic dreams, it is said.

[113859] Hormiscion is one of the most pleasing stones to the sight; it is of a fiery colour, and emits rays like gold, tipped at the extremity with a whitish light. Hy&aelig;nia is derived from the eyes of the hy&aelig;na, it is said, the animal being hunted to obtain it; placed beneath the tongue, if we believe the story, it will enable a person to prophesy the future. H&aelig;matitis, of the very finest quality, comes from &AElig;thiopia, but it is found in Arabia and Africa as well. It is a stone of a blood-red colour, and we must not omit to mention the assurance given [by the magicians], that the possession of it reveals treacherous designs on the part of the barbarians. Zachalias of Babylon, in the books which he dedicated to King Mithridates, attributing the destinies of man to certain properties innate in precious stones, is not content with vaunting the merits of this stone as curative of diseases of the eyes and liver, but recommends it also as ensuring success to petitions addressed to kings. He also makes it play its part in lawsuits and judg- ments, and even goes so far as to say that it is highly beneficial to be rubbed with it on the field of battle. There is another stone of the same class, called "menui" by the people of India, and "xanthos" by the Greeks: it is of a whitish, tawny colour.

[115180] The stones called Id&aelig;i dactyli, and found in Crete, are of an iron colour, and resemble the human thumb in shape. The colour of icterias resembles that of livid skin, and hence it is that it has been thought so excellent a remedy for jaundice. There is also another stone of this name, of a still more livid colour; while a third has all the appearance of a leaf. This last is broader than the others, almost imponderous, and streaked with livid veins. A fourth kind again is of the same colour, but blacker, and marked all over with livid veins. Jovis gemma is a white stone, very light, and soft: another name given to it is "drosolithos." Indica retains the name of the country that produces it: it is a stone of a reddish colour, and yields a purple liquid when rubbed. There is another stone also of this name, white, and of a dusty appearance. Ion is an Indian stone, of a violet tint: it is but rarely, however, that it is found of a deep, full, colour.

[116148] Lepidotis is a stone of various colours, and resembles the scales of fish in appearance. Lesbias, so called from Lesbos which produces it, is a stone found in India as well. Leucophthalmos, which in other respects is of a reddish hue, presents all the appearance of an eye, in white and black.

[116443] Leucop&oelig;cilos is white, variegated with drops of vermilion of a golden hue. Libanochrus strongly resembles frankincense, and yields a liquid like honey. Limoniatis would appear to be the same as smaragdus; and all that we find said about liparea is, that employed in the form of a fumigation, it allures all kinds of wild beasts. Lysimachos resembles Rhodian marble, with veins of gold: in polishing it, it is reduced very considerably in size, in order to remove all defects. Leucochrysos is a kind of chrysolithos interspersed with white.

[116990] What kind of stone memnonia is, we do not find mentioned. Medea is a black stone, said to have been discovered by the Medea of fable: it has veins of a golden lustre, and yields a liquid like saffron in colour and with a vinous flavour. Meconitis strongly resembles poppies. Mithrax comes from Persia and the mountains of the Red Sea: it is of numerous colours, and reflects various tints when exposed to the sun. Morochthos is a stone of a leek-green colour, from which a milk exudes. Mormorion is a transparent stone from India, of a deep black colour, and known also as "promnion." When it has a mixture of the colour of carbunculus, it is from Alexandria; and when it shares that of sarda, it is a native of Cyprus. It is found also at Tyrus and in Galatia; and, according to Xenocrates, it has been discovered at the foot of the

[117825] Alps. These stones are well adapted for cutting in relief. Murrhitis has just the colour of myrrh, and very little of the appearance of a gem: it has the odour also of an unguent, and smells like nard when rubbed. Myrmecias is black, and has excrescences upon it like warts. Myrsinitis has a colour like that of honey, and the smell of myrtle. "Mesoleucos" is the name given to a stone when a white line runs through the middle; and when a black vein intersects any other colour, it is called "mesomelas."

[118332] Nasamonitis is a blood-red stone, marked with black veins. Nebritis, a stone sacred to Father Liber, has received its name from its resemblance to a nebris. There is also another stone of this kind, that is black. Nipparene bears the name of a city and people of Persia, and resembles the teeth of the hippopotamus.

[118649] Oica is the barbarian name given to a stone which is pleasing for its colours, black, reddish yellow, green, and white. Ombria, by some called notia," falls with showers and lightning, much in the same manner as ceraunia and brontea, the properties of which it is said to possess. There is a statement also, that if this stone is placed upon altars it will prevent the offerings from being consumed. Onocardia is like kermesberry in appearance, but nothing further is said about it. Oritis, by some called "sideritis," is a stone of globular form, and proof against the action of fire. Ostracias, or ostracitis, is a testaceous stone, harder than ceramitis, and similar in all respects to achates, except that the latter has an unctuous appearance when polished: indeed, so remarkably hard is ostritis, that with fragments of it other gems are engraved. Ostritis receives its name from its resemblance to an oyster-shell. Ophicardelon is the barbarian name for a stone of a black colour, terminated by a white line on either side. Of Obsian stone we have already spoken in the preceding Book. There are gems, too, of the same name and colour, found not only in &AElig;thiopia and India, but in Samnium as well, and, in the opinion of some, upon the Spanish shores that lie towards the Ocean.

[119942] Panchrus is a stone which displays nearly every colour. Pangonus is no longer than the finger: the only thing that prevents it from being taken for a crystal, is, its greater number of angles. What kind of stone paneros is, Metrodorus does not inform us; but he gives some lines, by no means without elegance, that were written upon this stone by Queen Timaris, and dedicated to Venus; from which we have reason to conclude that certain fecundating virtues were attributed to it. By some writers it is called panerastos. Of the stone called "pontica" there are numerous varieties: one is stellated, and presents either blood-red spots, or drops like gold, being reckoned in the number of the sacred stones. Another, in place of stars, has streaks of the same colour, and a fourth presents all the appearance of mountains and valleys.

[120777] Phloginos, also called "chrysitis," strongly resembles Attic ochre, and is found in Egypt. Ph&oelig;nicitis is a stone so called from its resemblance to a date. Phycitis receives its name from its resemblance to sea-weed. Perileucos is the name given to a gem, in which a white colour runs down from the margin of the stone to the base. P&aelig;anitis, by some called "g&aelig;anis," conceives, it is said, and is good for females at the time of parturition: this stone is found in Macedonia, near the monument of Tiresias there, and has all the appearance of congealed water.

[121355] Solis gemma is white, and, like the luminary from which it takes its name, emits brilliant rays in a circular form. Sagda is found by the people of Chald&aelig;a adhering to ships, and is of a leek-green colour. The Isle of Samothrace gives its name to a stone which it produces, black and imponderous, and similar to wood in appearance. Sauritis is found, they say, in the belly of the green lizard, cut asunder with a reed. Sarcitis is a stone, like beef in appearance. Selenitis is white and transparent, with a reflected colour like that of honey. It has a figure within it like that of the moon, and reflects the face of that luminary, if what we are told is true, according to its phases, day by day, whether on the wane or whether on the increase: this stone is a native of Arabia, it is thought. Sideritis is a stone like iron, the presence of which in lawsuits creates discord. Siderop&oelig;cilos, which is a variety of the same stone, is a native of &AElig;thiopia, and is covered with variegated spots.

[122371] Spongitis has its name from its resemblance to sponge. Synodontitis is a stone found in the brain of the fish known as "synodus." Syrtitis is a stone that used formerly to be found on the shores of the Syrtes, though now it is found on the coasts of Lucania as well: it is of a honey colour, with a reflected tint of saffron, and contains stars of a feeble lustre within. Syringitis is hollow throughout, like the space between the two joints in a straw.

[122827] Trichrus comes from Africa: it is of a black colour, but yields three different liquids, black at the lower part, bloodred in the middle, and of an ochre colour at the top. Thelyrrhizos is of an ashy or russet colour, but white at the lower part. Thelycardios is like a heart in colour, and is held in high esteem by the people of Persia, in which country it is found: the name given to it by them is "mule." Of thracia there are three varieties; a green stone, one of a more pallid colour, and a third with spots like drops of blood. Tephritis is crescent-shaped, with horns like those of the new moon, but it is of an ashy colour. Tecolithos has all the appearance of an olive stone: it is held in no estimation as a gem, but a solution of it will break and expel urinary calculi.

[123611] Veneris crines is the name given to a stone that is remarkably black and shining, with an appearance like red hair within. Veientana is an Italian stone, found at Veii: it is black, divided by a line of white.

[123822] Zathene, according to Democritus, is a native of Media. It is like amber in colour, and, if beaten up with palm-wine and saffron, it will become soft like wax, yielding a very fragrant smell. Zmilampis is found in the river Euphrates: it resembles marble of Proconnesus in appearance, and is of a seagreen colour within. Zoranisc&aelig;a is found in the river Indus: it is a stone used by magicians, it is said, but I find no further particulars relative to it.

[124285] There is also another method of classifying stones; according to the resemblance which they bear to various other objects. Thus, for example, the different parts of the body give the following names to stones:&mdash;Hepatitis is so called from the liver; and steatitis from its resemblance to the fat of various animals. Adadunephros, adaduophthalmos, and adadudactylos, mean "kidney of Adad," "eye of Adad," and "finger of Adad," a god of the Syrians so called. Triophthalmos is a stone found in conjunction with onyx, which resembles three human eyes at once.

[124848] Other stones, again, derive their names from various animals. Carcinias is so called from the colour of the sea-crab; echitis, from the colour of the viper; scorpitis, from either the colour or the shape of the scorpion; scaritis, from the fish called scarus; triglitis, from the sur-mullet; &aelig;gophthalmos, from the eye of the goat; hyophthalmos, from the eye of the swine; geranitis, from the neck of the crane; hieracitis, from the neck of the hawk; and a&euml;titis, from the colour of the whitetailed eagle. Myrmecitis presents the appearance of an ant crawling within, and cantharias, of a scarab&aelig;us. Lycophthalmos is a stone of four different colours; on the exterior it is ruddy and blood-red, and within it is black, surrounded with a line of white, closely resembling the eye of the wolf in every respect. Taos is a stone with colours like those of the peacock. Timictonia, I find, is the name of a stone, like the asp in colour.

[125799] Hammochrysos resembles sand in appearance, but sand mixed with gold. Cenchritis has all the appearance of grains of millet scattered here and there. Dryitis resembles the trunk of a tree, and burns like wood. Cissitis, upon a white, transparent surface, has leaves of ivy running all over it. Narcissitis is distinguished by veins on the surface, and has a smell like that of the narcissus. Cyamias is a black stone, but when broken, produces a bean to all appearance. Pyren is so called from its resemblance to an olive-stone: in some cases it would appear to contain the back-bone of a fish. Ph&oelig;nicitis resembles a palm-date in form. Chalazias resembles a hailstone, both in form and colour: it is as hard as adamant, so much so, indeed, that in the fire even it retains its coolness, it is said. Pyritis, though a black stone, burns the fingers when rubbed by them. Polyzonos is a black stone traversed by numerous zones of white.

[126740] Astrap&aelig;a has rays like flashes of lightning, running across the middle on a ground of white or blue. In phlogitis, there is, to all appearance, a flame burning within, but not reaching the surface of the stone. In anthracitis, there are sometimes sparks, to all appearance, flying to and fro. Enhygros is always perfectly round, smooth, and white; but when it is shaken a liquid is heard to move within, just like the yolk within an egg. Polythrix presents the appearance of hair upon a green surface; but it causes the hair to fall off, it is said. Leontios and pardalios are names given to stones, from their resemblance to the skin of the lion and panther. Drosolithos has received its name from its colour. Melichrus is a honey-coloured stone, of which there are several varieties.

[127533] Melichloros is a stone of two colours, partly honey-coloured, partly yellow. Crocias is the name given to a stone which reflects a colour like that of saffron; polias, to a stone resembling white hair in colour; and spartopolias, to a stone more thinly sprinkled with white.

[127809] Rhoditis is like the rose in colour, chalcitis resembles copper, and sycitis is in colour like a fig. Bostrychitis is covered with branches of a white or blood-red colour, upon a ground of black; and chernitis has, on a stony surface, a figure like that of two hands grasping each other. Anancitis is used in hydromancy, they say, for summoning the gods to make their appearance; and synochitis, for detaining the shades from below when they have appeared. If white dendritis is buried beneath a tree that is being felled, the edge of the axe will never be blunted, it is asserted. There are many other stones also, of a still more outrageously marvellous nature, to which, admitted as it is that they are stones, barbarous names have been given: we have refuted, however, a quite sufficient number of these portentous lies already.

[128643] New species of precious stones are repeatedly brought into existence, and fresh ones are found all at once, destitute of names. Thus, for example, there was a stone formerly discovered in the gold-mines of Lampsacus, which, on account of its extraordinary beauty, was sent to King Alexander, as we learn from Theophrastus. Cochlides, too, which are now so common, are rather artificial productions than natural, and in Arabia there have been found vast masses of them; which are boiled, it is said, in honey, for seven days and nights without intermission. By doing this, all earthy and faulty particles are removed; after which, the mass, thus cleansed and purified, is adorned by the ingenuity of artists with variegated veins and spots, and cut into such shapes as may be most to the taste of purchasers. Indeed, these articles, in former times, were made of so large a size, that they were employed in the East as frontals for the horses of kings, and as pendants for their trappings.

[129633] All precious stones in general are improved in brilliancy by being boiled in honey, Corsican honey more particularly; but acrid substances are in every respect injurious to them. As to the stones which are variegated, and to which new colours are imparted by the inventive ingenuity of man, as they have no name in common use, they are usually known by that of "physis;" a name which claims for them, as it were, that admiration which we are more ready to bestow upon the works of Nature. But really, these artificial stones have names without end, and I could never think of recounting the infinite series of them, coined as they have been by the frivolous tendencies of the Greeks.

[130318] Having already described the more noble gems, and indeed those of inferior quality which are found among the stones that are held in high esteem, I must content myself with knowing that I have pointed out those kinds which are the most deserving of mention. It will be as well, however, for the reader to bear in mind, that, according to the varying number of the spots and inequalities on their surface, according to the numerous intersections of lines and their multiplied tints and shades, the names of precious stones are subject to repeated changes; the material itself, for the most part, remaining just the same.

[130939] We will now make some observations in reference to precious stones in general, following therein the opinions that have been expressed by various authors. Stones with a level surface are preferred to those which are concave or protuberant on the face. An oblong shape is the one that is most approved of, and, next to that, the lenticular form, as it is called. After this, the stone with a plane surface and circular is admired, those which are angular being held in the least esteem. There is considerable difficulty in distinguishing genuine stones from false; the more so, as there has been discovered a method of transforming genuine stones of one kind into false stones of another. Sardonyx, for example, is imitated by cementing together three other precious stones, in such a way that no skill can detect the fraud; a black stone being used for the purpose, a white stone, and one of a vermilion colour, each of them, in its own way, a stone of high repute. Nay, even more than this, there are books in existence, the authors of which I forbear to name, which give instructions how to stain crystal in such a way as to imitate smaragdus and other transparent stones, how to make sardonyx of sarda, and other gems in a similar manner. Indeed, there is no kind of fraud practised, by which larger profits are made.

[132261] On the contrary, we will make it our business to point out the methods of detecting these false stones, seeing that it is only proper to put luxury even on its guard against fraud. In addition to the particulars which we have already given, when treating of each individual kind of precious stone, it is generally agreed that transparent stones should be tested by a morning light, or even, if necessary, so late as the fourth hour, but never after that hour. The modes of testing stones are numerous: first, by their weight, the genuine stone being the heavier of the two; next, by their comparative coolness, the genuine stone being cooler than the other to the mouth; and, next to that, by their substance; there being blisters perceptible in the body of the fictitious stone, as well as a certain roughness on the surface; filaments, too, an unequal brilliancy, and a brightness that falls short before it reaches the eye. The best mode of testing is to strike off a fragment with an iron saw; but this is a thing not allowed by the dealers, who equally refuse to let their gems be tested by the file. Dust of Obsian stone will not leave a mark upon the surface of a genuine stone: but where the gem is artificial, every mark that is made will leave a white scratch upon it. In addition to this, there is such a vast diversity in their degrees of hardness, that some stones do not admit of being engraved with iron, and others can only be cut with a graver blunted at the edge. In all cases, however, precious stones may be cut and polished by the aid of adamas; an operation which may be considerably expedited by heating the graver. The rivers which produce precious stones, are the Acesinus and the Ganges; and, of all countries, India is the most prolific of them.

[134035] Having now treated of all the works of Nature, it will be as well to take a sort of comparative view of her several productions, as well as the countries which supply them. Throughout the whole earth, then, and wherever the vault of heaven extends, there is no country so beautiful, or which, for the productions of Nature, merits so high a rank as Italy, that ruler and second parent of the world; recommended as she is by her men, her women, her generals, her soldiers, her slaves, her superiority in the arts, and the illustrious examples of genius which she has produced. Her situation, too, is equally in her favour; the salubrity and mildness of her climate; the easy access which she offers to all nations; her coasts indented with so many harbours; the propitious breezes, too, that always prevail on her shores; advantages, all of them, due to her situation, lying, as she does, midway between the East and the West, and extended in the most favourable of all positions. Add to this, the abundant supply of her waters, the salubrity of her groves, the repeated intersections of her mountain ranges, the comparative innocuousness of her wild animals, the fertility of her soil, and the singular richness of her pastures.

[135265] Whatever there is that the life of man ought not to feel in want of, is nowhere to be found in greater perfection than here; the cereals, for example, wine, oil, wool, flax, tissues, and oxen. As to horses, there are none, I find, preferred to those of Italy for the course; while, for mines of gold, silver, copper, and iron, so long as it was deemed lawful to work them, Italy was held inferior to no country whatsoever. At the present day, teeming as she is with these treasures, she contents herself with lavishing upon us, as the whole of her bounties, her various liquids, and the numerous flavours yielded by her cereals and her fruits. Next to Italy, if we except the fabulous regions of India, I would rank Spain, for my own part, those districts, at least, that lie in the vicinity of the sea. She is parched and sterile in one part, it is true; but where she is at all productive, she yields the cereals in abundance, oil, wine, horses, and metals of every kind. In all these respects, Gaul is her equal, no doubt; but Spain, on the other hand, outdoes the Gallic provinces in her spartum and her specular stone, the products of her desert tracts, in her pigments that minister to our luxuries, in the ardour displayed by her people in laborious employments, in the perfect training of her slaves, in the robustness of body of her men, and in their general resoluteness of character.

[136661] As to the productions themselves, the greatest value of all, among the products of the sea, is attached to pearls: of objects that lie upon the surface of the earth, it is crystals that are most highly esteemed: and of those derived from the interior, adamas, smaragdus, precious stones, and murrhine, are the things upon which the highest value is placed. The most costly things that are matured by the earth, are the kermes-berry and laser; that are gathered from trees, nard and Seric tissues; that are derived from the trunks of trees, logs of citrus -wood; that are produced by shrubs, cin- namon, cassia, and amomum; that are yielded by the juices of trees or of shrubs, amber, opobalsamum, myrrh, and frankincense; that are found in the roots of trees, the perfumes derived from costus. The most valuable products furnished by living animals, on land, are the teeth of elephants; by animals in the sea, tortoise-shell; by the coverings of animals, the skins which the Seres dye, and the substance gathered from the hair of the she-goats of Arabia, which we have spoken of under the name of "ladanum;" by creatures that are common to both land and sea, the purple of the murex. With reference to the birds, beyond plumes for warriors' helmets, and the grease that is derived from the geese of Commagene, I find no remarkable product mentioned. We must not omit, too, to observe, that gold, for which there is such a mania with all mankind, hardly holds the tenth rank as an object of value, and silver, with which we purchase gold, hardly the twentieth!

[138222] HAIL to thee, Nature, thou parent of all things! and do thou deign to show thy favour unto me, who, alone of all the citizens of Rome, have, in thy every department, thus made known thy praise.

[138417] SUMMARY.&mdash;Facts, narratives, and observations, one thousand three hundred.

[138498] ROMAN AUTHORS QUOTED.&mdash;M. Varro, the Register of the Triumphs, M&aelig;cenas, Iacchus, Cornelius Bocchus.

[138610] FOREIGN AUTHORS QUOTED.&mdash;King Juba, Xenocrates the son of Zeno, Sudines, &AElig;schylus, Philoxenus, Euripides, Nicander, Satyrus, Theophrastus, Chares, Philemon, Demostratus, Zenothemis, Metrodorus, Sotacus, Pytheas, Tim&aelig;us the Sicilian, Nicias, Theochrestus, Asarubas, Mnaseas, Theomenes, Ctesias, Mithridates, Sophocles,

[138946] King Archela&uuml;s, Callistratus, Democritus, Ismenias, Olympicus, Alexander Polyhistor, Apion, Horus, Zoroaster, Zachalias.