WORK: Controversiae  (slug: seneca-the-elder-controversiae-ce0606)

CHAPTER: 01-book-1



[109837] 7.6. OF BLANDUS: This man, who has not the means to live, how dearly does he sell your tyrant-slayers! What do you say, pirate of your own son, schoolmaster of pirates, buyer of a cruelty of which not even a pirate is the seller? OF ROMANIUS HISPO: "The father greets the pirates": this greeting you snatch from your son. "I will give double": what need? I could have been loosed more cheaply. "that you cut off his hands": the pirates were astounded, and as they let me go, said: "tell your father that pirates do not sell everything." OF MENTO: Until now, judges, I have pleaded as though for my own hands; but the truth must be confessed: they have been given back to you. I exhibit, republic, the pirates' deposit to you: these your hands have been brought back safe to you. Do what you will. This one thing I ask: if they have sinned, hand them over to anyone to be bound: if you hand them to this man, he will bind them as he loosed them: he will cut them off.

[110805] 7.7. OF ALFIUS FLAVUS: As yet I know not what kind of father to wish for. A rich one? He maims. A poor one? He binds. Neither is good for my hands. "I will give double, that you cut off his hands." You had a son less cruel. OF MARULLUS: When the letter was brought, the pirates already began to loose me; when the double money in the letter was read out, "this," I said, "is the father I had praised to you." OF TRIARIUS: Where is that patrimony of yours which equips tyrants, which makes adulterers? Where is it? Certainly on me you spent nothing.

[111355] 7.8. THE OTHER SIDE. OF JULIUS BASSUS: Even my victory will be unhappy: if I do not win my cause, I shall die of hunger; if I win it, I shall achieve only this — not to die of hunger. I married too fruitful a wife: she bore me three I know not what monsters, raging in various ways against each other and against me, judges: one able to crush his country, one to violate his brother, one his father. I call all my fellow-citizens to witness, judges: we served together; no one felt the tyranny more than I alone. I have the greatest proof — that I live: you would not have spared me, had you thought me a part of the tyrant. While they fought among themselves, the republic won. The remaining two, since they could not against us, exercised their tyranny upon each other. This one had some wife or other, whom he had got to know in the citadel. If I could bind you, I would have bound you when you set out.

[112263] 7.9. You have no need of great expense to support your father: share with me your own maintenance. I do not wish you to maintain me as well as I maintained you; I do not wish you to pardon me: whatever you suffered, whatever you feared, I will suffer; demand the lash, tear at my wrinkles. Were you burned? Set fires beneath, and this half-dead face, which breathes only for its own reproach because it cannot be put out, burn away. If that is too little, do what you say not even the pirates did: cut off my hands. I exhibit them to you: these are the ones that write whatever they please. Where is your sword? Draw it. The tyrant was allowed to die by a wound; the adulterer was quickly dispatched with one blow: I, your father, ask as a kindness a like fate. Not even among the pirates did you fear hunger. No tyrant tortured anyone so.

[113104] 7.10. OF PORCIUS LATRO: Son, I beg nothing more than to be spared hunger; yet if you are inexorable, this I ask as a kindness: that I may die either as an adulterer or as a tyrant. The fortune of us both was equal at that time: you were bound, I in old age was immobile and most like one bound; you in solitude, I in the solitude of all my own; you did not see the light, I even hated it. This one thing is between us, that you received food even from the pirates. OF BLANDUS: I was pleading not for an adulterer but for my house, that he might not kill his brother, defile a tyrant-slayer, bespatter a father. As I begged, and interposed these very hands, he all but cut them off. This epigram was laughed at by Latro as childish: this much was provided for it, that he might seem to have left someone of his own whom he did not kill. OF VIBIUS RUFUS: These, surely, are the hands that wrote the letter: I offer them; cut them off and maintain me. OF POMPEIUS SILO: "Let children maintain their parents, or be bound." To you I transfer my own law:

[114154] 7.11. you may bind me, but maintain me. THE DIVISION. Generally they used this division: whether the law weighs the case neither of father nor of son, but that every father is to be maintained by his son — He said that this law was written for bad fathers; good ones are maintained even without a law. If not all are to be maintained, whether this man is to be maintained. This question Latro divided into these: whether he is to be maintained, since he did not ransom his son from the pirates. Here he asked whether he could not have ransomed him, or would not; then, whether he is to be maintained even though he wished his son's hands cut off;

[114802] 7.12. lastly, whether he wished them cut off. HISPO ROMANIUS made this separately, as a question of law: whether one who has not ransomed his son cannot seek maintenance from him. But, as GALLIO said, both questions contain this, and the first too, in which it is asked whether every father is to be maintained; for it is said: what if a man has blinded his son? What if a man has not ransomed him? And when one comes to the other question, in which it is asked whether this father is to be maintained, nothing else can be said why he should not be maintained, but that he did not ransom him, that he promised double for his hands to be cut off. The Greeks' improper question it will be enough, in such controversiae, to note once or twice: whether a father may use this law against a tyrant-slayer, as though his hands were sacred and public, against which not even the pirates think anything is permitted to them. Our men have removed this kind of question.

[115763] 7.13. SILO POMPEIUS used not only the points the rest used, when he said this father ought not to be maintained because he had not ransomed his son and because he had wished his son's hands cut off, but he passed from the private causes to the public cause; for he said that a man pernicious to the republic ought not to be maintained — one who had had a tyrant for a son, who had not killed him, who longed for him when lost, who would avenge him; and he denied that this man had any other cause of pursuing the tyrant-slayer save public liberty, and he described the character of the man as impious, bloody, who, because he could not through his children, exercised tyranny through pirates: and, that he might say this the more freely, he gave the son an advocate. And this in this part was praised, while Silo declaimed: he had begun to treat this — that a tyrant's father ought not to be maintained; with all favouring him, that he should be starved to death; and when he had long pressed that he was a tyrant's father, he added: dare to demand that this profit you, that you are a tyrant-slayer's father. BLANDUS, when he declaimed this thought the next day, turned it into irony, and, when he had objected that he was a tyrant's father, added: do not turn from him;

[117036] 7.14. he has something to set against it: he is an adulterer's father too. The colour for the father one man and another introduced differently. FUSCUS confessed he had been angry with him for killing his brother before his father's eyes, and pressed this point vehemently, since no tyrant, no pirate, had done this. "I was angry," he said, "for this very reason, that by this crime you had defiled even your tyrant-slaying; it is plain that you rage against your own by a kind of disease." And he kept this tenor of pleading: "I was angry, and to this day I am angry, nor do I complain." Nor did he stoop to entreaties or beg, but used a father's right. This he added, to excuse the cruelty of the letter: I wrote to the pirates not with the intent that your hands be cut off, but to reproach you with your bloody hands, stained with a brother's blood before your father's eyes. And I wrote in safety; for I knew the pirates would not do it unless they had received money, which I would not send: and so they did not cut them off; and had they hoped for it, they certainly would have. But it was plain that those letters were the letters of an angry man, not of one promising. At the end he described how wretched he would be, taking maintenance from those hands which a little before he had watched killing his brother, and added — what he said his teacher delivered to the highest applause — that line of Homer suited to Priam: "And he kissed his dread, man-slaying hands, which had slain many of his sons." SILO POMPEIUS too confessed his anger.

[118587] 7.15. For he said he would not be believed, if he denied he had been angry; but he gave not the cause of his anger that FUSCUS gave; he said those grievances were to be passed over in which the son would glory; he gave this cause: that he had been abandoned by his only son, that against his will he had sailed away, seeing his father an old man, orphaned, now almost in want; that even then he had fled to avoid maintaining him; and he brought the father to prayers, and in the epilogue entreated his son. And SPARSUS too I remember declaiming with this colour — a man sane among schoolmen,

[119180] 7.16. and a schoolman among the sane. CESTIUS used a far different colour; he said it was not anger in the father, but cleverness: "I had nothing," he said, "wherewith to ransom him. Whom should I ask for money in so greedy a city, in which not even sons maintain their fathers? I used a stratagem: I knew the pirates were not cruel, but greedy. I wished to bring it about both that they should despair of his being ransomed, and that, for this reason, thinking him superfluous, they should let him go. Whether I planned wisely I do not know; meanwhile I planned luckily: after those letters which he accuses, he was let go." Latro removed himself entirely from these colours, and called up his powers with so great a force in the whole pleading that he held men astounded; for he used this colour: I know not what I wrote. Long ago my mind was struck from me. From the moment I saw one son in the citadel, another in adultery, a third in kin-murder; from the moment I was sprinkled with my dying son's blood; from the moment I was left alone, orphaned, an old man — I hate my own. This colour was to be approved by his powers; for how great a force is needed, that a man should make himself pitiable by accusing himself?

[120403] 7.17. ALBUCIUS mixed all the colours and, that this might be free, gave the father an advocate, and would not narrate. He began from the proposition: a father has sought maintenance from his son; then, when he came to defend the writing that he would give double if they cut off the hands, he first used the Latronian colour: "this," he said, "I answer: he knows not what he did, he was driven into madness by his ills." Here he introduced a philosophical commonplace, how minds are overturned by great calamities; then he took up an anthypophora: "you lie; nay, he was angry. You compel me," he says, "to say that he was rightly angry with you." He went through everything; this among other things he objected to him: that he had either not known, or had dissembled, that his brother was seizing the citadel; he wished thus to strip from his tyrant-slaying too its recommendation. Then he returned to that Cestian colour: "but I think he did from policy what he did. What then? What yet does this man say? Why he wrote it? He says nothing; he weeps, he wishes to die, but not of hunger." In this declamation ALBUCIUS uttered that epigram,

[121544] 7.18. doubtful among admirers and mockers: do you give the bread to your dog that you do not give your father? GLYCON said excellently: "Pity him, who runs the risk of nourishing a father." GARGONIUS was a hearer of Buteo, and afterwards his successor in the school too, of a dull but most pugnacious voice, of whom the buffoon Baros said a most charming thing: "you have the voice of a hundred hoarse men." This man thought he had devised a clever colour for the father: "I dictated," he said, "'I will give double, if you do not cut off the hands': one syllable, 'not,' fell out by the copyist, and he wrote 'if you cut them off.'" A thing worthy to be uttered in that voice. ARTEMON said: "Child-loving father, does anyone shrink from punishing you too?" ADAEUS said: "We saw a swift-sailing skiff. And was anyone of the sailors in that skiff a father?" NICETES said: "'I will give double, if you strike off the hands.' The pirates asked: 'Did you ever play the tyrant?'"

[122520] 8.1. THE LAW: A son shall be in the father's power. THE THEME: A man had a son, brave in war. After he had thrice fought bravely, the father wishes to disinherit him, that he may keep him at home. OF PORCIUS LATRO: Most wretched father, I should no longer see my son, did I not disinherit him. Braver than is enough for the law or the fatherland, he did not return to me a third time, but was carried back. What is left over for the fatherland, I claim for the father. My son flees me — and indeed to the enemy. How long shall I, trembling, await the news of battles? Son, for myself I ask exemption. OF CESTIUS PIUS: I disinherit my son that I may have him. My exemption profited the republic no less than his military service: I took a wife. Thus he descends into the narrative. A third time I heard, as though the gods were warning me, that the young man should set a limit to his own good fortune. I sought leave for one battle: let happen, I said, whatever I fear, if I send him into the line again; I have made a bargain with the gods. "I am not afraid," he says. This is why I am afraid. It is cast at me that my son hates me. OF ARELLIUS FUSCUS THE FATHER: O me, already weary while my son fights!

[123727] 8.2. Great are the omens: do you think it nothing, that the father of a brave man should fear? Wretched me: now you are too well known to the enemy; now even the law fears I know not what on your behalf. Do you wonder if what is enough for the law is too much for a father? "Do you," he says, "reproach me with luxury?" Nay, I can even urge you toward pleasures. How long will you lie on the hard couch of the camp? How long break your sleep with the trumpet? How long live bloody? Let us be cheerful: the vows of three victories must be paid. So many battle-lines you have withstood, so many wounds; I can complain even of the republic: late are you discharged. Now and again I hear you saying, "I prefer glory to life"; this, then, is what kills me — that to die is so easy for you. At last rest from one war. OF POMPEIUS SILO.

[124558] 8.3. My reason for disinheriting is that I may not live without my son, whom I should long since not see, did I not disinherit him. My disinheriting is in the power of the disinherited. OF ROMANIUS HISPO: What is more vexing than one who wearies out his own good fortune? What do you wait for, until you are cast out of the camp? OF MENTO: The republic blushes to use a soldier so scarred. So great a valour ought not to fall without a successor: a wife must be taken; but even now I warn you, do not raise but one child. OF CORNELIUS HISPANUS: I did not begin to hold you back until the republic discharged you. No wound can now be impressed on you save through a scar. Until now you have been longer with the enemy than with your father: at home only have you been healed. OF JUNIUS OTHO THE FATHER: The best end of valour is to stop before you fail.

[125412] 8.4. THE OTHER SIDE. "Thrice bravely . . ." certainly the disinherited are allowed to fight. OF ALBUCIUS SILUS: What sudden uproar has resounded here? Does the general call? I come. I laboured most in the front line. I am ashamed: men thrice conquered serve as soldiers. OF PUBLIUS ASPRENAS: "How long," he says, "will you risk yourself?" It is well, judges: my father thinks me worthy to be safe. A senator, after his sixty-fifth year, is not compelled to come into the senate-house: is he forbidden? A man of praetorian rank may wear the bordered toga on festal or solemn days: is it necessary? Whatever is given under the name of reward or honour, is free both ways; otherwise it ceases to be a reward, on which necessity is laid. I obey that father of mine who used to say that by glory we are made immortal, who used to kiss the wounds of those returning from the line.

[126288] 8.5. To these new and contrary commands, do you think I can be suddenly turned about? It is not so. That feeling rules within us which first entered the mind. Luxury, avarice, sloth, unchastity, fear, are not unlearned, and daily all these are either chastised or punished: so tenacious are we even of our vices. Believe me, father: I am not my own master, when that battle-cry has arisen: it bids me charge the enemy, cleave the opposing ranks with the sword; this onset, this ardour of spirit, adorned your house with thrice-won spoils of the enemy; to this you owe those thanksgivings; for the sake of this you love me even when you disinherit me. Now my spirit is not steady, now my tongue is not steady; I have been caught up in another's work; the very toga does not sit upon my shoulders.

[127085] 8.6. Should you bid me go to besiege an enemy, to seize a position for a camp, to cut off the enemy's supplies — you command leisure to a spirit that is not at leisure. As often as any uproar has arisen, the eyes of all the citizens are turned upon me, they look to my hands; and yet — the truth must be told — the fatherland owes me nothing: I never fought save under compulsion. Do you think it matters at all where we are, what course of life we lead? The same perils stand round us everywhere, and there are as many roads to death. Sometimes continued toil makes men stronger: often what had strengthened, sloth has consumed. OF MARULLUS: Let me confer some service upon my country: until now my military service has been the duty of the law. I will fight even disinherited, nor will I fear that my service may be useless to my country. Even the Athenians conquered under a disinherited general. How great is the difference between me and him?

[128034] 8.7. He wiped out his disinheriting by valour; I earned it. THE DIVISION. The first question was made by all, a common one: whether a son can be disinherited for the very reason that he is his own master; then, whether he ought to be. This belongs wholly to treatment. The Greeks are wont to attempt that first question, which has not gone to Roman ears: whether a brave man can be disinherited. But I do not see what they will bring forward, why he cannot. For the fact that he is brave, and so often, brings him not more right, but more recommendation.

[128590] 8.8. The colour on the father's side some made the harder; for they wished the father to seem hateful to his son: so that the son would rather live with the enemy than with his father. Almost all: that the young man is insatiable of glory, and for that very reason is to be moderated and restrained by his father. Some took refuge entirely in the father's tenderness, and did not argue in the way SILO POMPEIUS argued, who divided thus, so as to say: even if you had no father, you ought to stop; since you have a father, you ought to stop, because your father forbids it;

[129164] 8.9. or in the way GALLIO did, who divided this part thus: this I command for the republic's sake, for your sake, for my own sake. The latter two you see how he could fill out: that he commanded it for the republic's sake he treated thus: first, that the way to valour might lie open to more young men, the opportunity of acting bravely ought not to be seized by one alone. Then, that it is expedient for the republic not to seem to depend on one man; that the enemy's spirits would rise and his own people's be broken, if the thrice-brave man should fall by chance. Last, that it is useful to the republic that the thrice-brave man be kept, that there may be one to be shown to the youth; that he can now be more an ornament than a defence. That old thought — "now even the law fears something for the brave man" — Gallio placed here: "this too," he said, "either distrusts or takes counsel for the thrice-brave man."

[130084] 8.10. They did not even follow that treatment which BLANDUS used, who said: military service is for you superfluous, it is invidious, it is dangerous. It is superfluous, because you are not compelled — nay, you are forbidden by modesty. One serves for glory's sake: you have won glory; for exemption's sake: you have won it; for reward's sake: there are three rewards at home; and so he passed on to say that it was invidious for one man so often to wish for honours and intercept them from all; how dangerous a thing envy is, how great men it has crushed; here examples. That military service is dangerous he gathered in the same place as the rest; this one new point he added about the law, that the man could no longer act bravely, because all the enemy would single him out: "evidently for this reason the law discharged the thrice-brave man: it knows that he is now marked out by the enemy."

[130982] 8.11. These things, then, being passed over, those who brought on a loving father pleaded in this manner: "I cannot bear it, I cannot endure my longing for you." Here AESCHINES, of the new declaimers, when he said: not glory has made me more desirous of you, not your valour admired by all; I will confess, he said, a father's feelings, which let each man interpret as he will: "thus would I love you even disinherited." He seemed, while expressing tenderness, not to have preserved the father's dignity. It pleased Latro rather to hold the father back by reason than by feeling, since in reason feeling too has some place.

[131607] 8.12. ASPRENAS followed a far different colour; for he said he did not refuse the republic a brave man's services, but reserved them for necessary occasions. If some great war should befall, then even veterans are called to arms. And that epigram of his was much praised in this place: "now let those serve who must; you will serve, if there be need." So, he said, the Roman people came to Scipio Aemilianus, when a greater war at Numantia had loomed than the other generals could sustain; a great interval was given to Scipio between Carthage and Numantia. So they came to Pompey, when the pirates had closed the seas. Great defences are not to be used up. Here Asprenas too spoke an epigram about the law: "evidently for such occasions the law set aside the thrice-brave man."

[132387] 8.13. On the son's side some introduced a colour to make him eager for glory and warlike. NICETES indeed used this phrase: "we shall present him to the judges as a war-lover," and so pleaded that he should complain that his hands were idle, that they were unarmed. This colour did not please Latro: he preferred that the young man should serve by judgement rather than by disease. "This," he said, "is what the father may effectively say — that his son detracts from the glory of his own deeds, rash, bloodthirsty, whom neither a father can hold back nor the law discharge."

[132963] 8.14. Some made a bargain with the father — like Mento, who said he wished to serve but once more, that he might seem to have rendered the republic something beyond the law. Some declared perpetual military service: as long as his strength held, the brave man would not fail the republic. Latro did not approve this colour; he denied that the father's hope in his son should be cut off forever. VIBIUS RUFUS pleaded with the same colour as Mento, but added this: that there reached him those voices of the envious: "did he fight any longer than he had to?" Some thought this too was a thing composed and feigned between us — that I should wish to serve, and you forbid it.

[133637] 8.15. Latro pleaded vehemently on the father's side, and added: even when he is disinherited I will not let him go out; I will lay hands on him, hold him, and at the last fling this corpse of mine before the threshold as he goes out: that you may reach the enemy, trample on your father. PLANCUS, a great lover of Latro, thought this thought was said more forcibly by Latro, more tenderly by LESBOCLES the Greek, who said: "thus shall I lie, like a wall: leap over the trench and your father." FUSCUS ARELLIUS brought on the father with religious awe and terrified by omens; he said that his teacher, in describing the perils of the coming battle in this controversia, began from this line of Homer: "Strange man, your own valour will destroy you." GLYCON said: "you shall see how I despise this death for my country's sake." DIOCLES OF CARYSTUS said: "if you succeed, you will add one deed of valour; if you fail, you will lose three deeds of valour."

[134591] 8.16. GLYCON said: "it is not easy to be sent off well by one who is weeping." AESCHINES — not the orator, for then there was no zeal for declamation, but this one of the new declaimers — said, when he was warning his son of the danger and saying he was touched by presentiments: "a father's soul, somehow, is most prophetic." DIOCLES OF CARYSTUS spoke an epigram which could please not only in declamation but even in some more solid kind of writing, when he was treating the commonplace on the changefulness of fortune: "there is but one safety against fortune — not to tempt her too often." DORION said a thing somewhat loftier than terse and restrained oratory admits, but by which he splendidly expressed the father's astonished feelings: "What desire is this, child, to drink things bloodied, to eat things bloodied? I fear, somewhere, a pitched battle; I fear, somewhere, a bond; I fear, somewhere, an array. I fear for the whole world. Why, child, do you blush?\"