WORK: Controversiae  (slug: seneca-the-elder-controversiae-ce0606)

CHAPTER: 03-book-7



[110093] 8.2. And is it not better to die only once? Kill now not the ravisher, but the husband. OF PORCIUS LATRO. Is it more dangerous to deny a rape than to commit it? The young man had been led into such confusion that he did not know what he had done. Yet he did not shrink from marriage with the girl; he only favoured himself so far as to marry as an innocent man. And so he sought nothing else than freedom, that he might marry more honourably. So, before you, judges, is it safer to sin than to blush? He would have been more worthy of punishment if he had sinned in a way that he could remember. Rise, young man, and without any regard for your shame cast yourself at the girl's feet; come too, friends and kinsmen, and you, mother, and you, father. What is it, girl? Do these men's tears move you at all? "No," she says; "let the magistrate come to him." I do not dissemble: I fear you, girl, if you wish to be entreated nowhere but where you can kill. I am punished more heavily now, when I am ashamed of having sinned, than when I sinned. The woman who pardons after the injury grows angry after the mercy.

[111204] 8.3. OF CESTIUS PIUS. He comes to you, by your kindness, to keep the girl's kindness. He chose marriage; nor did he yet know what a modest husband he was going to have. You let the ravisher go; will you kill the husband? The judge said: "What have you, that you deny so obstinately? She chooses marriage. Is then what he did in ravishing less than what he did in denying?" OF Q. HATERIUS. "I shall not choose death," she said, "but I wish it to be lawful for me even to choose death." The power that delights in this is cruel. OF BLANDUS. So have we denied the injury more dangerously than we did it?

[111806] 8.4. OF JUNIUS GALLIO. On a certain night — what shall I say? now it is shameful even to deny it. Night, wine, error — why are you angry, girl? Now I dare not deny. My case was not pleaded carefully: while you feared nothing, you the more easily entrusted me to the girl. We must confess our fault: we caused delay to the marriage. Whether she had still been violated or not, she seemed worthy of marriage who could not kill a man. I was taking thought for you, that you might not be said to be married to a ravisher: if it had been allowed you, you would have had a more honourable husband. Did you deny it? O shameless man! So did you not cry aloud, before the magistrate's tribunal, in the people's sight, in the middle of the forum, "I raped a virgin"? You can have no husband so compliant as this: he will now deny nothing.

[112636] 8.5. OF VARIUS GEMINUS. I will set out the order of events to you as though I had learned it from a man who does not know what he did. OF VIBIUS GALLUS. Where are you who used to say, "It is no concern of yours: confess"? He confesses because you thought it more honourable to marry a ravisher. "Let him be my heir," she says, "if any child is born within ten months." Does she deny it at all? Rise, young man, say, "I raped, I violated"; begin to know what you do not know: do you wonder that she does not believe you? There is much about which she is afraid.

[113198] 8.6. The other side. OF P. ASPRENAS. I do not know in which trial my opponent was the more shameless. In the earlier he aimed at this — to pay no penalty for the rape at all; in this he aims to choose himself which of the two punishments fixed by the law he wishes to pay. For he confesses that he preferred to go unpunished rather than to marry a wife; to marry a wife rather than to die. Before, he tried to overturn the law of violation; now he wishes to transfer it: he asks the advocates — let not this free him from fear, the fact that he knows the clemency of his own judge. He kept crying that he was innocent; if he had committed any sin, he did not refuse to die. The people stood by the ravisher, and nothing made the violated girl's case more suspect than the leniency of the choice. If now your defilement is clear to you, there is a certain modesty next to innocence — to offer oneself to the laws: but you did not even deserve death by that denial. Did you not know whether you had sinned? You wished to be innocent. You have your case: return to your parents, girl, since indeed you so often beg, who ought yourself to have been begged.

[114352] 8.7. LATRO made three questions: whether, he asked, that choice was lawful. "It was not lawful," he says; "for it was not established that you were a ravisher." "It makes no difference," he says, "whether he denied it. For he was a ravisher even if he denied it, and so the choice was lawful." Whether, if the choice was unlawful, it can be recalled. "The choice," he says, "is given to the girl once; it is unchangeable, the moment it is uttered. The judge cannot recall the verdict he has given on a defendant; the examiner will not change his pronouncement; nothing is so civic, so useful, as that a power which is great should be brief. If she wishes to recall both her second choice and then her third, it will never be settled what is to happen, since she can always rescind by a following choice what she had chosen." He made a third question: whether, if a choice can sometimes be recalled, it ought now to be. Here is the defence of the young man, because he denied that he had violated her.

[115354] 8.8. FUSCUS both changed the order of the questions and increased their number; for he made the first question: whether the raped girl cannot choose more than once. "She can," he says; "for the law does not add how often she may choose, but from which choices: 'either this,' it says, 'or that'; it does not add, 'no more than once.'" Against this he says: "The law bids you choose one of the two; if today you choose death, you will do what was never done: you will have chosen both." "Even if it is not lawful," he says, "more than once, I have not yet chosen: for that is a choice which is made lawfully; that one was not made lawfully. If the praetor had been absent, would you call it a choice? If the ravisher had been absent? The ravisher was absent: that is not a choice; it is mere talk." Whether the choice was confirmed by the previous trial. The ravisher says: "It was argued before the judges whether the choice ought to be valid or not; it was judged that it ought to be valid: let it be valid." "No," says the girl; "for the question was whether I had a right over the ravisher; it was judged that I had: I must use it. I cannot have the law before I have the ravisher." He made a last question, of equity: whether the choice ought to be valid.

[116615] 8.9. Passienus divided this last part thus: whether, if the young man with evil intent toward the girl denied the rape in order to escape the marriage, he deserves to undergo once more the fortune of the choice he refused. Then: whether he acted with evil intent. VARIUS GEMINUS added to the last question, or part — in which it is asked what ought to be done — these two things which he thought could be asked: whether, if the girl is certain to choose the young man's death, the choice ought not to be allowed her, since she would use her power so cruelly; then, whether she will choose death. "What reason have you," he says, "to wish to choose, except that you do not wish the marriage? This we not only endure, but ask for."

[117346] 8.10. The colour for the young man introduced by LATRO was this: that he should say he had been drunk and did not know what he had done; that even today he rather believed than knew about his own deed; that he had refused, not so as not to marry a wife, but so as to marry of his own will; and that the judges had not listened anxiously, but had been lenient, as though the matter concerned the marriage. VARIUS GEMINUS confessed the rape, and said that nothing was so contrary to the young man's interest as still to deny it: he would offend not only the raped girl, but the judge. CESTIUS neither followed Latro, who said he had not known and did not even now know, nor Varius Geminus, who confessed, but denied the rape more openly. "The truth," he said, "could not be found out; the judges followed that sententia: 'If he raped, it is shameful that the girl go unavenged; if he did not rape, it is not shameful that he become her husband.'" SILO POMPEIUS said that the young man, modest by nature and of rustic shyness, had not endured to confess. The colour did not please LATRO: "He will be the less pardoned," he said, "if he knows that he raped her and knowingly lied." SILO argued against this, that no one could be made to believe that a man does not know whether he raped her.

[118635] 8.11. HISPANUS CORNELIUS: "I did not wish," he said, "to take her husband from her, but to give her a more honourable one. She is worthy," he said, "so merciful a girl, that she should not seem to have married a ravisher." HISPO ROMANIUS said that those comrades who had urged him on by night had stood round him and said: "It is not the girl you raped; it was another." He feared lest he do an injury to the girl he had raped. ARGENTARIUS said: "I could wish you had chosen death: this man would not have been judged a ravisher. It is not your case that presses him, but the choice, while each several judge says: 'What has he that he should so refuse? You would think his life were at stake; and he himself says he is not unwilling to marry a wife, but refuses the title. Of course, when conquered he will marry the wife. There is no need to judge anxiously concerning one whom we must congratulate even when condemned.'" SILO used this colour: that the young man, suddenly confused and in so great an uproar, had not been sufficiently in command of himself; and that he had denied it because he was confused, and persisted because he had denied it.