WORK: Controversiae  (slug: seneca-the-elder-controversiae-ce0606)

CHAPTER: 02-book-2



[109933] 6.13. DIOCLES OF CARYSTUS: "But if comely flesh is changed by luxury." HERMAGORAS used to speak epigrams that were rare but pointed, and such as would deeply affect an attentive listener but slip past a careless and inattentive one. In this controversia he said: "O cruel fortune! We did these things commanding one another." BARBARUS said a common thought commonly enough: "You shall know, child, that the mind is still in its first bloom." More elegantly Hispo ROMANIUS composed this: my frugality pleases you, because I have kept my patrimony, because I have added to it, because I married in good time, always loved my wife, kept myself safe from every scandal. This I affirm — that in my whole life I have done nothing more frugal. A thing said by all, SYRIACUS VALLIUS said most quickly: son, let us stop when you wish.

[110760] 7.1. THE THEME: A man, going abroad, left his wife behind. While he was away, a handsome, rich, unknown young man moved into the neighbourhood, was repeatedly rebuffed by the wife, fell sick, died, and made the wife his sole heir on the ground that she was chaste and could not be corrupted. The husband, on his return, accuses her of adultery. OF PORCIUS LATRO: Although the morals of the state have now sunk so low that no one can seem too credulous in suspecting adultery, yet I have been so far from that vice that I rather fear someone may charge me with too much patience or too much dullness, in bringing so late a complaint. I do not accuse my wife of adultery save now that she is grown rich; I drag her as defendant from a house in which nothing of mine is left. While I have travelled so long abroad, and have fled no peril by land or sea, she has earned more within a single neighbourhood than I in a whole voyage over the sea. After such great profits of unchastity, if I can keep silent, I must confess that I was away for this reason — to vie with my wife in increasing my patrimony by travel. This, judges, is my torment — that, branded by your verdict, though she lose her doubled dowry, she will yet have more from her gains than the condemned must lose; so much has her rich lover poured out upon her, that even after punishment it pays to have been an adulteress. What I charged my wife as I set out, I know;

[112190] 7.2. the rest — how a handsome, rich, unknown young man moved into the neighbourhood of a handsome and, in her husband's absence, too free woman; how, by constant satiety of daily lust, day and night, his strength drained, he perished — ask of rumour. I ask you, judges, what was my duty: could I, with my honour safe, suspect nothing about an inheritance into which I am named even as confirming witness by my wife? I have come for nothing else than to complain of my fortune; for the case you know better.

[112699] 7.3. It is time, judges, that a husband be believed about his wife — that so handsome a woman could be loved: a chaste woman could perhaps be loved thus, that she might not be solicited; and there is no cause for her to say: that was not in my power. You are mistaken, judges, if you do not think that a greater incitement to soliciting a matron is the hope of corrupting her than a face, however lovely and charming. If as much could be hoped in a beautiful woman as can please, all beautiful women would turn all eyes upon themselves. A matron who wishes to be safe against the wantonness of a solicitor should go out adorned only so far as may keep off the unchaste, if by nothing else, by the modesty of her years; let her keep her eyes cast down to the ground; against an officious greeter let her be inhuman rather than immodest; even in the necessary exchange of a return greeting let her be covered with much blushing. So let her pledge herself to modesty; let her deny her unchastity by her face long before she denies it by word. Into these guards of preserved integrity no lust will break.

[113801] 7.4. Go forth composed, with smooth brow, to every allurement, a little more darkly than naked women with their garments laid aside, with speech exquisitely turned to every witticism, all but offering blandishments unbidden, so that whoever sees you may not fear to approach: then do you wonder if, when you have written out your unchastity by so many tokens — dress, gait, speech, face — someone was found who would not draw back from an adulteress running upon him? She ordered, I suppose, the solicitor's go-between to be seized and stripped, demanded scourges and lashes and every kind of torture, and barely restrained the weakness of a woman's hand from the wounds of a worthless slave.

[114495] 7.5. How often did she implore her absent husband's name? How often did she complain that she did not travel abroad with him? No one asks a second time one who refuses thus. With whom did you complain? Before whom were you indignant? Do you think you will go far enough toward proving your chastity, if you only deny the outrage — which, for the most part, even the most unchaste woman, in hope of a richer reward, deliberately feigns? When did you write to your husband about the wrong done you, and, that your solitude might not lie open to the chance of a like wrong, beg his earlier return? And how much more becomingly should I have learned of the affront to my marriage-chamber by a wife's letter than by a solicitor's will! Most wretched of all the age's husbands, with my absence thus despised, I should even now not know my own wrong, had the man who did it wished to keep silent.

[115386] 7.6. So often solicited, did you not veil that face by which you could please? Did you not curse every ornament as the cause of such a wrong? What comes next to one who promises: being asked, she keeps silent about the outrage. Look at the adulterer's fortune; from it let that go unpunished which she gave to the adulterer, if there is anything she did not give. Why do I reckon up everything one by one? What did I, her husband, not send her from my own goods? Now, with all my fortune, I lie hidden among the adulterer's gifts! "Let her be sole heir." Why so? "You have it," he says; he wrote the reasons: "because, when I had appealed once, when I had appealed a second time, when I had appealed a third time, I did not corrupt her."

[116125] 7.7. O we, born in too happy and golden an age, as they say! So even those who seek the unchaste honour the chaste? "Of all my goods, of all my money, let her be sole heir, because she could not be corrupted, because she could not be stormed by so many solicitations, because she so faithfully guarded her chastity." Conceal the testator's name a little while: do you not think it the will of a husband? Lo, suspecting no disgrace in my wife, amid mutual love — or at least so believed — if I, now about to die, seizing the tablets, wish to set an inscription upon her along with my gifts, it must be sought from the adulterer's will. "Let her be sole heir, though a stranger, though unknown; only because she is chaste, because she is uncorrupted." What?

[116882] 7.8. Has this so censorious an adulterer no mother? No sister? No kinswoman? Or is none of them chaste? For this, of course, with such great riches he wanders through foreign cities in honour of unknown chastity. There, where he was born, no woman was chaste; and there, where he did business, because every woman was a prostitute, a chaste heiress was sought, by mistake, with a vacant will. I charge with adultery a woman whom I received in marriage, of whom I prayed for children in common, whom I would most gladly believe chaste. Will the age now give us up to every endurance, so that against a husband's complaint a wife is defended by a stranger's testimony? But, by Hercules, against the opinions of outsiders this was a most splendid defence: I please my husband.

[117657] 7.9. But I, if you now accept this fashion of writing, will, in your sight, write thus: "let my wife be my heir, because, while I was abroad, she was loved to distraction; because she was left heiress by a strange and lustful young man; because she entered upon so infamous an inheritance." From two wills I send you to deliberate: which will you follow? The one by which she is acquitted by an adulterer, or the one by which she is condemned by her husband? The one fruit of chastity is to be believed chaste, and, against all enticements and all allurements, the only firm support, as it were, for women's natures is to have fallen into no scandal. It is perhaps a new and dreadful thing not to . . . into all men's esteem . . . then . . . from one who will give . . . experiences of various . . . a woman . . . one chastity . . . and yet she must take care both to be and to seem chaste.