WORK: Letters  (slug: sidonius-apollinaris-letters-727be6)

CHAPTER: 01-letters



[220207] 5.9.3. It has come to us—that is, it has come to the grandsons, whom it would befit to guard against nothing more than lest, through us perhaps, the affection of our parents and our forefathers should seem antiquated. To this, into a like intimacy, besides the hereditary prerogative, we are compelled by a manifold opportunity: the age of each of us no less joined than our fatherland; one sport exercised us, one master trained us; one gladness relaxed us, severity restrained us, discipline formed us.

[220713] 5.9.4. For the rest, if God grants, in the years now knocking at the thresholds of old age, let us be, unless you reject it, two souls, one mind; and let us imbue our children, loving one another, to wish and to refuse the same things, to flee and to follow the same. But this would be of our fathers now above their prayers: if, through Rusticus and Apollinaris, the hearts of our praiseworthy great-grandfathers are reformed as well as their names. Farewell.

[221175] Sidonius to his friend Sapaudus, greetings.

[221220] 5.10.1. If the illustrious Pragmatius does anything at all well among the other virtues of his mind, this he does best: that, from love of studies, he loves you singularly, in whom alone, or most of all, he marks that the traces of old skill and diligence have settled. And indeed not unjustly is he your patron; for a most copious honour is owed by him to letters.

[221587] 5.10.2. Him once, declaiming and breaking the rhetorical benches with applaudable oratory, his eloquent father-in-law of his own accord admitted into a patrician family—although age, comeliness, and modesty pleaded for him to this end, to say nothing of his birth or wealth. But, as I have learned, even then the serious man blushed to have pleased by the gift of his form, since by the merit of his talent it would have sufficed him to be loved. And truly each best man pleases more excellently by his character than by his beauty; moreover, the passing adornments of the body waver with the advance and decline of running time. Him too, his judgement remaining, Priscus Valerianus, afterward prefect of the Gauls, joined to his counsels and tribunals, most perseveringly holding the old judgement, that to whom he had joined his offspring under the plea of knowledge, he should join also dignity.

[222487] 5.10.3. But your composition is so bright, so distinguished, that, compared with it, the division of Palaemon, the gravity of Gallio, the abundance of Delphidius, the discipline of Agroecius, the strength of Alcimus, the tenderness of Adelphius, the rigour of Magnus, the sweetness of Victorius would write not only nothing superior but scarcely things equal. Indeed, lest I should seem to you, under this as it were hyperbolic catalogue of rhetoricians, to have flattered and gratified you in anything, I do not doubt—nay rather, I acquiesce—that to you alone the keenness of Quintilian and the pomp of Palladius are to be compared.

[223122] 5.10.4. Wherefore, if anyone after you favours Latin erudition, he gives thanks to this friendship, and, if he has anything of a man, wishes to be added as a third to your fellowship; although—what is the more grievous—that ambition of his will not be enough to stir distaste in you, since few now honour studies, and at the same time it is fixed and rooted in human breasts, by a natural vice, that those who do not understand arts do not admire artists. Farewell.

[223589] Sidonius to his friend Potentinus, greetings.

[223636] 5.11.1. We love you much; and indeed the affection of this love is not erroneous or fortuitous. For, that I might be made a comrade the more bound to you, I made a judgement—for it is my custom to choose first, to love after. "What, then," you say, "in me pleased you, to be approved?"

[223923] 5.11.2. I will say gladly and briefly—of which one thing favour, the other the paper, compels me to make. I revere in your doings that you do many things imitable by every good man: you cultivate as one most skilful; you build as one most orderly; you hunt as one most effective; you feed your household as one most exact; you jest as one most witty; you judge as one most fair; you advise as one most sincere; you are moved to anger as one most slow; you are appeased as one most swift; you love in return as one most faithful.

[224453] 5.11.3. All these examples of living, if my Apollinaris from these years of his youth follows, I rejoice; certainly I admonish him to follow them; in the teaching and training of whom—provided only that, by Christ's help, what is arranged succeeds—I most greatly rejoice that I shall borrow the greatest pattern of life from your character. Farewell.

[224805] Sidonius to his friend Calminius, greetings.

[224851] 5.12.1. That a page travels to you from us more rarely, it is not our pride but another's tyranny that brings about; nor should you seek anything plainer concerning these things, since an equal fear with you interprets the necessity of this silence. This alone, however, I freely groan: that, made separate by the whirlwind of dissenting parties, we by no means enjoy a mutual sight of each other, nor are you ever offered to the anxious gaze of your fatherland—except perhaps when, at the will of another's terror, the breastplate covers you, the battlements us; where you yourself, brought captive to this alone, are compelled to empty your quivers of arrows, to fill your eyes with tears—we too not refusing it, since your wishes contrive something far other than your javelins.

[225634] 5.12.2. But since meanwhile, even if not through the truth of treaties, at least through the semblance of truces, a certain window of the hope of our liberty shines out, I earnestly beg that you impart to us, when most you can, the address of a frequent page, knowing that there remains for you, in the minds of your besieged fellow-citizens, that gratitude which forgets the besieger's enmity. Farewell.

[226040] Sidonius to his friend Pannychius, greetings.

[226087] 5.13.1. Do you know that Seronatus is returning from Toulouse? If not yet—and I believe that not yet—learn it at least by this: already Euanthius is going to Clausetia, and already gathering the assembled labour-gangs to clear, if perchance the embankment has been fouled by any fall of dropping leaves. Certainly if there is anything full of holes, he himself, alarmed, levels it, earth being carried in, the pits filled—as one who, like a leader, is about to go before his own monster from the valley of the Tarn—like the little mussels that pilot the bulk of whales amid rocks or shallows.

[226681] 5.13.2. But that man—so swift in anger, so slow in bulk—like a serpent scarcely unrolled from its cave, is now borne in from close at hand upon the Gabalitani, expiring with fear; whom, single, scattered, townless, he now drains by unheard-of kinds of taxes, now nets about with the winding fraud of calumnies, not permitting the toil-worn to return home even then, when they have paid the yearly tribute.

[227088] 5.13.3. And this too is a sure sign of his impending arrival: that in droves, wherever he turns, the bound are dragged, dragging their chains; in whose pain he rejoices, on whose hunger he feeds, reckoning it especially fine to disfigure those to be condemned before punishing them. He nourishes the hair of men, cuts that of women; of whom, however, if a rare pardon has regarded some, these venality looses, those vanity, none mercy. But to unfold such a beast neither the prince of orators, Marcus of Arpinum, nor of poets, Publius of Mantua, can suffice.

[227648] 5.13.4. Accordingly, since this very plague is said to be drawing near—against whose treacheries may God interpose—forestall the disease by the wholesomeness of foresight, and against the suits of the quarrelsome, if any are stirred, take counsel by agreements; against tributes, by receipts; lest the evil man find, in the affairs of good men, either what to harm or what to bestow. In sum, do you wish to receive what I think about Seronatus? The rest fear to be afflicted, by his agency, with loss; to me even a robber's benefits are suspect. Farewell.

[228205] Sidonius to his friend Aper, greetings.

[228246] 5.14.1. Does warm Baiae now delight you, and the sulphur-water belched, cavern-wise, from the rough pumice, and the pool medicinal for the liver-sick and the consumptive feeble? Or perhaps a mountain seat among the fortresses, and, in choosing a seat of refuge, do you suffer a certain difficulty from the multitude of strongholds? Whatever it is, whether you are at leisure or at business, you will yet, unless I am mistaken, be recalled to the city by the consideration of the Rogations.

[228737] 5.14.2. Of which solemnity Mamertus, father and bishop, first found, instituted, and brought in for us, by a most reverend example, by a most useful experiment. There were indeed before—be it said with the peace of the faith—wandering, lukewarm, infrequent, and (so to speak) yawning supplications, which were often blunted by the interposing obstacles of luncheons—chiefly to deprecate either rains or fair weather; to which, to say nothing more, it was not fitting that the potter and the gardener alike should come.

[229257] 5.14.3. But in these which the aforesaid supreme priest both brought forth and bestowed on us, there is fasting, praying, psalm-singing, weeping. To these festivals of humbled necks and the sighing companies of prostrate citizens I summon you; and, if I rightly measure your spiritual mind, you will now come the sooner, since you are called not to feasts but to tears. Farewell.

[229638] Sidonius to his friend Ruricius, greetings.

[229683] 5.15.1. The word of office being premised, I commend our bookseller—tested by me not by favour but as a judge—of whom I have proved well and abundantly the good faith in his breast, and likewise the swiftness in his work, toward you, his master and mine and his own in common. This very man, then, carries hither a book of the Heptateuch, written with the highest speed and the highest neatness, although it has been re-read and revised by us also. He brings too a volume of the Prophets, although run through in my absence, yet by his own care and hand cleared of superfluous readings—and not always with the man reading against him who had promised his help; I believe, because his infirmity was an impediment, that he should not fulfil what he had promised.

[230445] 5.15.2. It remains that your exhortation or your pledge should reward the servant, thus either studying to please or deserving, with a fitting grace; which, at any rate, if it is paid for such labour, will begin to look to your own recompense. But since I beg this from favour alone, do you look at what he deserves, of whom it is agreed that he seeks rather his master's affection than a reward. Farewell.

[230853] Sidonius to his wife Papianilla, greetings.

[230898] 5.16.1. The quaestor Licinianus, coming from Ravenna, as soon as he touched the soil of Gaul, the Alps being crossed, sent a letter ahead of his coming, in which he indicates that he is the bearer of the imperial codicils, at whose arrival the patrician honour accrues to your brother Ecdicius too—in whose titles you rejoice equally as in mine—most swiftly, if you consider his age; most slowly, if his merits; for he long ago paid the suffrage for entering upon this dignity, not in the scale but on the sword's edge, and he himself, a private man, enriched the public treasury, not with moneys, but with spoils.

[231514] 5.16.2. This, however, the holy Julius Nepos—supreme Augustus alike in arms and in character—did, in that the good faith of his predecessor Anthemius, pledged to your brother's toils, he discharged the more praiseworthily the quicker; since this man fulfilled what that one most often promised. Whence it comes that henceforth, for the commonwealth, every best man can and ought, if there is any strength in anyone, to spend it—being secure, and hence eager—since, even when an emperor is dead, the principate always repays whatever the prince has pledged to the devotion of the labouring.

[232105] 5.16.3. Meanwhile you, if I well gather your affection, on learning these things take great solace amid the greatest adversities, nor does the terror even of the neighbouring siege swerve your mind from the path of common joys. For I know well that you were not so gladdened even by my own honour, which by the law you share, since, although you are a good wife, you are a most excellent sister. On which account, by Christ our God being propitious, I have hastily inscribed with congratulatory letters the enlarged titles of your line, at once absolving your solicitude and your brother's modesty; who would indicate nothing of his own dignity—and if perchance you did not know him to be modest, you would not on that account judge him impious.

[232852] 5.16.4. But I enjoy not so much your insignia—which you have hitherto awaited, the more freely the more impatiently (although these too greatly)—as your concord; which I wish in future to be equal for our children and his, demanding by our common prayers that, as we, having attained the prefectorian rank for each of our families, have by divine favour rendered it patrician too, so they may make the patrician rank which they receive into a consular one.

[233310] 5.16.5. Roscia salutes you, our common care; who, in the most indulgent bosom of her grandmother and aunts—what rarely befalls grandchildren to be reared—is yet brought up with severity. By which, however, her tender age is not weakened but her character is formed. Farewell.

[233587] Sidonius to his friend Eriphius, greetings.

[233632] 5.17.1. You are, my Eriphius, ever yourself, and never does the hunt, the city, the country call you away so much that you are not, by the way, held by the pleasure of letters; and it comes by this zeal that you do not even disdain our writings, who, as you write, smell to you of the Muses. Which sentence, however, is amply proved to lack truth, and which it also appears comes either from jest, if you are merry, or from love, if you are serious; but for the rest it recoils far from what is just, when you assign to me things that would scarcely be fittingly accommodated even to Maro, scarcely to Homer.

[234242] 5.17.2. Let us leave these things, and converse of that whence the occasion arose. You bid verses be directed to you which I granted to the prayers of a most distinguished man, your father-in-law; who, mingled in the fellowship of his equals, lives with manners alike ready to command and to obey. But since you desire to know both the place and the cause, that you may the more easily understand a very small matter, lay it rather to my fault that the preface will be more talkative than the work.

[234742] 5.17.3. We had come together at the sepulchre of holy Justus (but infirmity was an impediment to you, that you were not then present); the procession had been before dawn, the solemnity the yearly one, the people huge, of either sex, whom the most capacious basilica could not hold, however girt with spreading covered galleries. The worship of the vigils being performed—which the monks and the clergy, psalm-singers, had celebrated together with alternating sweetness—each of us withdrew in different directions, yet not far off, since at the third hour we were to be present, when the divine service was to be performed with the priests;

[235384] 5.17.4. exceedingly out of breath, indeed, from the press of the place and the crowds, and from the numerous lights brought in; and at the same time the night, still close upon summer, had scorched us, shut in under a roof, with its vapour, even though now, with the first chill, the autumnal Dawn was nonetheless growing cool. And so, when the various bodies of the orders were dispersed here and there, it pleased us, with the chief of the citizens, to come together at the tomb of the consul Syagrius, which was not separated even by a full bowshot. Here some of us had sat down under the shade of a grown vine, which, the stems being raised high and hanging trellis-wise, the foliage drawn over had woven; some on the green turf, but fragrant with flowers.

[236146] 5.17.5. The talk was sweet, jocular, bantering; and besides—which was the most blessed thing—no mention of the powers or of the tributes, no speech that could be betrayed, no person who would betray. Anyone, certainly, could have related a tale worthy of relating and worthy in its sentiments: it was listened to most ambitiously; nor for that reason was the narration the less distinct, that gladness was mingled with it. Amid these things, to us long languid from leisure, it seemed good to do something.

[236654] 5.17.6. Presently, two parties being formed—as the age allowed—amid the acclamations demanding it, there is brought forth to these the ball, to those the dice-board. Of the ball I was the first standard-bearer, which, as you know, is held my companion no less than the book. On the other side my brother Domnicius, a man of the highest grace, of the highest charm, had taken the dice and was shaking them, by which, as by a trumpet, he called the gamesters to the dice-tower. We, with a troop of scholars, played abundantly, so much as our limbs, dulled by the torpor of stationary labour, might be invigorated by wholesome running.

[237288] 5.17.7. Here the illustrious Philomatius—as is that phrase of the Mantuan poet, "daring himself too with his hand to try the labour of the young men"—steadfastly mingled himself with the bands of the ball-players, for he had done this beautifully, but when his years were still younger. Who, since he was frequently thrust from the place of those standing by the impulse of one running in the midst, now too, received into the field, neither cut off the path of the ball flying past before him or thrown over him, nor avoided it, and, often bent forward through a tumble, scarcely gathered himself up again from the ruinous swerve, was the first to remove himself from the noise of the game, sighing, his inwards growing hot. For frequent pains, the fibre of his little liver swelling, pricked the exercised man.

[238102] 5.17.8. I straightway stopped too, about to do, by the fellowship of resting, a deed of charity, lest the brotherly weariness should suffer shame. So, as we sat down, sweat soon admonished him to ask for water for his face: it was brought to him as he asked, and likewise a towel heavy with nap, which, polished by yesterday's washing, chanced to be swaying under the very double-leaved doors of the little house, from the porter's upright rope, pulley-wise.

[238562] 5.17.9. While at leisure he dries his cheeks with it: "I should wish," he said, "you would bid some quatrain of like office be written for me on the cloth." "Let it be," I said. "But," he said, "let it hold my name too in the metre." I replied that what he had asked were things possible to do. He himself too said: "Dictate, then." Then I, smiling: "Know at once that the Muses are stirred, if I am at leisure with their choir not without witnesses." He answered vehemently and most urbanely—as he is by nature a fiery man and a certain inexhaustible fount of eloquence: "See, lord Sollius, lest Apollo perhaps be the more stirred, that you alone solicit his foster-children to secrets." Now you can know what applause a sentiment so sudden, so charming, stirs up.

[239329] 5.17.10. And, delaying no longer, presently his scribe, who held the tablet at hand, being called to me, I composed the following epigram:

[239469] In the new morning, whether the warm baths call, or when the brow, heated with hunting, runs with sweat, let fair Philomatius foster his moist face with this, that the moisture may pass from his face into the thirsty fleece.

[239695] Our Epiphanius had scarcely written out the above, and it was announced, the hour warning, that the bishop was coming forth from the retiring-room, and we rose.

[239857] 5.17.11. Do you grant pardon for the requested song. But that other thing—which is the greater, and which you both lately bade me write, in parable or figure, against a certain man who bears good days ill, and which, finished, shall be sent tomorrow—review in secret; and, if it please, fostering it, publish it; if it displease, deleting it, forgive. Farewell.

[240220] Sidonius to his friend Attalus, greetings.

[240264] 5.18.1. That you have begun to preside over the Aeduan city I received gladly and with joy. The cause of my gladness is fourfold: first, that you are a friend; second, that you are just; third, that you are severe; fourth, that you are near. Whence it comes that you would, and ought, and are able to aid very much the dealings of us and of our people. Therefore, embracing in an old friend the new right of the power you have attained, I have now long sought matter for your benefits—in which know that I trust so much that, even if I do not find what to ask, you yourself seem to me about to seek what you may bestow. Farewell.

[240895] Sidonius to his friend Pudens, greetings.

[240938] 5.19.1. The son of your nurse has carried off the daughter of mine: an unworthy deed, and one that would have made us and you enemies, had I not at once known that you knew not it was to be done. But, the purgation of your conscience being premised, you deign to seek impunity for the still-warm fault; on a condition I grant it: if you, now a patron, loose the ravisher, as your dependant, from the bond of his original tenure.

[241368] 5.19.2. But that woman is now free; who will then at last be seen not consigned to mockery but taken into marriage, if our culprit, for whom you intercede, presently made a client, from a tributary should rather begin to have a plebeian person than a colonary one. For this alone, whether composition or satisfaction, even moderately amends my affront; I, who acquiesce in your wishes and friendships in this, if liberty looses the husband, that punishment may not bind the ravisher. Farewell.

[241863] Sidonius to his friend Pastor, greetings.

[241906] 5.20.1. That on yesterday you were absent from the deliberation of the city in the council, the better part took to have been done on purpose, suspecting that you guarded against this, lest the burden of the future embassy should be laid upon your shoulders. I congratulate you that you live with such morals that you must needs fear your own election; I praise your efficiency, I look up to your prudence, I attend with praise your good fortune; in short, I wish things equal to these for those whom I love equally.

[242424] 5.20.2. Many men frequently, whom an execrable popularity drives, grasp by the hand the greatest of the citizens and lead them aside from the public assembly, and, having sequestered them, press kisses upon them, pledge their own service—but unasked; and, that they may seem to be sent as envoys for the assertion of the common business, they pay back the travel-warrant and of their own accord refuse the very expenses, and secretly, out of ambition, beg single men that they may be begged openly by all.

[242931] 5.20.3. Even so, although a gratuitous toil could be gladly admitted, yet the modest are more gladly and lovingly chosen, and that even with cost; so much weight has the impudence of those who thrust themselves forward, that not even with the tributary burden is anything paid out under their name. Accordingly, although it has not escaped you what every good man was planning, render yourself nevertheless to the wishes of those who await you, and prove the affection of those who seek you, you who have now proved your modesty. That you were absent first is ascribed to modesty; a second delay looks toward cowardice.

[243552] 5.20.4. Besides, for you, about to set out for Arles, there is on the way your venerable mother, your loving brothers, and the soil of a fatherland that loves you in return, to which, even apart from the occasion, one comes with pleasure; then your own house, whose steward, your vineyard, harvest, olive-grove, and even the roof itself, even while you pass by, it is a matter of convenience to inspect. Wherefore, sent by us, you arrive also for yourself; for the condition and opportunity of your journey and of our cause will be such, unless I am mistaken, that you may seem able to charge it to the city as a benefit at any time, that you have seen your own. Farewell.

[244226] Sidonius to his friends Sacerdos and Justinus, greetings.

[244285] 5.21.1. Victorius your uncle, a man as excellent as he was everywhere most learned, as he composed other things powerfully, so most powerfully composed verses; to me too the care of the Muses has always been a concern from my childhood. Now you come heirs to a parent, as rightly as deservedly: so I become next to the poet by profession, you by descent. Therefore it is most just that, the dead being departed, each of us should succeed in the way he is joined to him; and so hold your patrimonies, give the songs, farewell.

[244812] 6.1.1. Blessed be the Holy Spirit and the Father of God Almighty, that you, the father of fathers and bishop of bishops, a second James for your age, look down from a certain watchtower of charity—and not from the lower Jerusalem—upon all the members of the Church of our God; you who are worthy to console all the weak, and who deservedly receive the homage of all. And what answer worthy of such condescension can I now make, who am but rotten earth, fetid with guilt?

[245284] 6.1.2. Suffering both the want of your saving converse and the fear that the memory of a blameworthy life inspires, I am driven to cry out to you what your colleague once said to the Lord: "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord." Yet if that fear is not tempered by love, I am afraid that, like the Gerasenes, I may be abandoned by the example and you depart from my borders. Rather let me bind you by the more profitable course, setting before you the condition my fellow-leper proposed, and saying to you: "If you will, you can make me clean"—a sentence by which he revealed no less what he asked of Christ than he made public what he believed.

[245940] 6.1.3. Since then you are beyond all doubt the first of all bishops throughout the whole extent of the world, since to your precedence all submit, since even the throng of your colleagues trembles before your judgement, since in comparison with your gravity the very hearts of the aged turn childlike, since after the hard-won vigils of your service at Lérins and now nine lustres run out in the apostolic see the spiritual camps revere you as a most renowned veteran centurion of both the holy orders—you nonetheless withdraw a while from the company of the spearmen and the front-rank standard-bearers, and do not despise your lowliest drudges and camp-followers, and to the very last of the baggage-train, who in their folly still sit fast among the burdens of the flesh, you carry round the standards of the cross you have so long borne, and stretch out the hand of your tongue to those wounded in conscience.

[246855] 6.1.4. You know, it seems, veteran commander, how to gather up those struck down from the opposing line, and, most skilled of trumpeters, to sound the retreat for sinners coming back to Christ; and after the example of the gospel shepherd you rejoice no more over those who remain sound than over those, given up for lost, who do not stay away. You then, the standard of conduct, you, the pillar of the virtues, you—if it is permitted to flatter the guilty—true sweetness, because holy: you did not shrink to handle with the fingers of exhortation the ulcers of the most despised of worms; you were not so grudging as to refuse to feed with counsel a soul starved by its own frailty, and from the storehouse of your loftiest love to pour out for us the measure of the humility we should pursue.

[247651] 6.1.5. But pray that I may one day come to my senses, weighed down as my neck is by the mass of the burden laid upon me. By the unbroken sequence of my misdeeds I have come, wretch that I am, to such a pass of necessity that I am now compelled to pray for the sins of a people for whom a people of innocents could scarcely obtain pardon, even were they to make supplication. For who, being sick, can well administer a cure? Who, in a fever, can with arrogant touch tell the healthy pulse from his own? Who that has deserted can rightly praise the science of war? Who that is gorged can fitly reproach the abstinent? Most unworthy of mortals, I must say what I refuse to do, and, damnable in my own words, since I do not fulfil what I counsel, I am daily forced to pronounce against myself the very sentence I pronounce on others.

[248482] 6.1.6. But if you would stand between me and Him with whom you are crucified, our Lord, as an intercessor for the people of my sins—younger rather than lesser than Moses—we shall go down no further into hell while yet alive, nor, inflamed by the incitements of the vices of the flesh, shall we any longer kindle strange fire upon the altar of the Lord; for although the balance of glory does not regard us, guilty as we are, yet we shall rejoice abundantly and more than enough if by your prayer we can lift the breast of our inward man—if not whole, for reward, at least scarred over, for pardon. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[249124] 6.2.1. The venerable matron Eutropia—a woman, as far as I can see, of singular example, who, in a rivalry of thrift and kindness, feeds the poor no less by her fastings than by her food, and, ever watchful in the worship of Christ, alone compels sin to sleep within herself—now, to the griefs of her bereavement there being added the burden of a lawsuit, hastens to seek out the perfect remedy of your consolation against this twofold evil, and will be grateful whether you reckon this a short journey or a long service.

[249646] 6.2.2. For the said venerable woman is wearied—if it would do injury to call it knavery, let us at least call it sharp practice—by my brother Agrippinus, now indeed a presbyter; who, abusing the weakness of the matron, does not cease to trouble the serenity of her spiritual soul with the gusts of worldly cunning, and to whose long-standing wound of widowhood two fresh blows are added alike—the loss of a son, and not long after, of a grandson.

[250094] 6.2.3. We have tried to bring about a settlement between the two parties—I above all, upon whom my profession imposed a new claim, and friendship an old one—proposing some terms, urging others, and beseeching most of all; and, what may surprise you, it was from the woman's side that a readier descent was made to every condition of concord. And although a father's privilege might boast that it would profit a daughter more deeply, the mother-in-law's offer of generosity nonetheless found greater favour with the daughter-in-law.

[250627] 6.2.4. Meanwhile the quarrel, half-laid to rest, is now brought into your bosom. Make peace between the contending parties, and by the authority of your pontifical judgement enjoin upon parties suspicious of one another the grace of reconciliation; speak the truth. For holy Eutropia, if you put any faith in my surety, counts it a victory if, even after losses, she does not go to law. Hence too I suspect you will have to pronounce one household quarrelsome, though you find both at odds. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[251162] 6.3.1. Although you have encouraged the first beginnings of my profession by no exhortations, nor watered with any rain of heavenly doctrine the thirst of my hitherto worldly ignorance, I am nonetheless not so unmindful of myself as to presume that the exchange of services should be conducted on an equal scale between my part and yours. For since my mediocrity is easily surpassed by you in the age of my life, in the date of my dignity, in the privilege of place, in the renown of learning, in the gift of conscience, we deserve nothing if we expect an address as between equals.

[251746] 6.3.2. Therefore, not blaming your silence but rather striving to excuse my own loquacity, I commend the bearer of this note; if you cherish his journey with ready favour, a great harbour of security is opened to his affairs. His business concerns a will. The merits of his own documents are hidden from him: he has gone there to consult the skill of advocates pleading their cases, ready to count it a victory if he learns that he is rightly defeated, provided only he be not blamed for having through the fault of his own sloth wrongly failed to safeguard himself and his people. I venture to commend him so far that, if learned counsel should disdain to instruct him kindly, the authority of your crown may strive to wring from the negligent a speedy answer. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[252552] 6.4.1. Besides the homage which is owed without end to your incomparably eminent apostolate—even though it be paid without intermission—I commend, by reason of a new connection, the old need of suppliant bearers, who have made a long journey into the region of Auvergne (long indeed in these times) and have come with their labour wasted. For when they had learned by no false report that a woman of their own affections, whom by chance an incursion of the Vargi (for by that name they call the native brigands) had carried off, had been brought here some years ago and here sold, they tracked her by certain signs, though by traces not recent.

[253198] 6.4.2. And, as it happened, before these men arrived, this same unfortunate woman died in the house and ownership of a trader of ours, having been quite openly sold there—one Prudens (this is the man's name), who, fame now spreads abroad, dwells at Troyes, approving the contract of men unknown to us; whose signature, within the form of a market sale, is produced as that of a fitting witness. The authority of your person and the opportunity of your presence will easily prevail among parties brought face to face, if it shall deign to investigate the old man's whole act of violence—which, what is graver, mounted to such a pitch of crime that, as far as the bearers can attest from report, even in that brigandage a certain one of the number of the travellers is known to have been killed.

[253993] 6.4.3. But since those who are giving birth to a criminal case seek the medicine and civility of your judgement, it is your part, if I judge rightly, no less than the part of your character, to come to the aid both of the grief of the one side and the danger of the other by some harmless settlement, and by a certain temperance of a salutary sentence to make this party less afflicted, that one less guilty, and both more secure; lest the state of the quarrel, as the quality of the time and place bears, come down to such an end as it began to have for a beginning. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[254605] 6.5.1. He who carries this letter from me to you pleads my cause without knowing it; for, while a longed-for occasion of duty is granted me, he confers the benefit which he thinks he is receiving—as now the venerable Donidius, worthy to be numbered among the most distinguished, whose dependant and slaves I commend, who have set out either on their patron's business or their master's. Protect the toil of these travellers with what aid, kindness, and intercession you can; and, if in anything the friend himself, through inexperience and his newness to public dealings, shall seem less effective, look you rather to this—what the cause of the absent, not what the person of the man present, deserves. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[255352] 6.6.1. After I learned that the treaty-breaking people had returned to their own seats and were preparing no ambushes for travellers, I thought it wrong to put off any longer the discourse of my services, lest your affection should, by my fault, contract a kind of rust, as an unburnished sword does from the rarity of care. So, having sent a bearer of this letter on this errand alone, I anxiously inquire how sound the state of your poor body is, and whether your affairs go as your mind would wish—hoping that the love once granted me by you may not be thinned either by the length of the road that lies between or by the long duration of our common absence; for the goodness of the Creator shuts up within narrow bounds the dwelling-place of men rather than their charity.

[256130] 6.6.2. It remains that your beatitude feed the eager hunger of our ignorance with the wholesomeness of a discourse that pricks the heart. For it is greatly to your use that by your exhortations a mystic fatness and a spiritual richness should often distend the leanness of the inward man. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[256463] 6.7.1. If a connection handed down by elders bestows on their posterity anything toward the beginning of friendship as a saving, I too approach the fuller acquaintance of your apostolate with the privilege of a household intimacy; for I remember that you were always, in Christ, the most steadfast patron of my family, so that I think your friendships are not so much to be sought by me as reclaimed. To this is added that the name of priestly office, imposed on one most unworthy as I am, compels me to take refuge in the support of your prayers, that the wounds of my still ulcerous conscience, gaping all too wide, may be scarred over at least by your intercession.

[257133] 6.7.2. Therefore, commending myself and mine and excusing the lateness of my letter, I earnestly beseech that by your accustomed intercession—in whose strength you are immensely powerful—you guard in us the still-crawling first steps of a clerical novitiate, so that, if the unchanging mercy of God shall deign to change anything in the depravity of our character, we may owe it all to the patronage of your supplications. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[257600] 6.8.1. The bearer of this note sustains a poor life by the single occupation of trading; he has no craft for gain, no military service for profit, no farming for advantage. For this very reason, that he is known by his hired escorts and the labour he lets for hire, his reputation indeed grows, but with another's substance. Yet because his honesty is great, even if his means are small, as often as he goes to the markets of a freshly arrived cargo with other men's money, he deposits with his too-trusting creditors, in place of a pledge, only the proven testimony of his character.

[258186] 6.8.2. These things were suggested to me as I was dictating, and I do not on that account hesitate to assert with confidence what I have heard, because those who have him for an intimate are no slight intimates of my own. His tender brow, then, and his hard apprenticeship I commend; and, since the roll of lectors lately received his name, you will recognize that I, to a citizen about to make his way, owed a letter shaped for a cleric—one whom before long I think, not unjustly, will become a splendid merchant, if, hastening from here to your service, he prefer to the cold of his civic springs the spring of a purer wisdom. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[258859] 6.9.1. The now honourable Gallus, because, being bidden to return to his wife, he did not delay, brings back the obedience to my letter and the effect of yours; for when the page you had sent was opened to him, he at once groaned, pricked at heart, and judged that the letter was directed not at me but as a sentence against himself, and so straightway he promised, prepared, and undertook the journey to his native country. Him, on account of this very swiftness of repentance, we took care to address not in reproach but rather in consolation, since a hastened correction comes close to innocence.

[259460] 6.9.2. For no one, even one well aware of his own fault, has presumed to do more, provided he has not abandoned the track of your reproof; indeed, since the very words we have read, the words of a sparing censure, are the greatest spurs to amendment. For what can be more precious than the tenor of this very chastisement, in which a soul sick perchance with sin found within itself the remedy, when outside it could find no rebuke?

[259894] 6.9.3. For the rest, we beseech that by frequent prayer—through which you immensely lord it over all the vices—you make us too, even now, as the gospel magi are shown to have returned, go back by another road of conduct into the country of the blessed. I had almost omitted what should by no means have been passed over: render thanks to Innocentius, a man of standing, who, as you had directed, diligently complied with your charge. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[260372] 6.10.1. The office of the levitical order ennobles the bearer of this letter. He, fleeing with his household the whirlwind of the Gothic ravaging, was carried into your territory by the very weight, so to speak, of his flight; where, upon land of the church over which your holiness presides, the hungry stranger has cast a little seed into the half-worked turf, and he begs that he be granted the means of gathering it in full.

[260802] 6.10.2. If you cherish him with the kindness allotted to those of the household of the faith—that is, that the tax owed for the ground be not demanded—he counts so great a profit bestowed upon him (for a stranger's mind, like his estate, is narrow) as though he were farming on his native soil. If you grant him the lawful settlement, as is the custom, of so very small a crop, he will return with thanksgiving as though richly provisioned for the road. And if through him you favour me with a letter of your wonted condescension, your page will be reckoned by me and by the brotherhood settled there as though it had fallen from heaven. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[261484] 6.11.1. The present letter commends a Jew—not that I am pleased by the error through which those entangled in it perish, but because it is not fitting for us to pronounce any one of them wholly damnable while he yet lives; for he is still in hope of absolution who has it in his power to be converted.

[261787] 6.11.2. What the course of his business is, he himself will more rightly lay open by present narration face to face; for prudence is much opposed to extending to many words a matter that owes its fitness to the brevity of an epistolary form. Indeed, since men of this sort are wont to have honourable causes in worldly business or worldly suits, you too can defend the person of this poor man, even though you assail his faithlessness. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[262267] 6.12.1. One man thinks one thing, another another; I think that he above all lives by his own good who lives for another's, and who, pitying the calamities and want of the faithful, performs on earth the works of heaven. "To what end this?" you ask. This sentence seeks you most of all, most blessed Bishop, for whom it is not enough to bring aid only to those necessities you have come to know, and who, with the reach of your charity extended even to the farthest bounds of Gaul, are wont to consider the causes of the needy before you regard their persons.

[262828] 6.12.2. To no one's poverty or weakness is it any hindrance that he cannot seek you out, for you anticipate with your hands the man who could not reach you on foot. Your vigilance passes into other provinces, and in this the breadth of your care is poured forth—that it may console the straits of those set far off; and hence it comes about that, since the modesty of the absent moves you no less often than the complaint of those present, you have often wiped away the tears of those whose eyes you never saw.

[263340] 6.12.3. I pass over the things you daily endure for the want of impoverished citizens, with sleepless vigils, prayers, and outlays. I pass over that you always act with such moderation, are always judged so humane, so abstemious, that it is agreed without ceasing that the present king praises your dinners and the queen your fasts. I pass over that you adorn the church entrusted to you with such splendour that the beholder doubts whether new works are rising or old ones being restored.

[263831] 6.12.4. I pass over that through you in many places the foundations of basilicas rise and their ornaments are doubled; and that, while many things in the state of the faith are increased by your dispositions, the number of heretics alone is diminished, and that you, in a kind of apostolic hunt, entangle the wild minds of the Photinians in the nets of your spiritual preaching, and that the barbarians, now your followers, as often as they are convinced by your word, do not depart a footstep from your track, until you, that most blessed fisher of souls, have drawn them up from the deep gulf of error.

[264437] 6.12.5. And some of these things, perhaps, may be shared with your remaining colleagues; but that the following is owed to you under a certain title, as the jurists say, of a special claim, not even your modesty will be able to deny: that after the Gothic devastation, after the crops consumed by fire, you sent at your own private cost free grain to the common need throughout the desolated lands of Gaul, having bestowed too much on peoples wasting away with hunger—had that produce been a matter of commerce and not of gift. We have seen the roads narrowed by your grain; we have seen along the banks of the Saône and the Rhône more than one granary, which you alone had filled.

[265120] 6.12.6. Let the fictions of the pagan fables give way, and that Triptolemus, all but borne up to heaven for the discovery of the new ears of corn, whom his own Greece—illustrious for masons, painters, and sculptors—consecrated in temples, fashioned in statues, figured in images; whom doubtful fame frames as wandering through peoples still rude and Dodona-born, in two ships, to which the poets afterwards assigned the form of dragons, and carrying round an unknown seed. You—to say nothing of your bounty inland—when about to dispense sustenance to the cities of the Tyrrhenian Sea, filled with your granaries two rivers rather than two ships.

[265767] 6.12.7. But if perchance the religious man, when praised, takes offence at the Achaean examples of the Eleusinian superstition as unfit, then, setting aside the reverence due to the mystic meaning, let us compare the historical diligence of the venerable patriarch Joseph, who against the coming barrenness easily provided, for the seven plentiful years that were to follow, the remedy he foresaw. Yet, according to the moral judgement, in my opinion he is nothing less who, when a like necessity comes upon him, does not divine it and yet relieves it.

[266321] 6.12.8. Therefore, although I cannot fully guess what thanks the people of Arles and Riez, of Avignon too and Orange, and of Alba, and the inhabitant of the city of Valence and of Saint-Paul-Trois-Châteaux, pay you—since it is difficult to measure to the full the prayers of those to whom you know nourishment was given without a penny—yet I, in the name of the town of Auvergne, render most abundant thanks: a town which neither the common bond of a province, nor the nearness of a city, nor the convenience of a river, nor any offer of payment moved you to think of succouring.

[266902] 6.12.9. And so through me they render immense thanks who have had it fall to them, through the abundance of your bread, to reach their own sufficiency. Therefore, if I seem to have sufficiently fulfilled the duties of the office laid upon me, from an envoy I shall become a reporter. Let me say outright: throughout all Aquitaine your glory is borne abroad; you are loved as you are praised, longed for, honoured; in the hearts of all, in the prayers of all, amid these evil times you are a good bishop, a good father, a good year to those for whom it was worth their while to make their own famine, by its peril, the proof of your bounty, if it could be no otherwise. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[267615] 7.1.1. There is a rumour that the Goths have moved their camp onto Roman soil: to this incursion we wretched Arvernians are always the gateway, for we ourselves supply special fuel to the hatreds of our enemies, since—because they have not yet bounded their territory from the Ocean to the Rhône by the channel of the Loire—they suffer, under the help of Christ, only a single delay, and that from our resistance alone; the spaces and tract of the surrounding regions the grievous pressure of a menacing kingdom long ago devoured.

[268147] 7.1.2. But against an animosity so rash and so perilous we trust to be aided neither by the scorched face of our walls, nor by the rotten lattice of our palisades, nor by ramparts worn smooth by the breasts of our watchmen; we are soothed only by the help of the Rogations, brought in on your authority, in the beginning and the establishment of which the people of Auvergne, though not with equal effect, certainly with no unequal devotion, have begun to be initiated; and on this account they do not yet turn their backs to the terrors poured round about them.

[268711] 7.1.3. For it does not escape our inquiry that, in the first days of these supplications established by you, the city committed to you by heaven was being emptied through the alarms of prodigies of every kind. For now the stage-backings of the public walls were shaken by frequent earthquakes; now fires, often kindled, buried the falling crests of the roofs beneath a heaped mountain of ashes; now the fearful tameness of bold stags set their astonishing lairs in the forum: when you, amid these things, the city emptied by the departure of the leading men and the flight of the people, swiftly had recourse to the new examples of the ancient Ninevites, lest your own despair should also reproach the divine admonition.

[269433] 7.1.4. And in truth you could no longer distrust God without sin, after the proofs of his power; for when on one occasion the city had begun to blaze, your faith glowed the hotter in that burning; and when, in the sight of the terrified people, the fire, driven back by the mere interposition of your body, was bending in fugitive coils upon itself, it was granted by a miracle dreadful, new, and unheard of, that the flame yielded through reverence to him to whom it lacked the power to do harm by nature.

[269941] 7.1.5. So first you forbid fasts to the men of our order and to those few judges, you denounce sins, you proclaim punishments, you promise remedies; you set forth to all that neither the penalty nor the pardon is far off; you teach that the threats of the desolation foretold are to be removed by frequency of prayers; you warn that the constant assault of a raging fire can be quenched by the water of the eyes rather than of rivers; you warn that the menacing onset of earthquakes must be steadied by the firmness of faith.

[270468] 7.1.6. The humble crowd, at once following this counsel, became a spur even to their betters, who, having felt no shame to flee, were not ashamed to return; and the God who looks into hearts, appeased by this devotion, made your supplication a salvation to yourselves, a model to others, and a defence to both; in short, thereafter there were neither losses for calamity nor portents for fear. Knowing all this to have happened before to your people of Vienne and to have ceased afterward, this people embraces the footsteps of so sacred a teaching, earnestly asking that the beatitude of your conscience send the support of those prayers by which you transmitted the example.

[271146] 7.1.7. And since to you alone—after the memory of our forefathers, and after the confessor Ambrose, the discoverer of two martyrs—was granted, in the regions of the western world, the unbroken translation of the martyr Ferreolus, with the head of our Julian added (because from here the bloody hand of the executioner once carried it back to a turbulent persecutor), it is no injustice that we ask, by way of recompense, that a share of patronage come to us from there, since a share of the patron came back to you from here. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[271716] 7.2.1. You burden my modesty, most consummate of bishops, by heaping manifold praise upon me if I have ploughed anything with my rustic pen. And would that it were free of fault, that, in the first encounter of our letters, though circumvented, I yet joined together things at odds with the truth and discordant; for a cunning traveller imposed upon my ignorance. For while he put forward only the office of a merchant, he drew out my letter as a kind of testimonial—that is, that he was a lector—when it should rather have contained some expression of thanks. For, as I learned afterward, he had been advanced more by the kindness of the people of Marseilles than the condition of his estate, whether by census or by household, would warrant.

[272461] 7.2.2. Yet were any worthy narrator to unfold these things as they happened, they would make a pleasant tale. But since you yourselves bid that my page bring you something cheerful and full, grant me pardon if, saving the severity of your ears, I touch upon this very hospitality of our courier as a thing to be compared with the wit of comedy—lest I should seem to know him now for the first time, when he was introduced a second; and at the same time, if it is the custom of the rules of art that openings of speech be drawn from the whole matter, why here too, when I am about to discourse, should any matter be sought and fetched from afar, except that he himself may be the subject of my speech, who will be its burden?

[273187] 7.2.3. Auvergne is his homeland; his parents of birth not proud but free, and, as boasting nothing illustrious, so fearing nothing servile, content with a modest fortune, but that fortune sufficient and unencumbered. Their service had been run in the clerical rather than the palatine train. His father was greatly thrifty and to his children little liberal, and through excessive parsimony chose rather to profit his young son than to please him. When his father died, this boy then sought you out all too lightly equipped—which was the greatest hindrance to his first attempts; for nothing is heavier than a light travelling-purse.

[273822] 7.2.4. Nevertheless his first entrance within your walls was prosperous enough; the holy Eustachius, who has passed away before you, was at once, in word and deed, a twofold blessing. Lodging, briefly sought, was, by Eustachius' care, easily found, swiftly entered, civilly let. Now first he began to cultivate his neighbours by frequent visits, and was repeatedly, not disdainfully, greeted back by them. He dealt with each man as the reckoning of age allowed: binding his elders by attentions, his equals by services.

[274343] 7.2.5. He pursued chastity and sobriety above the rest—a thing as praiseworthy in youth as it is rare—and was thereafter, by attendance no less timely than frequent, recognized, made known, and made familiar to the leading men and then to the count of the city; and so his diligence from day to day was advanced by the fellowships of his betters; the best men cherished him in rivalry, all by their good wishes, very many by their counsels, private men by gifts, the great by benefits; and through these things his hopes and means were heaped up by sudden leaps and bounds.

[274918] 7.2.6. It chanced that next to the lodging which he had taken there dwelt a certain woman, of no less means than character, whose daughter, having now passed the time of infancy, was nonetheless not yet drawing near to marriageable years. To her this man, flattering (since that was the child's age, as is still seemly), gave now some trifles, now playthings suited to a girl's game; and by these gifts, slight in their occasion, the little girl's heart was bound most fast to him.

[275401] 7.2.7. Meanwhile the years grew equal for the marriage-bed. Why should I linger over many words? A young man, alone, poor, a stranger, a son under his father's authority, departing from his homeland not only against his father's will but without his knowledge, sought as wife a girl no lower in birth, higher in means, with the bishop for go-between (because he was a lector), with the count for support (because he was his dependant), the mother-in-law not examining his substance, the bride not despising his person; he asked, he obtained, the marriage was completed, the nuptial documents were drawn up; and if there is in our little town any suburban property, it is there, inserted in the marriage records, recited with the lavishness of a stage-comedy.

[276161] 7.2.8. The lawful circumvention and the solemn fraud accomplished, the poor and beloved man lifts up his rich wife, and, diligently rummaging and packing up all that pertained to his father-in-law, and wringing besides no small bonus from the easiness and credulity of his mother-in-law's munificence, the unconquered trickster sounded the retreat to his homeland. At this the girl's mother, on account of these hyperbolical settlements, began to wish to bring an action for extortion, and only then to grieve at the fewness of the slaves in the dowry-gift, when she was already rejoicing at the multitude of grandchildren. To pacify her our Hippolytus had set out, when he first presented my letter.

[276863] 7.2.9. You have the history of an outstanding youth, a tale equal to a Milesian or an Attic fable; and at the same time forgive one who extends the epistolary form beyond its measure—a thing I have drawn out with a lingering pen for this reason, that you may not receive as a stranger one whom by your benefits you have restored to citizenship; and likewise it is established by nature that we bestow our affection on those for whom we have spent our care. But you will show that the bishop Eustachius died leaving you as his worthy heir to the full, if to your dependants you pay the legacies of patronage as you would to kinsmen the legacies of a will.

[277519] 7.2.10. See, I have obeyed, and fulfilled the duty of compliance with garrulity—although one who lays upon an unlearned man the task of prolixity ought not to take it ill if he receives letters not so much eloquent as wordy. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[277788] 7.3.1. I deliberated long and much—though my mind was urged by affection and the zeal to obey—whether I should send, as you enjoin, the little petitions which I myself composed. In the end the opinion prevailed which determined that I should comply with you. So I have sent what you asked: and what shall I now say? Is this obedience great? It is great, I think; but greater still my effrontery, for with such a face we might pass on water to rivers, wood to forests; with such rashness we would present Apelles with a brush, Phidias with a chisel, Polyclitus with a hammer.

[278364] 7.3.2. You will therefore grant pardon to a presumption which prates with its native garrulity before your most learned scrutiny, holy, eloquent, venerable Bishop. Our custom holds it for a rule that, though it publish little, it should write much—just as it is inborn in dogs that, even if they do not bark, they yet growl. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[278733] 7.4.1. I am now afraid to introduce anyone, because we who commend give words, while you give gifts—as if the chief part of the benefit were not to be reckoned in this, that to those who depart from me, a sinner, a portion of holy communion lies open. Witness to this is our Vindicius, who returned home the more slowly for the load of your munificence, constantly affirming, wherever he is, that, though you are great in repute and greatest in rank, you are nonetheless to be praised no more for your dignity than for your condescension.

[279273] 7.4.2. He proclaims the honeyed, holy, and flowering blandishments that proceed from your tempered communion; and that nothing of the pontifical person is lost thereby, because you do not break the height of the priesthood by your affability but bend it. Knowing these things, I am so inflamed that I shall judge myself most happy when, set before you under God's help, it falls to me to cherish in close (though presumptuous) embraces a breast so secure of its God.

[279741] 7.4.3. Receive my confession: I am suspicious indeed of the too severe, and, conscious of my own weakness, I bear with equanimity those who are harsh to me; but, as must be owned, by such characters we are more easily brought low through humility than joined through familiarity. In sum, let him see by what gift of conscience he swells, who makes himself rigid to those who seek him; yet I should rather choose to be an imitator of the character of the man who strives to kindle affection toward himself even in those set far off.

[280274] 7.4.4. This too is greatly at heart among my chief joys: that I have learned you confer the abundant patronage of your apostolate, with unending intercession, upon the truest lords of my soul, Simplicius and Apollinaris. If it is true, I ask that your charity have no end; if it is false, I beg that it not delay to have a beginning. Besides, I commend the bearer of this letter, for whom a certain need that has arisen there—that is, in the town of Vaison—can be healed by the weight of your authority and reverence. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[280836] 7.5.1. Sought by the decree of the citizens, I have come to Bourges: the cause of my summons was the tottering state of the church, which, lately widowed of its supreme bishop, has sounded a kind of trumpet-call of canvassing for the priesthood among the orders of both professions. The people, divided by their partisanships, are in an uproar; a few put forward others, many not only offer but thrust forward themselves. If, according to your portion of strength, you should consult anything in God's name and the truth, all things present themselves as trivial, fickle, and disguised; and—what shall I say?—there alone is plain shamelessness.

[281482] 7.5.2. And did I not think you would judge me to complain without cause, I would dare to say that very many are of so headlong and perilous a temper that they do not shrink from coveting the sacrosanct see and dignity by an offered price, and that the thing might long ago have been put up for sale and auction, had a seller been found as desperate as the buyer is found ready. Therefore I beg you to adorn with your company the newness, the modesty, and the necessity of my office at your most longed-for arrival, and to protect it with your aid.

[282031] 7.5.3. Nor, although you are the head of the Senonian province, withdraw yourself amid these uncertainties from the efforts to heal the disorders of the Aquitanians; for it matters very little that the province is divided in our dwelling-place, when in religion the cause is joined. To this is added that, of the cities of Aquitania Prima, the wars have left to the Roman side only the town of Auvergne; wherefore in appointing a bishop for the aforesaid city we are deficient in the number of provincial colleagues, unless we are reinforced by the assent of the metropolitans.

[282610] 7.5.4. For the rest, as concerns the prerogative of your honour, no one has hitherto been named by me, no one called in, no one chosen; everything is kept whole, undiminished, and entire for your judgement. This only I count as mine: to invite your persons, to await your wishes, to praise your decisions; and, when anyone is appointed to the place and state of the bishop, that the command proceed from you, the compliance from me.

[283044] 7.5.5. But if—though I think this least likely—an evil-counselling interpreter should stand against my prayers with you, you will be able to excuse your absence rather than your fault; just as, on the other hand, if you come, you show that an end could be set to your region indeed, but could not be set to your charity. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[283409] 7.6.1. We have, by the gift of God, in a fresh example for our times, the old laws of friendship; and it is long since we loved one another in equal measure. Moreover, as concerns our common conscience, you are my patron—though I say this very thing presumptuously and arrogantly; for my iniquity is so great that, from the constancy of its lapses, scarcely even the efficacy of your supplication can heal it.

[283820] 7.6.2. Therefore, since you are doubly my lord, both by patronage and by love, and since I well remember with what fire of perception and fountain of words you abound—I who saw Modaharius, a Gothic citizen, brandishing the darts of the Arian heresy, with what blade of spiritual testimonies you transfixed him—keeping both the reverence and the peace of the other bishops, I lament to you, not without cause, how the wolf of this age, who is fattened by the sins of perishing souls, gnaws at the sheepfolds of the church with the secret bite of a tooth not yet understood.

[284394] 7.6.3. For the ancient enemy, that he may the more easily leap upon the bleating of abandoned sheep, first begins to threaten the necks of sleeping shepherds; nor am I so set above myself as not to remember that I am one whom a conscience yet to be washed with long weeping weighs down—whose filth, however, under the help of Christ, will one day be cleared away by the mystic rakes of your prayers. But since the public safety overtops the modesty of a private man's guilt, I shall not fear, though some sinister interpreter of the faith carp at my zeal, to betray, under the odium of vanity, the cause of truth.

[285009] 7.6.4. That Euric, king of the Goths, defends or extends the frontier of his kingdom by the right of arms—the ancient treaty broken and dissolved—it is permitted neither for us sinners here to accuse nor for you holy men here to discuss. Nay rather, if you ask, it is a matter of the divine order, that here the rich man should be clothed in purple and fine linen, and Lazarus here be smitten with sores and poverty; it is a matter of order, that, while we are turned about in this allegorical Egypt, Pharaoh should march with his diadem, the Israelite with his basket; it is a matter of order, that, while we are baked in this furnace of figurative Babylon, we should bewail with Jeremiah, with sighing howls, the spiritual Jerusalem, and that Assur, thundering in royal pride, should trample the holy of holies of the saints.

[285838] 7.6.5. With these vicissitudes of present and future blessings set before me, I bear our common misfortunes the more patiently; first, because, to one looking into what I deserve, whatever adversities have befallen will be reckoned the lighter; next, because I know for certain that it is the greatest remedy of the inward man, if on this threshing-floor of the world the outward is threshed by the various flails of suffering.

[286267] 7.6.6. But, as must be confessed, I dread the aforesaid king of the Goths, though he be terrible by the merits of his strength, as one who will lay ambush not so much against the Roman walls as against the Christian laws. So sharp, they say, is the mention of the catholic name to his mouth, so sharp to his breast, that you might doubt whether he holds the headship more of his nation or of his sect. To this add that, keen in arms, eager in spirit, vigorous in years, he labours under this one error alone—that he thinks the success of his negotiations and counsels is granted to him for his lawful religion, which he rather attains for his earthly good fortune.

[286933] 7.6.7. Wherefore learn quickly the hidden sickness of the catholic state, that you may hasten to apply an open medicine. Bordeaux, Périgueux, the Rutenians, Limoges, the Gabalitanians, the Helusans, the Vasates, the Convenae, the Auscenses, and now a far greater number of cities, shorn by death of their chief bishops, with no bishops thereafter appointed in the offices of the deceased—through whom, of course, the ministries of the lesser orders were supplied—have dragged out a broad boundary of spiritual ruin, which, it is generally agreed, advances day by day through the failure of dying fathers in such fashion that it could bend not only the heretics of the present but even the heresiarchs of former times: so heavily does a sad despair of an interrupted faith press upon peoples bereaved by the death of their bishops.

[287765] 7.6.8. There is no care in the desolated dioceses and parishes. You may see in the churches either the rotted collapses of the roofs, or the entrances of the basilicas, their door-hinges torn off, blocked by the brambles of rough thorn-bushes. The very herds—alas for the grief—you may see lying not only in the half-open vestibules, but even grazing on the grassy sides of the green altars. But now the solitude is not through the country parishes alone: the very assemblies of the city churches besides grow thin.

[288282] 7.6.9. For what comfort remains to the faithful, when not only the discipline but even the memory of the clergy perishes? Indeed, when any cleric dies, if by a succeeding blessing the office receive no heir to its dignity, in that church the priesthood dies, not the priest; and so what hope you would pronounce to remain, where the end of a man makes the end of religion. Look more deeply at the losses of the spiritual members: surely you will understand that, as great as are the bishops stolen from us, the faith of as many peoples is in peril for you. I say nothing of your colleagues Crocus and Simplicius, whom, expelled from the seats handed over to them, a like punishment of an unlike exile torments; for one of them grieves that he does not see whither he may return, the other grieves that he sees whither he does not return.

[289121] 7.6.10. You are found, of the most holy bishops—Leontius, Faustus, Graecus—in the middle, by city, by order, by charity. Through you the evils of the treaties run their course; through you the pacts and conditions of both kingdoms are carried. Act, then, that this be the chief concord of friendship, that, episcopal ordination being permitted, we may hold by faith the peoples of Gaul whom the boundary of the Gothic lot has shut in, even if we do not hold them by treaty. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[289639] 7.7.1. Behold, once again Amantius, our trifle-bearer, makes for his own Marseilles, about to carry home, as is his way, some spoil from the city, if only the cargo proves to his liking. Through him I would jestingly chatter at greater length, if one and the same mind could at once both ply cheerful matters and bear up under sad ones; for such is now the state of our unhappy corner, whose condition, as wretched report confirms, was less hard under war than under peace.

[290114] 7.7.2. Our servitude has been made the price of another's security—the servitude, alas for the grief, of the Arvernians, who, if old things were unrolled, dared once to call themselves brothers of Latium and to reckon their peoples descended from Trojan blood. If recent things are recalled, these are they who by their own strength held back the arms of the public enemies; the people to whom the Goth was often no terror, shut within the walls, while in turn he himself became a terror to his besiegers set within their camp. These are they who, against the line of their neighbours, were to themselves both leaders and soldiers; yet of their lot in those contests, if anything prosperous fell out, your successes consoled it, if anything contrary, their adversities crushed them. They, out of love for the commonwealth, did not fear to hand over to the laws Seronatus, who was offering the provinces to the barbarians—whom, convicted thereafter, the commonwealth scarcely presumed to put to death.

[291116] 7.7.3. Was this what they earned—want, fire, sword, pestilence, swords fat with slaughter and warriors lean with fasting? For the expectation of this so renowned a peace did we draw into our food the herbs torn from the chinks of the walls, often infected through ignorance with poisonous grasses, which, green with leaves and juices indistinguishable, the hand, sallow as our hunger, often gathered? For all these so many and so great proofs of our devotion, has there been, as far as I hear, a sacrifice made of us?

[291635] 7.7.4. Be ashamed, we beseech you, of this treaty, neither useful nor seemly. Through you the embassies go to and fro; to you first the peace, though the prince is absent, is not only laid open as a thing negotiated, but even entrusted as a thing to be negotiated. Let the harshness of truth, we ask, be pardonable at your ears, from which grief snatches the odium of reproach. You take too little thought for the common good; and when you come together in council, the care is not so much to heal the public perils as to study private fortunes; which, indeed, doing often and long, you have begun to be no longer the first of your fellow-provincials, but the last.

[292302] 7.7.5. But how long will these deceits be able to last? For our elders themselves will not much longer glory in this name, who begin to have no juniors. Wherefore, by the counsel by which you can, cut off this state of so shameful a concord. Still, if it must be, to be besieged, still to fight, still to hunger, is pleasing; but if we are handed over, we who could not be overcome by force, it is certain you have found something barbarous to advise, you cowards.

[292768] 7.7.6. But why do we loosen the reins to excessive grief? Nay rather, forgive the afflicted, and lay nothing to the charge of the mourning. For another region, handed over, hopes for servitude; the land of Auvergne, for punishment. Indeed, if you cannot heal our extremities, at least bring this about by diligent prayer, that the blood live of those whose liberty is about to die; prepare for the exiles a land, for the captives a ransom, for the wanderers a viaticum. If our wall is opened to the enemy, let not yours be closed to guests. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[293353] 7.8.1. Since the bonds of clerical office bind me, I would pronounce the state of my mediocrity most happy, if we had walls as near as we have neighbouring territories—namely, that I might consult your crown about the smallest matters and the greatest, and that the course of my actions might become like that of some calm and unhindered river, if it flowed from your counsel as from a most healthful spring. Beyond doubt it would then be neither foaming with boastfulness, nor turbid with pride, nor muddy with conscience, nor headlong through youth; nay rather, if anything squalid and rotten were filthy in it, the admixed vein of your counsel would wash it all away.

[294025] 7.8.2. But since long spaces are interposed as a hindrance to wishes of this kind, I diligently pray that you free me, as I consult you, from the scruple of a doubt that has befallen me; and, since the people of Bourges demand that Simplicius, a man of standing, be ordained their bishop, decide what I ought to do in so great a matter. For such is your condescension toward me and your authority toward the rest that, if you wish anything to be done (and you will wish whatever is most just), you ought not so much to advise as to command.

[294567] 7.8.3. Of this Simplicius, however, know that very many good things are told, and those indeed by very many good men—testimonies which at the first encounter of conversation I judged not very pleasing to me, because they were too partial. But after I saw that his rivals did nothing more than keep silent, and those above all who cherish the faith of the Arians, and that nothing unlawful was alleged against the man named—although he is not yet of our profession—I noticed that a most exact man might be reckoned, of whom a bad citizen could not speak, nor a good one keep silent.

[295150] 7.8.4. But why have I, foolish, added these things, as though I were giving counsel who asked for it? Nay rather, all things will be arranged at your nod, judgement, and letter, made manifest to the bishops and the people. For we are not so wholly without sense as to decide that you must first be summoned, if it is possible to come, and then, if anything is otherwise, at least consulted—unless we mean to comply in all things. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[295624] 7.9.1. By the desire for spiritual readings—of which a library of the catholic faith, both in its authorities and its disputants, is most familiar to you—you wish to know even those things which are least worthy to occupy the censure of your ears; for you enjoin that I send you the sermon which I am thought to have delivered to the people at Bourges in the church; to which no rhetorical division, no oratorical menaces, no grammatical figures supplied a fitting grace and discipline.

[296112] 7.9.2. For there, as is the custom of those who plead with exactness, it pleased me to fit neither historical weights nor poetic figures nor the sparkles of controversial perorations. For when the seditions, partisanships, and divisions of the parties dragged me in different directions, the very wrong I suffered supplied me with matter for composition, just as my occupation withdrew the time. For so great was the throng of competitors that not even two benches could have received the most numerous candidates for a single seat. All were pleasing to themselves, all displeasing to all.

[296703] 7.9.3. Nor should we have been able to consult anything in common, had not the people, making a sacrifice of its own judgement and soothed, submitted itself rather to the priestly judgement—a few presbyters indeed stammering in corners, but openly not so much as muttering, because most feared their own order no less than the rest. And so, while in public each man took heed for all, it came about that all listened not disdainfully to what they would afterward expound with canvassing zeal.

[297197] 7.9.4. So take the page joined to the volumes appended below, which—composed, with Christ as witness, in two watches of a single summer night—I greatly fear you will credit more to the reading itself, which proves this of itself, than to me. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop. The Sermon

[297494] 7.9.5. Secular history relates, dearly beloved, that a certain one of the philosophers showed to his disciples, when they came to him, the patience of silence before the doctrine of speech, and so endured each of his beginners in mute silence for five years among the chairs of his arguing followers, that not even the quicker wits of some might be praised before it became fitting that they be known. So it came about that whoever had begun to hear those same men speak after their long silence did not keep silent; for, until nature has drunk in knowledge, there is no greater glory in having said what you know than in having kept silent about what you do not know.

[298164] 7.9.6. But now a far different condition awaits my mediocrity, upon whom, as I walk through the sighing whirlpools and the wallowing-places of my misdeeds, the weight of this profession has been thrust; and before I render to any of the good the compliance of a learner, I am compelled to owe to the rest the office of a teacher. To this impossibility is added the weight of shame: that you have particularly entrusted to me, by the offering of a decretal page, the judgement of choosing a bishop, in the presence of a most holy father, most worthy of the highest pontificate; who, since he is the head of his province, is to me also superior in usage, instruction, eloquence, privilege, time, and age—and I, about to speak both before and concerning the metropolitan, both a provincial and a junior, bear alike the modesty of one undeserving and the odium of one too forward.

[299042] 7.9.7. But since it has so pleased your error that I, myself lacking prudence, should seek out for you, under the help of Christ, a prudent bishop, in whose person many good qualities concur, you will know that by an assent of this kind I take up much honour, but more burden. In the first place, weigh the great load of public opinion, that you have enjoined consummate judgements upon a beginner, and from him you demand the straight track of counsel, in which you recollect there was an error but lately. Therefore, since this was your heart's desire, I beseech that, as you believe us in faith, so you make us by intercession; and that you deign to lift up our humility into heaven by prayers rather than by applause.

[299765] 7.9.8. First, however, it is right that you know into what Scyllas of detraction, and into what barkings of tongues—but human ones—the whirlwind of certain men trying to defame you has cast you. For there is a certain force in evil characters, that the crimes of a few should disfigure the innocence of the multitude, when yet, on the other hand, the rarity of the good cannot excuse the misdeeds of the many by virtues held in common.

[300202] 7.9.9. If I name any of the monks—though one to be compared with the Pauls, the Antonys, the Hilarions, the Macarii, attended by the prerogative of an anchoretic life pursued—at once a confused uproar beats upon my ears, the murmur of ignoble dwarfs complaining: "This man who is named," they say, "fulfils the office not of a bishop but rather of an abbot, and can intercede for souls before the heavenly judge more than for bodies before the earthly one." But who would not grow exasperated, seeing the sincerity of virtues soiled by the accusation of vices?

[300764] 7.9.10. If we choose a humble man, he is called abject; if we bring forward an upright one, he is judged to be proud; if one less instructed, he is thought, for his unskillfulness, fit to be mocked; if one somewhat learned, he is cried up, for his knowledge, as puffed up; if a severe man, he is shuddered at as cruel; if an indulgent one, he is blamed for his easiness; if a simple man, he is despised as dull; if a keen one, he is shunned as crafty; if a diligent man, he is set down as superstitious; if a slack one, he is judged negligent; if a clever one, greedy; if a quiet one, he is pronounced cowardly; if we put forward an abstemious man, he is taken for a miser; if one who feeds by dining, he is assailed for gluttony; if one who fasts by feeding others, he is accused of vanity.

[301557] 7.9.11. They condemn freedom as wickedness; they disdain modesty as boorishness; the rigid, for their austerity, they do not hold dear; the gentle, by their affability, grow cheap with them. And so, in whichever manner one lives, here nonetheless the character of the good will always be hooked, as by twin-barbed hooks, on the stinging tongues of the slanderous. Amid these things, the stiff-neckedness of the people and the licence of the clergy are hardly brought under monastic discipline.

[302052] 7.9.12. If I name a cleric, those who follow him are envious, those who went before disparage him. For so few of these—be it said with the rest's leave—judge that mere length of clerical service is to be reckoned in place of merits, that, in consecrating a bishop, they would have us choose not usefulness but age, as though to have lived long rather than well ought to be taken as the prerogative, the adornment, the allurement of all the favours, for obtaining the highest priesthood. And so certain men—slack in ministering, swift in detraction, idle in deliberations, busy in seditions, weak in charity, robust in faction, steady in keeping their rivalries, wavering in the assertion of opinions—strive to rule the church, men whom it will soon be necessary to rule on account of their old age.

[302852] 7.9.13. But it does not please me longer, on account of the ambition of a few, to brand the persons of the many: this only I add, that, since I name no one by name, he confesses the rebuff who professes the offence. Indeed I say this the more freely: that of the multitude standing around, many are episcopal, but all cannot be bishops; and that, while individual men possess the property of diverse gifts, all suffice for themselves, no one for all.

[303304] 7.9.14. If perchance I name a military person, at once they rise to these words: "Sidonius, because he was transferred to the clergy from a secular profession, on that account makes a show of taking to himself a metropolitan from the religious congregation; he swells with his birth, is haughty with the insignia of his dignities, despises the poor of Christ."

[303666] 7.9.15. Wherefore in the present I will pay the faith I owe not so much to the charity of the good as to the suspicion of the slanderous—the Holy Spirit lives, our almighty God, who by the voice of Peter condemned in Simon Magus his thinking that he could purchase for himself the grace of blessing by a price—that in him whom I have judged opportune for you I favour neither money nor favour, but, the condition of the person, the time, the province, the city being weighed over and over, I have believed a man most fitting, whose life will be briefly unfolded in what follows.

[304246] 7.9.16. The blessed Simplicius—hitherto to be held of your order, and from now of ours, if only God assent through you—answers so well to both sides, whether in deed or in profession, that both the commonwealth can find in him what to admire, and the church what to love.

[304519] 7.9.17. If reverence is to be kept for birth—since the evangelist showed that this too is not to be omitted (for Luke, undertaking the praise of John, reckoned it the most excellent thing that he came of priestly stock, and, about to proclaim the nobility of his life, yet first extolled the dignity of his family)—his parents presided either over chairs or over tribunals. An illustrious lineage in both walks of life flourished either with bishops or with prefects: so always to this man's forefathers it was the custom to dictate either human or divine law.

[305081] 7.9.18. But if we weigh his person by a more careful consideration, we find that he holds there the chief place among the men of rank. But you will say that by right Eucherius and Pannychius are held superior as illustres; let it be that they have been so esteemed hitherto, but now, for the present cause, they are not required by the canon, since both have passed to second marriages. If we count his years, he has the efficacy of youth, of old age the counsels; if we compare letters or talent, his nature contends with his learning.

[305619] 7.9.19. If humanity is to be sought, to citizen, cleric, stranger, the least and the greatest, it is offered even beyond his means; and his own bread, more often than not, that man rather knew it who was not going to repay it. If the necessity of undertaking an embassy pressed, not once did he stand for this city, whether before the skin-clad kings or before the purpled princes. If it is doubted under what master he was steeped in the rudiments of the faith: to speak proverbially, he had at home whence to learn.

[306138] 7.9.20. Lastly, this is he, dearly beloved, to whom, set in the darkness of the prison-house, the bolts of the barbarian gaol, many times barred, were opened by divine power. Him, as we have heard, you cried out that he ought to be led to the priesthood, his father-in-law and father alike set aside—at which time, indeed, he brought home much praise, when he chose to be honoured by the dignity of his parents rather than his own.

[306571] 7.9.21. I had almost passed over what ought not to have been passed over. Under Moses of old, as the psalmist says, in the ancient days, that the form of the tabernacle of the covenant might rise, all Israel in the desert, before the feet of Bezalel, heaped up the contribution of their offered expense. Solomon thereafter, that he might build the temple in Jerusalem, exhausted the whole strength of the people upon the work, although he heaped up the captive wealth of the Philistines and the tributary functions of the surrounding kings and the riches of the southern queen of Sheba. This man built a church for you, a young soldier, of slender means, alone, still a son under authority and already a father; nor did either the tenacity of the old or the regard for his little ones hold him back from his proposed devotion—and yet there would be a fashioning of his character which kept silence.

[307471] 7.9.22. For he is, unless I am mistaken, of brass against all mere popularity; he does not catch at the favour of all but of the good; not growing cheap by indiscriminate familiarity, but precious by tested fellowship, and, with a good manhood, desiring rather to profit his rivals than to please them; to be compared with severe fathers, who think not so much of the wishes of their young sons as of their good; in adversity steadfast, in doubt faithful, in prosperity modest, in dress simple, in speech sociable, in fellowship an equal, in counsel pre-eminent; he eagerly seeks proven friendships, steadfastly retains them, perpetually keeps them; he carries on declared enmities honourably, is slow to believe, quick to lay aside; most to be courted because least ambitious, he is eager not to take up the priesthood, but to deserve it.

[308312] 7.9.23. Someone says: "Whence have you learned so much about him so quickly?" To whom I reply: I knew the people of Bourges before I knew Bourges. Many on a journey, many in fellow-service, many in contract, many in deliberation, many in their wandering, many in ours, do we come to know; very many short cuts to acquaintance are given even by reputation, since nature has set not so narrow bounds to fame as to one's homeland. Wherefore, if the standing of cities is to be assessed not so much by the circuit of their walls as by the renown of their citizens, I have recognized not only who you were, but where you were.

[308935] 7.9.24. His wife descends from the stock of the Palladii, who held the chairs either of letters or of altars with the praise of their order. Indeed, since the person of a matron demands a modest and brief mention of herself, I would steadfastly affirm that that woman answers to the priesthoods of both families, both where she was reared and grew, and where, chosen, she removed. The two of them rear their sons well and prudently; compared with whom the father begins to be the happier for this, that he is surpassed.

[309456] 7.9.25. And since you have sworn that the opinion of my littleness shall prevail in this election—seeing that it is no more binding to speak the sacrament than to write it—in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, it is Simplicius whom I pronounce ought to be made metropolitan of our province, supreme bishop of your city. Do you, however, concerning the man of whom we speak, if you follow my new opinion, sound in unison with your old.

[309919] 7.10.1. I envy the good fortune of the habitual courier, by whom it has fallen to you to be seen the more often. But what shall I say of Amantius, when I am jealous of my very letters themselves, which will be opened by sacrosanct fingers, inspected by your eyes? And I, shut here among the half-burnt straits of a fragile wall, by the terror of a war close at hand, am by no means permitted to satisfy my longing for you. And would that this were the form or the cause of the Arvernian region, that we might be excused as men less excusable.

[310463] 7.10.2. But, what is harder, it is brought about by the deserts of our injustice that a just excuse is not wanting to us. Wherefore, the salutation premised, as the custom of duty demands, I greatly beg that meanwhile you remit the debt of a meeting to one who pays it even with words. For if the liberty of going and coming should be recalled by peace, this I shall the more fear—that the constancy of my presence might prove rather a cause of distaste. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[310962] 7.11.1. If the reckoning of times and regions allowed, I would take care to cultivate friendships once entered not by mere offices of words alone; but since the storm of clashing kingdoms makes too much uproar against the wish for fraternal peace, at least among men separated and set apart the letter of habitual converse will rightly be retained, which long ago, introduced deservedly under the pretext of charity, conforms to the old examples. It remains that you indulge to an anxious admirer the fault of a rare meeting—one who, that he may the less assiduously enjoy the sacrosanct contemplation of your countenance, now fears danger from his neighbours, now odium from his patrons; but of these, so much: even these are many words.

[311702] 7.11.2. Meanwhile I introduce Peter, a man of tribunician rank, the bearer of our discourse, who diligently asks this same thing, and who can more compendiously make known by present narrative what business he carries. To him, I pray, let what help is in you accrue, in view of the present page—the regard for equity nonetheless remaining, against which I have not been wont to commend the causes even of my friends. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[312163] 7.12.1. If we considered the time, order, and rank of our friendship and kinship rather than of your person, then by right, in this work, however small it is, the first headings, the first offices of address would be dedicated to you. My pen would have gone through your ancestral curule chairs, no less about to enumerate the patrician fillets; it would not have kept silence about the threefold prefectures, and would not have denied to your Syagrius praises in return for praeconia so often changed; thence it would have run through your father and uncles, by no means to be passed over.

[312755] 7.12.2. And although it might be wearied by the triumphal honours of your family, it would not, however, be so exhausted in unfolding the pedigrees of the ancients as to become on that account the blunter for narrating your glory; which pen, if even in writing the virtues of your forefathers it had been dulled, would again be brought to a point by your own merits. But, about to send you a public salutation, it considered not what you had been, but what you now rather are.

[313233] 7.12.3. It passed over that the Gauls were administered by you at the very time when they were most unharmed; it passed over that, by the wholesomeness of your dispositions alone, you bore with Attila, the enemy of the Rhine, Thorismund, the guest of the Rhône, Aetius, the liberator of the Loire; and that, for so great a prudence and foresight, the provincials with the loudest acclaim of applause put your chariot under their own willing necks, because you so guided the reins of the Gauls that the exhausted landowner was relieved of his tributary yoke. It passed over that the most ferocious king of Gothia was bound by your speech—honeyed, weighty, witty, unwonted—and that you removed him from the gates of Arles by a dinner, whom Aetius could not by a battle.

[314002] 7.12.4. All these things it passed over, hoping it more fitting that your "Hail" be joined now to the names of bishops than of senators; and it judged it done more justly, if you were set among the perfect ones of Christ than among the prefects of Valentinian. Nor let a malicious interpreter turn it to your discredit that you have been rather mingled with the priests; for a great ignorance of the orders holds those who would hence detract somewhat, because—just as, when a public festivity holds a banquet, the last guest at the first table is before him who shall have been first at the second—so, without dispute, by the judgement of the good, the least religious is reckoned more excellent than the greatest of the honoured. Pray for us.

[314748] 7.13.1. The bishop Himerius, your son, hitherto little known to me by face, well enough by repute (which indeed was extended to the good side), came lately to Lyon from Troyes; where, hastily and briefly inspected by me, he restored to us, by the imitation of his character, the holy bishop Lupus, easily the prince of the Gallican bishops, the master alike of his profession and the author of his dignity.

[315156] 7.13.2. Good God, what judgement in the man, joined with charm, if he should perchance deliberate or advise! He abounds in the salt of mind when he is consulted, in honey when he consults. His highest care is for letters, but most of all for religious ones, in which the marrow of meanings occupies him more than the foam of words. His whole intention of his actions—their swiftness and their delay—is Christ. And, what you may wonder at or praise, he does nothing idle, since he does nothing not tranquil.

[315664] 7.13.3. He delights in fasts, he acquiesces in foods; to those he cleaves on account of the custom of the cross, by these he is bent on account of the grace of charity: each with the highest moderation, for he represses, as often as he resolves to dine, his appetite, as often as to abstain, his ostentation. He multiplies his own services, he avoids those of others; and, though it is fitting that he be met in turn, he holds it more pleasing if a mutual honour be owed to him rather than repaid.

[316163] 7.13.4. At banquet, on the road, at the table, he yields to his inferiors; whence it comes that the crowd of his superiors the more pleasurably set themselves after him. He dispenses his speech with the greatest moderation toward his interlocutor, in which he suffers neither the stranger to take any shame nor the familiar any injury, neither the credulous any envy nor the curious any rebuff, neither the suspicious any malice, neither the skilled any calumny nor the unskilled any disgrace. He keeps the simplicity of the dove in the church, the cunning of the serpent in the forum; to the good he is judged prudent, to the bad cautious, to neither crafty.

[316824] 7.13.5. Why more? He has now given you back to us entire; he has copied out, by a pleasant resemblance, your whole temperance and religion, your liberty and modesty, and that most chaste tenderness of a delicate mind. Wherefore, however much you may henceforth wish to enjoy your retirement and indulge your seclusion, you may indulge it; since in my brother Himerius we now hold you—your grandfather in name, your father in face, both in prudence. Farewell.

[317284] 7.14.1. Lately, among the leading men (and the gathering was full), there was mention of you. All the good men in common felt all good things of you, though each one named various kinds of virtues. Indeed, when someone boasted, beyond what was fair, of your presence, as though they knew you better, I grew hot; for I admitted with no equanimity its being said that a man of all letters should become better known to neighbouring rustics than to more remote men of cultivation.

[317763] 7.14.2. The contention proceeded further; and when some obstinately disputed about this error (for it is the way of the ignorant, as they are easily refuted, so they are hard to restrain), I steadfastly asserted that, if a contemplative acquaintance should never come to eloquent friends, it is harsh somehow, yet tolerable, because their own talents prevail—before whom civic inexperience travels abroad—to extend, with the pen's assistance, to the desires of remote provinces; through which often so great an affection of the absent, of the cultivated at least, is gathered as is not produced even by present assiduity. Therefore, if it is so, let those preachers of faces rather than of characters cease to calumniate the necessity of our common absence.

[318522] 7.14.3. Indeed, if human substance is to be assessed more rightly by mass than by mind, I am much at a loss what, according to bodily bulk over however extended spaces, we should admire as final in man, than whom the condition of birth has produced nothing equally wretched and destitute; since, by contrast, it provides the ox with hair, the boar with bristles, the bird with feathers for clothing (to which, moreover, that they may either inflict or repel force, horn, tooth, claw are inborn weapons), while our own limbs you would judge to have been cast out into this world alone, not brought forth; and while, for the begetting of the limbs of other animals, nature meets them with manifold protection, like a mother with open bosom, she poured forth human bodies alone, to whose weakness she was in a manner a stepmother.

[319351] 7.14.4. For that, as I judge—I who lead your mind to be preferable to your limbs—has no equality, that the reasoning of an intellectual soul, knowing the true and the false, has raised our state above the beasts; and if those men, who look upon their friends mockingly, not so much with judgement as with the eye, should for a moment remove its dignity, let them say, I pray, what in the form of man they think sufficiently pre-eminent, what worthy of regard.

[319812] 7.14.5. His height? As though this were not often more fittingly suited to beams. Or his strength? Which reigns more vigorously in the sinews of a lion's neck. Or the beauty of his features? Which clay often more skilfully fixes in images, and wax in pictures. Or his swiftness? Which is more competently ascribed to dogs. Or his vigilance? With which even the owl contends. Or his voice? To which the ass would not yield in clearness. Or his industry? With which, after its own measure, not even the ant fears to be compared.

[320340] 7.14.6. But perhaps they prefer the power of seeing: as though the sight of eagles were not more eminent. They prefer the efficacy of hearing: as though the bristly swine did not surpass us in hearing. They prefer the subtlety of smelling: as though the vulture did not precede us in scent. They prefer the discernment of tasting: as though we did not here yield much even to the ape. What shall I say of touch, the fifth sense of our body? Which the philosopher and the little worm claim for themselves indifferently. I say nothing here of the alluring appetites, which, in coition, the bowed-down pleasure of human flesh shares with the beast's impulse.

[320997] 7.14.7. See what misery they prefer and cultivate, who, puffed up, insult me because you are known to them by sight alone. But I always see that Philagrius whose face, if I saw it silent, I would not see as Philagrius. Whence that common saying, which a certain man uttered, in a different case but with a like opinion: "The Roman people did not recognize the son of Marcus Cicero when he spoke." For by universal judgement the dignity of knowledge, virtue, prerogative are renowned, to whose highest summit one ascends by the steps of merits.

[321542] 7.14.8. First, even the bestial body, if it is now perchance formed, transcends in dignity the unformed matter; next, before the formed is set the animated body; thirdly, the human mind precedes the soul of the beast, because, as the flesh is inferior to life, so life to reason, of which our substance God the Maker made master, but the beast's incapable; yet so that in the state of the human mind a twofold condition prevails; for as souls that reason in a human way, but are dull and rather sluggish, are trodden down by the talent of the prudent and the keen, so, if there are any that flourish by natural wisdom alone, these easily concede that they are surpassed by the merits of the skilled.

[322243] 7.14.9. Observing the difference of these grades, I always behold with the eye of the heart that Philagrius, to whom my mind makes me potentially known by likeness of character; for, although you please all good men, no one has been more able to look upon you within than he who strives to imitate you without. Indeed, in what manner I become a follower of your pursuits, will be disclosed in the following part of the page.

[322669] 7.14.10. You love, as I have learned, the quiet; I, even the indolent. You avoid the barbarians, because they are thought evil; I, even if they are good. You give diligence to reading; I too suffer my own sloth to harm me little in that part. You yourself fill the person of a religious man; I, at least the image. You do not desire the goods of others; I even count it as gain if I do not lose my own. You delight in the company of the learned; I call any crowd, however great, lacking in literary art, the greatest solitude.

[323197] 7.14.11. You are said to be most cheerful; I too define that all tears perish which anyone has shed, except as often as he supplicates God. You are reported to be most humane; no guest has shuddered at our little table, as at the cave of Polyphemus. The highest clemency is attributed to you toward your servants; nor am I tortured, if mine, as often as they sin, are not as often tortured.

[323589] 7.14.12. You think one ought to fast on alternate days? It does not irk me to follow. To dine? It does not shame me to be the first. For the rest, if it is granted me, by the gift of Christ, to be seen by you, I shall so rejoice as one from whom no lesser things have been withdrawn concerning you. Moreover, what greater things are in you, I now know well enough. On account of which it can the more easily come about that, even if at some time, set before you, I look upon your face, some fresh joy concerning you, rather than opinion, accrues to me. Farewell.

[324153] 7.15.1. As often as I come to Vienne, I would wish, at the greatest price purchased, that the dwelling of the city held you and our common brother as settlers the more—you who are joined to me not by love only but also by profession. But that one eludes my reproach under the pretext of his frequented suburban estate, by which it comes about that he is to us neither present himself nor accountable; and you have wherewith meanwhile to excuse yourself, that a possession scarcely recovered now possesses you long. Whatever it is, come now, henceforth to obtain a departure on this condition, that you either return in turn or stay longer. For however much, set in the country, you make your husbandmen industrious, then truly will you make your own land fruitful, if the church, which you cultivate much, you cultivate more. Farewell.

[324990] 7.16.1. You do, my only patron in Christ, a thing alike of your love and of your custom, in that you soothe the cares of a wandering friend by consoling letters. And would that you always so remember me, that the very anxieties, chained together by a succeeding anguish, which as an exhorter you make thin, you may, as an intercessor, cut off!

[325335] 7.16.2. For the rest, I think your freedmen, the business you had enjoined being despatched, are returning; who, it is agreed, performed the matter so vigorously that they did not even need to be helped. Through them I have sent the nightly cowl, with which you may worthily cover your limbs, worn out by fasts, between praying and lying down—although the shaggy garment is sent not opportunely, the winter being ended and the seasons of summer now drawing near. Farewell.

[325809] 7.17.1. You bid me, my lord brother, by the law of friendship, which it is a sin to wound, to set my long-idle fingers upon the anvils of the old workshop, and to inscribe for the holy Abraham, his day fulfilled, a funeral dirge in mournful verses. Quickly will I comply with what is enjoined, both drawn by your authority and chiefly forestalled by the devotion of that most distinguished man, the count Victorius, whom by secular right I honour as a patron, by ecclesiastical right I cherish as a son, as a client, and love as a father; who sufficiently showed what and how great a care burned within him toward the servants of Christ, when, bending about the couch of the dying bishop, no less than about his limbs, and made one colour with grief, growing pale at the death close above his face, he showed by his indicative tears what he wished for the man.

[326671] 7.17.2. And since he himself snatched for himself the greatest parts of burying the body, bestowing the whole apparatus of the abundant expense that befitted the bishop to be buried, we confer, at least to the obsequies, the words that remain, about to scratch with the impress of the engraving pen nothing other than a testimony of mutual love; for the rest, the character, deeds, and virtues of the man will be most unworthily weighed by the meanness of my words. Abraham, worthy to be joined to the holy patrons, whom I would not tremble to call your colleagues: for so they go before that you may soon follow them; a share of martyrdom gives a share of the kingdom. Born by the Euphrates, having suffered prison for Christ and bonds loosened only by a five years' famine, escaped from the truculent king of the Susian shore, you hasten alone all the way to the western land. But the signs of his powers follow the confessor, and to evil spirits you bring, fugitive, their flight. Wherever you come, the throng of Lemures cries that it yields: you, an exile, bid the demons go into exile. You are sought by all, yet no ambition takes you; the honour thrust upon you is more burdensome. You flee the uproars of Rome and Byzantium and the walls broken by arrow-bearing Titus. The wall of Alexander and of Antioch holds you not; you spurn the Byrsa-roofed house of Dido, you scorn the populous fields of marsh-dwelling Ravenna and those that take their name from the wool-bearing sow. This corner pleases you, and a poor man's retreat, and a hut whose roof was pressed low with straw. Here you yourself build a temple venerable to God, having yourself first been made by your body a temple of God. Here ended the course of your life and your journey: a double crown remains for your toil. Now the thousands of the holy paradise stand around you; now Abraham, your fellow-pilgrim, holds you; now you enter the homeland, but the one from which Adam fell; now you may go to the fount of your own godhead.

[328674] 7.17.3. See, as you had enjoined, the rites that remain we have paid in full to the buried man; but if in turn it is fitting for brothers, friends, and fellow-soldiers to comply with the commands of charity, in your turn, I pray, do you too, by the institutions in which you excel, undertake to console his disciples, and swiftly form the wavering rule of the abandoned brothers according to the statutes of the fathers of Lérins or of Grigny; of which discipline, if any are rebels, do you yourself chastise; if any are followers, do you yourself praise together.

[329240] 7.17.4. The holy Auxanius is indeed seen to be set over them; who, as you know, being somewhat more than is just both weak in body and modest in disposition, and thereby readier to obey than to command, requires that you be asked that he himself come as master of the monastery under your own mastership, and that, if any of the younger ones should despise him as unskilled or faint-hearted, he may feel, through you alone, that both are not contemned with impunity. Why many words? Do you wish to learn in a few what I want? I ask that brother Auxanius be abbot over the congregation, but you over the abbot. Farewell.

[329861] 7.18.1. From you the beginning, with you it shall end; for I have sent the requested work, the copies hastily chosen, which on this account came few into my hands, because, while I meditated nothing about the writing of this little book, things hitherto unkept cannot be found. Indeed these few, which are also slight, I quickly finished, although my mind, once spurred, did not yet cease to wish to write—keeping diligently this kind of moderation, that the text of the letters should not be drawn out, if the number were shortened.