WORK: Letters  (slug: sidonius-apollinaris-letters-727be6)

CHAPTER: 01-letters



[110098] 3.3.9. But why do I prattle of these things a little more than is just—I who have presumed not to weave a complete history of your labours, but to make a memorial in part, that you might the more believe the prayers of your own people, to whose ailing expectation no remedies will heal more wholesomely and swiftly than your arrival? Therefore, if you yield anything to the entreaties of our countrymen, make haste straightway to sound the retreat into your fatherland, and quickly take away your constant attendance from the dangerous familiarity of kings, whose intimacy each most experienced man rightly compares to the nature of flames, which, as removed a little from themselves they give light, so brought too near themselves they burn. Farewell.

[110852] Sidonius to his friend Felix, greetings.

[110894] 3.4.1. Gozolas, a Jew by birth, a dependant of your eminence—whose person would be at heart to me also, were not his sect a thing of contempt—delivers my letter, which I wrote out grandly anxious; for the arms of the nations poured around us terrify our town as a kind of barrier of their frontier. So, set in the midst, a lamentable prey of peoples that rival one another, suspected by the Burgundians, neighbours to the Goths, we lack neither the wrath of attackers nor the envy of defenders.

[111390] 3.4.2. But of this elsewhere. Meanwhile, if at least with you things are right, it is well. For we are not of such a breast that, although we ourselves are punished with open penalties on account of the hidden things of our crimes, we should not wish things to go prosperously even anywhere; for it is certain that he is no less a captive of vices than of enemies who has not, even amid evil times, kept good wishes. Farewell.

[111818] Sidonius to his friend Hypatius, greetings.

[111863] 3.5.1. If the distinguished Donidius, an admirer and reverer of your character, had had regard only to the reckoning of his own domestic advantage, your good faith would suffice abundantly and to spare for his interests, even if no intercessor were added. But he was led by his love for me to make me request what he had himself by his own means obtained; and so now this addition accrues to your honour, that we are made two debtors, although yet one of us obtains the benefit.

[112343] 3.5.2. He desires that the desolate half of the Eborolacan estate—even before the barbarians desolate, and which now looks to the rights of a patrician house—be joined, by your support, to his own right. Nor is he led to this bargain by the spur of cupidity, but by regard for ancestral remembrance. Since the whole of that farm looked, as the dominion of his own family, to the death of his stepfather, who lately departed this life; but now the man, not coveting another's, sparing of his own, is distressed by the loss of an old possession alienated from himself not so much by the damage as by the shame; and that he should attempt to redeem it, he is compelled not by the vice of avarice but by the necessity of modesty.

[113070] 3.5.3. Deign to grant to his wishes, my prayers, and your own character, that, by your patronage, he may attain to the entirety of that estate—of which, since his parents' property is known to himself and even crept over among the rudiments of his joyful infancy, as to have recovered it would be little profitable, so not to have earned it would seem too slothful. But I shall be so bound by your indulgence as if it profited my own property peculiarly—whatever my brother in age, my son in profession, my fellow-citizen in standing, my friend in good faith shall have received. Farewell.

[113661] Sidonius to his friend Eutropius, greetings.

[113707] 3.6.1. If of our old fellowship in service, if of the favour renewed since then day by day, your good faith rightly remembers at present, assuredly you understand that, as you ascend to the summits of dignities, so we to those of our desires. For we all so congratulate you on your high office that we reckon raised through it no more your house than our friendship. Witness is that deliberation in which the incitements of my exhortation availed not a little.

[114169] 3.6.2. By which you could scarcely be induced to join the prefecture to philosophy, when the wrestling-school of the Platonists, your fellows clinging to the doctrines of Plotinus, had snatched you into the profound leisure of an untimely quiet—of which discipline I then asserted that the free profession would be when you owed nothing to your family. For, moreover, that contempt of public service was thought nearer to sloth, to which men of the good party boast that they cannot, rather than will not, ascend.

[114684] 3.6.3. Therefore—what it is right should be done in the first place—we give abundant thanks to Christ, who, as he hitherto adorned the state of your loftiness with the nobility of your parents, so now crowns it with a parity of titles; and at the same time, the hopes of our minds being raised, it is right henceforth to hope better things. Certainly there is a frequent saying of the provincials, that a good year is to be reckoned not so much from great fruits as from great powers. On which account it is yours, my honoured lord, to reward our expectation with suitable arrangements. For, mindful of your origin, the whole community of the nobles has persuaded itself that, so long as the family of the Sabini rules us, the family of the Sabiniani is not to be feared. Farewell.

[115467] Sidonius to his friend Felix, greetings.

[115509] 3.7.1. It is long since you abstained from letters. So each of us keeps his own custom: I prattle, you keep silence. Whence, too, a man distinguished in the other offices of good faith as you are, I reckon it a kind of virtue that you cannot be wearied by so much leisure. Will you indeed never be moved by regard for our old intimacy, so that at last you may draw back your foot from the purpose of continued silence? Or do you not know that not to answer a chatterer is an affront? You keep silence, whether amid libraries or amid law-gowns, and expect from me the office of beggarly speech, who, if you well perceive, have for writing rather facility than means.

[116176] 3.7.2. At least let even our fear make matter for your pen, and remember to load the hands of travellers with papers, that the care of friends may be relieved; and hasten to tell whether, by God going before, the quaestor Licinianus has opened to our mutual alarm any door of security. He is indeed a person, as they report, greater in his coming than in great expectation, more sublime in inspection than in report, and remarkable for all the gifts of fortune and of nature.

[116653] 3.7.3. His censorship is supreme, his courtesy equal, and his prudence and good faith befitting both the man sent and the man sending; nothing affected or feigned, and to the weight of his words a true severity rather than an imitation of severity; and not, as very many, who, when they allege things entrusted to them distrustfully, wish to seem to have acted more cautiously; nor yet of that number, as they say, who, peddling the secrets of the princes who direct them, court the barbarians, that things may go well rather with the envoy than with the embassy.

[117218] 3.7.4. This tenor of the man's character favourable rumour has brought us. Send word swiftly, if indeed the deeds square with the sayings, that for so long they may take breath from their sleepless station whom from the walls' watches neither a snowy day nor a moonless and stormy night persuades to sound the retreat; because, even if the barbarian withdraws into winter quarters, they rather put off than abandon the dread once rooted in their hearts. Soothe us with prosperous things, since our cause is not so far from you as our country. Farewell.

[117772] Sidonius to his friend Eucherius, greetings.

[117818] 3.8.1. I revere the ancients, yet not so as to set after them the virtues or merits of my coevals. Nor, if the Roman commonwealth has flowed down to these extremities of misery, so that it never rewards those zealous for it, do my ages on that account fail to bring forth Bruti and Torquati. To what end these things? you ask. Of you, to you, is my speech, most effective sir, to whom the commonwealth owes what history praises as paid by the aforesaid men.

[118277] 3.8.2. Wherefore let those ignorant of affairs suspend their rash judgements, nor persist either to look up too much to the men of the past or to look down on those of the present; since it easily becomes clear that the commonwealth delays its benefits, that you deserve them—although it ought not greatly to be wondered at, when a nation of federates not only uncivilly administers the Roman forces but even fundamentally uproots them, if of noble and military men, and warlike beyond either our party's hope or the adverse party's opinion, not so much the deeds as the rewards have been lacking. Farewell.

[118886] Sidonius to his friend Riothamus, greetings.

[118932] 3.9.1. The custom of our speech is kept; for I mix complaint with greeting—not at all studying this, that my pen should be courteous in the salutations and harsh in the pages, but because there always befall things about which it is agreed that a man of my place or order is set at odds: if he speaks, he sins; if he is silent, he suffers. But I myself look upon the burden of your modesty, whose shame has always been this, that you should blush for the faults of others.

[119406] 3.9.2. The bearer of this letter, humble, obscure, and despicable even to the loss of an innocent helplessness, deplores that his own slaves have been led away by the Britons who secretly solicited them. It is uncertain to me whether the charge is sure; but if, between persons set face to face, you untie the objections with even mind, I think this toil-worn man can prove what he objects—if, that is, amid sharp, armed, tumultuous men, defiant in valour, number, and fellowship, a man alone, unarmed, abject, a rustic, a stranger, a pauper, can be heard in equity and good. Farewell.

[119993] Sidonius to his friend Tetradius, greetings.

[120039] 3.10.1. Our young men add very much of praise to their own character as often as, doubting about the merits of their affairs, they have recourse to the counsels of the skilled, as now the most distinguished Theodorus, noble at home indeed, but more highborn by the repute of a most modest manner of life, who, by my letter, sets out to your letter—that is, to the purest fount of knowledge—with laudable eagerness, not only to find there himself what he may learn, but perhaps also to bring back thence what he may teach.

[120562] 3.10.2. To whom, against the powerful and the factious, if your skill did not abundantly aid him, the prudence of counsel would suffice. Answer, we beseech—unless, however, the joint prayers of both of us shall be reckoned by you a burden or a weariness—by your own judgement, on my testimony; and prop up the substance and the wavering cause of the suppliant with the wholesomeness of a healing reply. Farewell.

[120976] Sidonius to his friend Simplicius, greetings.

[121023] 3.11.1. Even if so great an adversity attends our desire that even now you are grudged to our gaze, you are not on that account such a man, best of men, of whose character the things lofty in the telling should lie hidden from us; so do all our countrymen, and likewise our chief men, attend you with concordant praise as the most excellent head of a household of the best and most exact party.

[121419] 3.11.2. There supports this verdict about you of good men either a son-in-law so chosen or a daughter so brought up; in whose union your prayers have brought you so happy a controversy that you may doubt whether you have prevailed by judgement or by training. But yet hence chiefly, both venerable parents, be secure: you surpass the rest for this reason, that your children have passed you by. Therefore grant pardon for the first letters, which, as not yet to have sent was sloth, so I fear lest to have sent be loquacity. Indeed our office will lack the blemish of talkativeness if, by the example of an answering address, you absolve the impudence of the present page. Farewell.

[122103] Sidonius to his friend Secundus, greetings.

[122148] 3.12.1. The tomb of my grandfather, your great-grandfather, yesterday—alas the grief!—a profane hand had almost violated; but God was at hand, that so great a wrong should not be perpetrated. The field itself, long since filled both with the ashes of pyres and with corpses, had for a long time now received no trench; but yet the earth, which is drawn over the buried, had returned to its former level, stretched out, the heaps settling under the weight of snow or the long flux of rains: which was the cause that the corpse-bearers dared, with their funeral mattocks, to defile the place as though vacant of bodies.

[122767] 3.12.2. What more? Already the turf was black instead of green, already fresh clods above the ancient sepulchre, when, chancing to be going to the city of Auvergne, I caught sight of the public crime from the brow of a neighbouring hill, and, hurling myself with loosened rein as much over level as over broken ground, and even thus impatient of the slightest delay, before I arrived, I checked the bold deed with a clamour going before me. While those caught in the crime hesitate whether to slip away or to stand, I came upon them too (I confess the error): I could not defer the punishments of the captives, but above the very covering of our old man I racked the robbers, so far as could suffice for the care of the survivors, for the security of the dead.

[123529] 3.12.3. Moreover, in that I reserved nothing for our bishop, foreknowing my own case and his person, I took counsel for the common good, lest either this should be avenged more mildly than was just, or that should avenge more severely than was just; to whom, however, when I had communicated the whole order of the matter, as one making satisfaction from the road, the holy and just man gave glory to my anger, when I asked nothing more than pardon, pronouncing, after the manner of the elders, that men guilty of so great a rashness were seen rightly slain.

[124089] 3.12.4. But lest anything in future should be permitted to chances, which we ought to shun by example, I ask that straightway, even in my absence, by your care but at my cost, the scattered heap may rise again into a mass, which a smoothed slab may cover. I have left with the venerable Gaudentius the price of the stone and the wage of the work. This song, indeed, which follows, I made the last night—not, I believe, an unsuitable one, since I was not a little intent on my journey.

[124575] 3.12.5. Which I beg may be quickly set on the tablet, of whatever quality it is; but see that the stone-cutter make no fault in the marble; which fault, whether from industry or through carelessness, a malicious reader will ascribe to me rather than to the mason. But if, with pious zeal, you take care of what is asked, I shall give thanks as if nothing of praise or glory accrued to you also—you to whom, your uncle removed, the entire care of the present office would have remained, in the degree of kinship.

[125088] A late song, after uncles and a father, I, a grandson not unworthy of his grandsire, have dedicated, lest perchance in after time, O traveller, not knowing the reverence due to the buried, you should tread the earth that has not been raised.

[125331] Here lies the prefect Apollinaris, who, after rightly governing the Gauls, was received into the bosom of a mourning fatherland, most wise and most useful, a cultivator of country, of warfare, and of the forum, and, by an example perilous to others, free under tyrant lords.

[125607] But this is proved his greatest dignity, that, cleansing his brow with the cross, his limbs with the font, he first of the number of his fathers renounced the sacrilegious rites.

[125787] This is the first glory, this the proud virtue, to go before in hope those whom you join in honour, and to surpass yonder, in merits, those parents who here are equal to you in titles.

[125973] 3.12.6. I know indeed that the quality of the epitaph does not answer to the learning of its author; but a skilled soul does not refuse musical funeral-rites. To you also it ought not to seem slow, that I, a third and fourth heir, pay it, since, the cycle of so many years being rolled round, we have learned that the great Alexander made offering to the shade of Achilles, and Julius Caesar paid the rites to Hector as his own. Farewell.

[126413] Sidonius to his friend Apollinaris, greetings.

[126461] 3.13.1. I singularly approve, rejoice, and marvel that, from love of chastity, you flee the company of the unchaste, especially those with whom there is nothing weighed, nothing holy, in the seeking and prattling of foul things, and who, because by shameless words they defile the reverence of public ears, think themselves grandly witty. Understand that the chief standard-bearer of this vileness in our country is Gnatho.

[126886] 3.13.2. For this whirlpool of a man is of the cobblers of fables, of the concocters of crimes, of the doublers of sinister opinions—talkative himself yet not witty, ridiculous yet not gay, arrogant yet not steadfast, curious yet not perspicacious, and, with his unbecoming, affected charm, the more boorish; courting present times, carping at the past, disdaining the future; of a benefit, if he is about to ask one, importunate in the asking, a disparager of what is denied, a cunning contriver of recasting what is received, querulous when dunned, garrulous when it is restored; but if he is to be asked, a feigner of readiness, a dissembler of the request, a vaunter of what he has lent, a publisher of what was hidden, a slanderer of the man who delayed, a denier of what was paid.

[127673] 3.13.3. A hater of fasts, a follower of feasts; bringing forth a praiseworthy sentence not about one who lives well but about one who feeds well; among which things yet himself most avaricious, whom no good bread feeds so much as another man's bread, eating this alone at home, if he has sent ahead anything from the dainties snatched amid the storms of slaps. But surely the man's frugality is not in all to be passed over in silence, praiseworthy as it is: he fasts as often as he is not invited; but even so, with parasite's levity, excusing himself if he is invited, spying out if he is shunned, reproaching if he is shut out, exulting if he is admitted, biding his time if he is beaten.

[128366] 3.13.4. When he has reclined at table, he is straightway carried, if he eats slowly, into rapine; if he is quickly filled, into tears; if he thirsts, into complaints; if he is made drunk, into vomiting; if he wearies others, into insults; if he is wearied, into furies—altogether like the filth of a sewer, which the more it is stirred, the more foul it is. So living, a pleasure to few, a love to none, a laughingstock to all; a burster of bladders and a breaker of canes; greedy of drinking, greedier of detracting; with rabid mouth alike breathing mire, foaming wine, speaking poison, he makes it doubtful whether the more rotten, the more drunken, or the more wicked he is to be esteemed.

[129060] 3.13.5. But you say: the quality of his body colours the disgraces of his mind, and the appearance of his person deprecates the ineptitude of his mind—an elegant man, no doubt, and most graceful, whose person is to be admired by those who behold it. But in truth that person of his is more sordid and more deformed than a funeral corpse which, the torches applied, half-burnt, and presently, the pile of brands settling, rolled off, even the by-now disdainful undertaker shudders to give back to the pyre. Besides this, he carries eyes that lack the light, which, in place of a Stygian marsh, roll tears through the darkness.

[129687] 3.13.6. He carries ears too, elephantine in their monstrousness, whose two-fold opening an ulcerous skin surrounds, with stony knots and tufaceous warts jutting out from their wet along the curved margin. He bears a nose too, which, since it is ample in its openings and tight along its ridge, so opens to horror that it is narrowed to smelling. He thrusts forth a mouth too, leaden in its lips, beast-like in its gape, festering in its gums, boxwood-coloured in its teeth, which a mephitic odour, breathed frequently from the hollow of the rotting molars, befouls, and which a belching from the dishes of yesterday is heaped up by the eructation of food and by the bilge of overflowing dinners.

[130384] 3.13.7. He produces a forehead too, which by a most foul gesture folds the skin and stretches the brows. He nourishes a beard too, which, now growing grey with age, yet is made black by Sulla's disease. In short, the whole face of the wretch is so pallid as though, hour by hour, saddened by ghostly shades. I pass over the rest of his bulk, bound by gout, dissolved by fatness; I pass over his brain, furrowed with frequent weals, which it is agreed is covered little more by hair than by scars; I pass over that, for the shortness of his neck, the joinings of his shoulder-blades cling to his back-turned occiput.

[131001] 3.13.8. I pass over that honour has fallen from his shoulders, grace from his arms, strength from his upper arms; I pass over his gout-ridden hands wrapped in the greasy rags of poultices as if in boxing-gloves. I pass over that, fenced about at his captive sides by the goatish and sour caves of his armpits, he makes deadly, with the fanned plague of a twofold Ampsanctus, the nostrils of those who sit about. I pass over that his breasts, broken by the weight of their fat, hang down—breasts which it would be foul on a man's chest even to jut out, but these to have fallen like a mother's udders. I pass over that the hanging nets of his curved belly afford, to his genitals—since they are feeble, twice shameful—a covering more shameful by their foul wrinkles.

[131768] 3.13.9. Now why should I here recall his back and spine? Although, bursting out from the joints of its vertebrae, the curvature of the ribs weaves the chest's coffer, none the less this whole branching frame of bones lies hidden under one, as it were, sea of an overflowing abdomen. I pass over the corpulence of his loins and buttocks, compared to whose thickness the belly is reckoned slender. I pass over his dry and bandy thigh, his huge knees, his delicate hams, his horny legs, his glassy ankles, his small toes, his large feet; and although he bristles with such distorted lineaments, and through a manifold pestilence is bloodless and half-alive, and neither, carried, sits, nor, supported, walks—yet he is more execrable in his words than in his limbs.

[132531] 3.13.10. For although he labours under an itch of dishonourable speech, yet he is chiefly to be guarded against in the secrets of patrons, of whom he is a praiser in prosperity, a betrayer in doubtful times; and if the reckoning of the moment solicits to publish the hidden things of one's intimates, presently through this Spartacus whatever things are shut are broken open, and whatever are barred are unbarred; so that those houses which he cannot assail with the engines of open enmity he attacks with the mines of clandestine treachery. By this contrivance our Daedalus builds up the summit of friendships, who, as he is joined to his comrades like a Theseus amid prosperity, so afterward, like a Proteus, slips away from them amid adversity.

[133280] 3.13.11. Therefore you will do according to my wish if you join yourself to the fellowship of such men not even in a first meeting—especially of those to whose prostituted and theatrical speech modesty sends ahead no reins, no bars; for those in whom, boasting without the brightness of honour, the unbridled tongue is polluted with the dregs of talkative petulance, have a conscience too most befouled. In short, it more easily happens that someone speaking serious things lives obscenely, than that one can be shown who is alike wicked in words and upright in character. Farewell.

[133864] Sidonius to his friend Placidus, greetings.

[133909] 3.14.1. Although your own Gratianopolis holds you, yet I have learned, by the faithful report of old guests, that you deign to deem my trifles—whether finished in prose work or made tuneful by the poet's pen—worthy more than the reading of stored volumes. I rejoice in this very thing, that I have recognized your leisure to be occupied with my little papers; but I well understand that, with your character, it is not the effect of the work that strikes out this pleasure, but the author's affection; and therefore I owe the more, since you give to friendship the point of glory which you would deny to the composition.

[134531] 3.14.2. But of the other disparagers of our study, what I should fully pronounce I have not yet deliberated. For he who seems to himself most learned re-reads sound and unsound composition with almost equal appetite, no more desiring the lofty that he may praise it than the despised that he may laugh at it. And in this way the knowledge, the display, the propriety of the Latin tongue is held in the greatest contempt by the verdicts of the idle, whose scurrility carelessness accompanies—wishing to read only that which it may carp at; so it does not use letters, in that it abuses them. Farewell.

[135133] Sidonius to his friend Probus, greetings.

[135176] 4.1.1. The sister who is mine is the wife who is yours: hence between us there is the highest and chiefest tie of kinship—and that indeed a cousin's, not a brother's, brotherhood, which most often loves itself the more purely, strongly, and unmixedly. For, the strife over property between brothers having first been laid to rest, those who are now born of brothers contend with one another over nothing; and hence often the affection among cousins is greater, because the feud ceases with the division, while the affection does not cease from the common seed. A second bond of minds was added to us from the parity of our studies, since we feel, blame, and praise the same things in letters, and any composition pleases or displeases us alike.

[135922] 4.1.2. Although I claim too much for myself in weighing my own judgement against yours. For who of the young or the old does not know that you were my own particular master, when you seemed to be a master shared by us in common—and that, whatever the heroic poet made lofty, the comic playful, the lyric tuneful, the orator declamatory, the historian truthful, the satirist figurative, the grammarian regular, the panegyrist applaudable, the sophist serious, the epigrammatist wanton, the commentator lucid, the jurist obscure, in their manifold ways, that you handed on to each in every way—unless someone lacked talent and himself? Good God! How our fathers gloried in this, when they saw that by Christ's help you could teach, I could learn; and that not only did you do what you could, but you also willed what you did, and were therefore pronounced good no less than skilled!

[136804] 4.1.3. And truly, within the household of Eusebius, a certain mint of such disciplines had received you, formed on whose philosophic anvil you now unfolded to us the various reckonings of things and of words, with even the very man who had taught you approving; now, as Plato the disciple, now well-nigh superior, under Socrates, so you, under our Eusebius, a craftsman dialectician, atticized amid the Aristotelian categories, while he still seasoned our age—mobile, tender, raw—now boiling it down with chastening severity, now flavouring it with the wholesomeness of his precepts.

[137389] 4.1.4. But of what kind, good God, and how precious, were these things—which, if anyone, to play the philosopher, were to carry off either to the marsh-dwelling Sygambri, or to the Caucasus-born Alani, or to the mare-milking Geloni, the horny hearts and icy fibres of those bestial and rigid nations would beyond doubt be softened and thawed, nor would we laugh at, despise, and dread their ferocity and stupidity, which, after the manner of beasts, plays the fool, grows brutish, and is inflamed.

[137888] 4.1.5. Therefore, since both affinity and studies have joined us, I pray, in whatever place you are, that you keep the rights of friendship unshaken, and that long, even if we are absent in dwelling, we may be present in affection: whose unviolated part, so far as concerns you, shall by us be made everlasting for an age, if any of life remains. Farewell.

[138246] Claudianus to Sidonius the Bishop, greetings.

[138293] 4.2.1. If it were possible to be done that I should meet you, my lord, even sometimes and a little, I should not inquire from anywhere the wishes or needs of any persons that could be of use to me in the matter of my due; since the power of revisiting is, in many ways and by wretched causes alike, cut off. Indeed the means of writing either rarely is fittingly at hand, or is not at hand at all. Whether these very things are pardonable or not, you yourself will have judged.

[138772] 4.2.2. Moreover indeed, that very often your writings are imparted to others, who neither seek that very thing as much as I myself perhaps do, nor deserve it more, I do not think is committed with impunity against the laws of friendship. This, too, I shall make a grievously silent reproach: that those little books which you do not refuse to be ennobled with my name you have never imparted by any rescript. But perhaps you have no empty time, which you, a little, might spend upon a very great friendship.

[139281] 4.2.3. With what business do you ever swell, anywhere, in which you are entangled, but that it turns back to the advantages of others? When by entreaty you appease God, you reconcile the same not only to friends but to strangers also. When you search out the mysteries of the heavenly scriptures, the more studiously you imbue yourself, the more abundantly you pour out learning into others. When you lavish your wealth on the uses of the needy, you indeed take counsel chiefly for yourself, but for others also. Accordingly, nothing—plainly, assuredly nothing—is so unfruitful of all your actions that it bears rich fruit to you alone and not to many others with you.

[139951] 4.2.4. No occasion, therefore, of anyone's impediment can be alleged even falsely, why I myself, your special and intimate friend, should bear no fruit from my special one, from whom strangers too, very many, take much; but, as I suppose, after the form of the evangelical giver, what you do not give to a hungry friend you will give to a shameless knocker. Moreover, if you still grow hard as usual, I shall do something you will regret, since, if you sin further by keeping silent, I shall straightway avenge myself by writing; for it is without doubt that you are as much to be punished by my writing as I myself am punished by your silence. Farewell.

[140607] Sidonius to his friend Claudianus, greetings.

[140654] 4.3.1. You pronounce, my honoured lord, that an offence is committed against the rights of intimacy, in that, as regards the greeting owed you, I long abstain from pen and tablets, and that henceforth no palms of travellers has my paper burdened, which should impart to you the homage of an earnest salutation. You conjecture these things beyond what is fair, if you reckon that any mortal—who yet has it at heart to converse in Latin—is not afraid when, written, he is brought into the examination of your ears; of your ears, I say, to whose skill—if the prerogative of the ages run down to this time does not overwhelm me—I would not match the thunderbolt of Frontonian gravity or of Apuleian weight, beside which the Varros, whether of Atax or of Reate, the Plinies, whether the uncle or Secundus, set at present would play the rustic.

[141494] 4.3.2. This judgement of mine is supported by that volume which you, most rich in the knowledge of things and of words, published on the state of the soul. In which, while you make a preface to my name, I received this gift above all: that the fame of my person, which it was not worth the labour to make famous by the titles of its own books, was perpetuated by the benefit of yours. But what, great God, and how great a work that is—shut up by its subject, conspicuous by its declamation, blocked by its proposition, unlocked by its disputation; and, although thorny by reason of the hooked points of its syllogisms, yet softened by the flower of a vernal eloquence!

[142164] 4.3.3. There the words are new, because old, and compared with which even the style of the old literature might rightly be made to seem antiquated; and—what is more precious—that whole composition is so terse, cut into clauses, that it flows on; which, ample in matter and strict in sentences, you would feel teaches more than it speaks. In short, this was once, and not unjustly, reckoned the chief eloquence, whose care—comprising many things in few—was rather to fill the cause than the page.

[142661] 4.3.4. But truly in your books, what manner of thing is this too, that a continuous maturity admits tenderness, and inserts a seasonable sweetness amid its censure, so that it suddenly fosters the reader's attention, wearied through the threshed-out members of the disciplines of philosophy, with pleasurable digressions, as with certain harbours of its own sea? O book powerful in many ways, O eloquence not of a thin but of a subtle wit, which neither swells with hyperbolic gushings nor is thinned by depressed tapinosis!

[143187] 4.3.5. Besides this, a unique and singular learning, remarkable in the assertion of diverse matters, whose custom it is to philosophize about each art with the masters of each, and which, if chance demands, does not refuse to hold with Orpheus the plectrum, with Aesculapius the staff, with Archimedes the rod, with Euphrates the horoscope, with Perdix the compasses, with Vitruvius the plumb-line; and which has never ceased to investigate with Thales the seasons, with Atlas the stars, with Zetus weights, with Chrysippus numbers, with Euclid measures.

[143743] 4.3.6. In short, no one in my age was able so to affirm what he wished; since, while he exerts himself against the man he speaks against, he rightly claims for himself the token of the character and studies of both tongues: he perceives like Pythagoras, divides like Socrates, unfolds like Plato, involves like Aristotle; like Aeschines he flatters, like Demosthenes he is angry; he blooms like Hortensius, he burns like Cethegus; he urges like Curio, he delays like Fabius; he feigns like Crassus, he dissembles like Caesar; he advises like Cato, he dissuades like Appius, he persuades like Tullius.

[144345] 4.3.7. Now if one comes for comparison to the most holy fathers: he instructs like Jerome, he destroys like Lactantius, he builds up like Augustine; he is exalted like Hilary, he is humbled like John; like Basil he rebukes, like Gregory he consoles; like Orosius he flows, like Rufinus he is restrained; like Eusebius he narrates, like Eucherius he stirs; like Paulinus he provokes, like Ambrose he perseveres.

[144757] 4.3.8. Now indeed, if you ask what I think of your hymn: it is concise, copious, sweet, exalted, and it surpasses any lyric dithyrambs whatever in poetic charm and historical truth; and this is your own peculiar excellence in it, that, the feet of the metres being kept, the syllables of the feet, and the natures of the syllables, a poor verse shuts up, within the limit of its own space, rich words; nor does the brevity of the cramped song banish the length of the bedizened speech. So it is easy for you, with little trochees and littler pyrrhics, to surpass not only the molossic and anapaestic groupings of three, but even the four-fold junctures of epitrites and paeons.

[145436] 4.3.9. The amplitude of the discourse outgrows the regular straits, and, like a great gem in a little gold, is scarcely contained and flashes forth like the spirit of a powerful horse, which, neighing—if it be held, by the law of the bridle, among wastes or rough ground—you understand to lack not so much the course as the field. What more? With me for judge, in both kinds of speaking neither will Athens be judged so Attic nor the Muses so musical—if only a too-long sloth has not taken from me the means even of judging. For while, under the cover of an imposed profession, I gradually seek a new manner of writing and unlearn the old by leaps, of a good orator I have nothing more left than that I have begun the more to be a bad poet.

[146178] 4.3.10. Therefore, I pray, grant me the favour of this offence, that, mindful of myself for a little while, I more rarely mingle my dry little vein with your river. Your trumpet the whole world, so far as it extends, will rightly venerate, which it is agreed sang with a twofold felicity, since it found neither rival nor equal, when long ago it ranged through the ears and mouths of peoples, with me too carrying it about. But for us it is great audacity if we so much as prattle even among municipal and chair-bound orators or forensic ranters, who, even when they make their perorations—saving the peace of their betters—are, a most numerous crowd, occupied with most unlettered letters. For you, to whom, whether it please you to alternate free or bound speech, it is at hand to thunder both ways, are among the few whom kindly favour has loved—the few who shall be changed. Farewell.

[147068] Sidonius to his friends Simplicius and Apollinaris, greetings.

[147132] 4.4.1. Here at last is my promise, your expectation—Faustinus, a father of a household noble at home, and now to be numbered among the greatest ornaments of a country shared by me and by him. He is my brother by the parity of birth, my friend by the likeness of minds. Often have I mixed serious matters with him, often jests too; and when, long ago, we were young men, in ball, in dice, in leaping, running, hunting, swimming, there was always to us both a holy contention, because affection remained. He is indeed somewhat older than I, yet only so much that it was not so much necessary to honour him as a delight to imitate him; and at the same time he himself was the more taken with this, that I understood myself to be loved by him rather than, as it were, courted. But by the advance of age and by his clerical service, when he was lovable before, he has now begun to be venerable.

[148023] 4.4.2. Through him I send greeting, desiring, by Christ's help, to see you as soon as ever possible, if the public state permits. Wherefore, unless my desire seems burdensome, when the aforesaid returns, I shall be made acquainted with the state of your places and times. It is my fixed resolve to struggle through the opposing difficulties of private occupations, and to assign to the embracing of your hearts a duty however long—if, however (what even now we fear), no greater force confounds my arrangements.

[148536] 4.4.3. Which it is not unfitting that you too, with brother Faustinus, as the times warn, deliberate, the matter being shared in conference. Whom, because I love, I have sent as one who loves me: if he answers to my judgement, I give thanks; moreover, since a good man is so judged by all, no man is the worse if he is not the best. Farewell.

[148880] Sidonius to his friend Felix, greetings.

[148922] 4.5.1. A repeated greeting repeats its bearer: your Gozolas—may God grant that he be ours—is made for the second time the carrier of my letters. Therefore take away from both of us the shame we share; for if you still intend to keep silence, all will judge unworthy both me, to whom, and him, through whom, you ought to write.

[149250] 4.5.2. Of the state of the times I now ask nothing, as before, lest it be a burden to your character, if you should signify adverse things, when prosperous ones do not follow. For since it does not befit you to send false reports, and likewise things to be wished for are wanting to relate, I flee to learn, by the tidings of good men, whatever that evil is. Farewell.

[149620] Sidonius to his friend Apollinaris, greetings.

[149668] 4.6.1. Through Bishop Faustinus—bound to me no less by the fellowship of our old companionship than by the communion of his new profession—I had charged him by word with certain things to be guarded against: that you obeyed the word I rejoice. Since to the prudent it is inwardly inborn to avoid chance accidents, as likewise it is absurd, if the outcome opposes bold undertakings, to rise up into complaints and to turn the blameworthy issues of ill-advised arrangements into the defaming of the uncertain things of chance.

[150194] 4.6.2. To what end these things? you say. I confess that I came too much in fear, lest, in a time of public fear, you should not fear, and the unshaken security, to this age, of a solid house should, for an untimely devotion, tremble at the tempestuous incursions of enemies, and the longed-for solemnity should begin to grow cheap among the tenderness of matronly minds—although in their breasts a native holiness has so measured out for itself a peculiar dwelling that, if anything had befallen them as they travelled, they would have rejoiced that they had endured a kind of martyrdom for a martyr. But I, to whom a lesser innocence makes greater diffidence, in this doubtful matter more gladly cling to the more cautious counsel, and am not with difficulty attached even to those who fear safe things.

[151001] 4.6.3. Accordingly it was well done that you wholesomely deferred the doubtful journey, and that the state of so great a household was not within the cast of so great a die. And although the journey, once begun, might have prospered, yet I will by no means cast a white pebble for a counsel of this kind, whose rashness cannot be absolved except by the benefit of good fortune. The Divinity will indeed grant such vows to be advanced by worthy successes, and it will be permitted yet to remember these terrors amid the pleasantness of peace; but present things make those cautious whom future things shall see secure.

[151620] 4.6.4. Meanwhile, for the present, the bearer of my letter sighs over certain damages inflicted on him through your Genesius. If you perceive that his complaint does not differ from the truth, grant, I pray, reformation to the man who convicts, swiftness to the stranger; but if punishable envy fans a calumny, in that vengeance has already gone before the man assailed, since the impudent suitor, worn out by cost and journey, sweats out the inconveniences of a suit rashly proposed—and this in the greatest harshness of winter and the highest heaps of snows and crusts of ice; which time, so far as concerns the followers of lawsuits, is indeed often short for a hearing, but always long for an injury. Farewell.

[152336] Sidonius to his friend Simplicius, greetings.

[152383] 4.7.1. He is wont to say "You warn one already running" who is asked to do what he was going to do even unasked. You may inquire, perhaps, to what these prefatory words tend. The bearer of this letter earnestly entreats that he may carry to you a letter from me; his journey to you having been learned by us, he was in any case to be entreated for this very thing, even if he had kept silent; for it is your love rather than regard for the bearer that has drawn out this office. Moreover, this very man reckons that he, who granted, has earned a benefit, although again and again he received what he asked—but as one by no means recognizing the rights of our friendships.

[153056] 4.7.2. Whence, although absent, I easily conjecture with what sudden amazement he will be struck when, deigned admittance for our sake, he understands that he has begged for my page more idly than for the delivery of it. I seem to see how all things will be new to a man not facetious to the point of envy, when, a stranger, he will be invited to a dwelling; alarmed, to conversation; a rustic, to gaiety; a pauper, to a table; and when, whereas among men coarse and gorged with the surfeits of onions this man plays the common sort, there he will be entertained with such courtesy as if among Apician feasters and Byzantine carvers he had hitherto belched.

[153715] 4.7.3. Yet such and so great as he himself is, he has most abundantly made me partaker of a wished-for office. But although persons of this kind are often well-nigh despicable, yet in the cultivating of comrades by letters affection sustains much loss if it is recalled, by the meanness of the bearers, from the practice of more frequent address. Farewell.

[154073] Sidonius to his friend Evodius, greetings.

[154117] 4.8.1. When the courier delivered to me your letter, which confessed to certain friends that you would soon set out for Toulouse at the king's command, we too were seeking the country far removed from the town. Me indeed, at first light, the occasion of your page scarcely shook out of the clinging crowd of escorters who delayed me, that I might be able to satisfy your charge at least as a traveller, at least as a horseman.

[154545] 4.8.2. For the rest, at daybreak my household had gone before, to pitch the tent at eighteen miles, in which place many conveniences attend the loosening of one's little baggage: a cold spring on a wooded hill, a field below abounding in grass, a river before the eyes filled with many birds and fish; besides these, having a house joined to its bank—a new house, an old friend, to whose immense kindness you can set no measure, whether you yield or whether you refuse.

[155016] 4.8.3. So, our people having gone ahead to this place, when we had halted for your sake, that a boy might be sent back more quickly even from the head of the village, already two hours after noon had easily passed, already the grown sun, with its increasing ray, had drunk up the moisture of the dewy night: the heat and the thirst grew strong, and in the profound serenity there was, against the heat, only such cloud as the dust made for cover. Then the length of the way, displayed to those who looked over the green plain of the open country—since for this very reason we were to lunch late—was groaned over; for though it did not yet wear the travellers down with labour, yet it already terrified them with expectation.

[155742] 4.8.4. All which prefatory things, my lord brother, tend to this: that I may prove to you that I was not at leisure much, either in mind, or in body, or in time, when I obeyed your demands. So, to return now to the tenor of your letter: after the words which first brought a greeting, you asked this, that I should send an epigram ended in twelve verses, which could be fitted to a capacious shell, which through each side of its handles, to the outermost of its circuit, is hollowed from the wheel of its base with six flutings.

[156273] 4.8.5. Of which I think you intend to inscribe either the curved bellies with single verses, or, by a better counsel—if that should be more becoming—the curved heads; and, polished with this adornment, you arrange to offer it to Queen Ragnahild, about to prepare an invincible patronage for your vows and likewise your acts. I serve your injunctions as best I can, not as I wished; but first pardon your own fault, you who gave more space to the silversmith than to the poet, since beyond doubt it did not escape you that, within the workshop of men of letters, if the metrical anvil has produced any song, it is polished by a file no less strong and rasping. But to what end these things, or the like? Behold, now sing:

[156995] The shell which on the fish-bearing Triton bears Cytherea— let it not doubt, compared with this, to yield. We beg you, incline a little while your mistress' height, and, great patroness, receive a small gift, and do not gladly spurn Evodius your client, whom, making him great, you yourself will be the greater. So may the son too, for you—whose father, father-in-law, and husband is a king—be a king with his father and after his father. Happy the waters, which, enclosed in the light of the metal, yet foster the brighter face of their mistress! For when the queen deigns to dip her countenance herein, brightness is sent into the silver from her face.

[157651] If you are so far held by love of me that you do not blush to write these trifles, conceal the author, more rightly secure of your own part; for in such a forum, or Athenaeum, your dish will be more praised than my writing. Farewell.

[157886] Sidonius to his friend Industrius, greetings.

[157933] 4.9.1. I lately visited Vettius, an illustrious man, and inspected his daily doings most thoroughly, and as it were at leisure. Which, since I found them worthy to be known, I have judged not unworthy to be reported. In the first place—what we shall rightly set before his other praises—the household keeps unimpaired a chastity equal to its master's; the slaves useful: the country ones obedient, the town ones friendly, compliant, and content with their patron; a table feeding the guest no less than the client; great kindness, and greater sobriety.

[158487] 4.9.2. Those are the lighter things: that the man himself of whom we speak is second to none in training, watching, and parading horses, dogs, and hawks; the highest neatness in his garments, elegance in his belts, splendour in his trappings; a stately gait, a serious mind (the latter asserts his public good faith, the former his private dignity); a relaxation that does not corrupt, a rebuke that does not draw blood, and his severity of such a temper as is not loathsome but austere.

[158976] 4.9.3. Amid these things, a frequent reading of the sacred volumes, by which, while eating, he more often takes the food of the soul; he frequently reads the psalms, more frequently sings them; and by a new kind of life he fulfils the monk, not under the little cloak but under the war-cloak; he abstains from the flesh of wild beasts, he gives himself to coursing; and so, secretly and delicately religious, he uses the hunt and yet does not use the venison.

[159437] 4.9.4. His only little daughter, left as the solace of his widowhood after his wife's death, he rears with a grandsire's tenderness, a mother's diligence, a father's kindness; toward his household neither menacing in uttering speech, nor scornful in admitting counsel, nor too eager in investigating a fault; the state and condition of his subjects he rules not by lordship but by judgement; you would think that he does not possess his own house but rather administers it.

[159912] 4.9.5. Which industry and temperance of the man, observed, I judged to pertain also to the instruction of the rest, if such a life were even superficially published to others—to whose following all men of our profession would, most usefully, be incited, besides the habit by which meanwhile one is set above the present age; for—be it said with the peace of my order—if there shall be only single good things in single men, I more admire a man of priestly quality than a priest. Farewell.

[160402] Sidonius to his friend Industrius, greetings.

[160449] 4.10.1. I burst forth into a greeting, though late, my lord—I myself now for many years ungreeted—not daring to keep up the frequency of the old office, after the adversities of exile broke me, banished from the bounds of my native soil. Wherefore it is fitting that you too pardon those who blush, since it is fitting that the humbled follow humble ways, nor hold an equal constancy of intimacy with those to whom it might perhaps be shameless to spend more of love than of reverence. On this account, in short, I have now long been silent, and I bore it more patiently than gladly that you too were silent, when my son Heliodorus came hither.

[161095] 4.10.2. But you used to say, though in mockery, that you stood, as it were, in awe of my eloquence. That excuse, even if it had been true, had passed away; since, after the little book I finished—which is too little polished—I weave the rest of my letters again in everyday speech, although, careful, I am not made better; for it is not worth so much to polish formulas that will lack publication. For the rest, if you restore the manner of your affection to the old course of our conversations, we too shall run back into the ruts of our old loquacity; and besides this, eagerly, by Christ going before, wherever you may be—provided only that my patron, now returned, indulge it—we shall fly to you, that friendship may be invigorated by deeds, which, unused in words, had grown torpid. Farewell.

[161894] Sidonius to his friend Petreius, greetings.

[161939] 4.11.1. The loss of my age distresses me exceedingly, your uncle Claudianus being lately snatched from our eyes—I doubt whether they will hereafter behold any equal. For he was a man provident, prudent, learned, eloquent, keen, and the most ingenious of the men of his age, his place, his people, and one who unceasingly played the philosopher, his religion being kept safe; and although he did not nourish hair and beard, now derided, now even execrated the cloak and the club, yet from the college of his fellow-Platonists he was separated by habit and faith alone.

[162508] 4.11.2. Good God, what a thing it was, as often as we came together to him for the sake of consultation alone! How he opened the whole to all at once, not doubting, not disdaining, reckoning it most pleasurable if perchance, by the labyrinthine insolubility of some questions that had arisen, the treasures of his knowledge were aired. Now if we had sat down in numbers, assigning to all the office of hearing, to the one alone whom we had perhaps chosen the right of speaking, man by man and in turn, not tumultuously, nor without the artful gesture of some figure, he would dispense the riches of his learning.

[163122] 4.11.3. Then whatever he had said, we straightway met with the contrarieties of resisting syllogisms; but he repelled the rash oppositions of us all: and so nothing was received that was not weighed and proved. Hence also there was to him among us the greatest reverence, that he did not too ill bear with a sluggish docility in any. With him this was a pardonable fault; whence it came that his patience was praiseworthy to us without being imitable. For who would unwillingly consult a man about hidden things, from the fellowship of whose disputation not even the inquiry of laymen and the unskilled was rejected?

[163740] 4.11.4. These few things of his studies; but for the rest, who could extol the rest with fitting praise—that, mindful in all things of the human condition, he consoled the clergy by deed and word, the people by exhortation, the bereaved by solace, the captives by ransom, the fasting by food, the naked by covering? And at the same time I resolve that to unfold more concerning these things is superfluous. For his own merits, by which he enriched a rich conscience, though impoverished in goods, he the more studied to conceal, in the hope of a future recompense.

[164306] 4.11.5. . . . observing his elder brother, the bishop, most affectionately, whom he loved as a son, while he venerated him as a father. But that one too looked up to him greatly, having in him a counsellor in judgements, a deputy in churches, a procurator in business, a steward on the estates, a registrar in the tributes, a companion in readings, an interpreter in expositions, a tent-mate on journeys. So to each, by the other, the mutual offices of brotherhood were rendered, by a good faith even to the point of being an enviable example.

[164851] 4.11.6. But why, intending to moderate our grief, do we rather supply fuel to the causes of grief? Therefore, as we had begun to say, for him now—as is that Maronian phrase—"to the thankless ash" (that is, to one who will return no gratitude) we have composed a dirge, sad and well-nigh sorrowful, with labour, because disuse of composition made difficulty—save that grief, heavy with weeping, kindled a mind by nature most slothful. This is his song:

[165304] Glory and grief of his brother Mamertus, the singular pomp of admiring bishops, to this turf Claudianus gives his limbs, under whom as master a threefold library— Roman, Attic, Christian—shone; all of which, a monk in his green years, he drank in by a hidden discipline; orator, dialectician, poet, expositor, geometer, and musician, skilled to loose the bonds of questions and with the sword of the word to cut the sects, if any assail the catholic faith. Here the modulator of psalms and the choir-trainer, before the altars, his brother rejoicing, taught the instructed companies to sound. Here for the yearly solemnities he prepared what readings should suit each season. He was a bishop in the second rank, relieving his brother of the episcopal burden; for of the supreme pontiff's office the one took the insignia, the other the labour. But you, whoever you are who grieve, friendly reader, as though of so great a man almost nothing remained, spare to water the marble with wet cheeks: the mind and the glory cannot be buried.

[166340] 4.11.7. Behold what song, when I first arrived, I wrote over the bones of my soulmate brother; for then I was absent, when they were performing his funeral; nor on that account, however, did I altogether lose the most longed-for occasion of weeping. For while I chanced to be meditating it, my soul, bringing forth, loosed the reins to my tears, and I did at the epitaph what others did at the sepulchre. These things, then, I have written to you, lest perhaps you should think that we cultivate only the fellowship of the living, and that we should be at fault in your judgement, did we not always remember our friends who lack life equally as the safe. For even from this, that the imaginary good faith is scarcely preserved even to survivors, you will not think beyond what is fair, if you conjecture that they are very few who love the dead. Farewell.

[167197] Sidonius to his friends Simplicius and Apollinaris, greetings.

[167261] 4.12.1. Good God, how conformable to a shipwrecking sea is the motion of our minds, since by the adverse whirlwinds of tidings it is confounded as by its own storm! Lately I and our common son were ruminating the wit of the Terentian Hecyra; I was sitting beside him as he studied, mindful of nature and forgetful even of my profession, that he might the more freely follow, with quickened docility, the comic rhythms; I myself too had in hand a play of like argument, that is, the Epitrepontes of Menander.

[167770] 4.12.2. We were reading together, praising, and jesting; and—what are the common wishes—the reading took him, he took me; when suddenly a household boy stood by, with a long face. To whom we: "Why so?" And he: "I saw," he said, "a reader, Constans by name, before the doors, returning from the masters Simplicius and Apollinaris; he gave indeed the letters which he had received, but he lost those he had been given to bring back."

[168203] 4.12.3. On learning which, the serenity of my gladness was straightway befouled by the cloud of overspread grief, and the contrariety of this news stirred up in me so much bile that for very many days I, inexorable, kept that most stolid blockhead himself from coming before my eyes, about to bear it ill if he did not deliver to me letters either any whatever or from anyone whatever—I say nothing of yours, which, while a mind sound and master of itself endures, will be judged by me, even if least frequent, most desirable. But after, by the interval of time, my anger gradually died down, I asked, the man being admitted, whether he had brought any word besides. He answered himself—though he was trembling and grovelling, and for guilt stammered with his mouth, was blind in his gaze—that all by which I could be instructed, by which I could be delighted, had been entrusted to the pages which had been lost. Wherefore have recourse to your tablets, unfold your parchments, and re-write what was written. For so long I admit with even mind that an unlucky chance should stand in the way of my desire, until it come to you by my speech that yours did not come to us. Farewell.

[169385] Sidonius to his friend Vectius, greetings.

[169429] 4.13.1. Lately, at the request of the distinguished Germanicus, I inspected the church of Cantilla. He himself is easily first of those settled there, who, though he is now passing his twelfth lustrum, yet daily, with conspicuous habit and grooming, not only grows young but in a manner grows boyish again. For indeed his garment is close-fitting, his buskin taut, his hair cut to the likeness of a wheel, his beard, with the shears sunk to the skin within the hiding-places of his wrinkles, trimmed.

[169931] 4.13.2. To this, too, by the supernal gift, a solid joining of limbs, unimpaired sight, an ample stride in his swift gait, gums of an uncorrupted, milky structure of teeth; his stomach does not turn, his vein is not inflamed, his heart is not struck, his lung does not gasp, his loin is not stiff, his liver does not swell, his hand does not soften, his spine is not bent; but, endowed with youthful health, he claims for himself, out of old age, reverence alone.

[170396] 4.13.3. On account of which peculiar benefits of God, since between you great rights of friendship flourish—for you are neighbours—I beseech and warn that, by your counsel, to whose following he gives, through a great conscience, the greatest authority, he should not trust much to doubtful things, nor believe too much in too great a soundness, but at last, the profession of religion being seized, should rather grow strong by the forces of a rising innocence, and make himself, old in years, new in merits.

[170907] 4.13.4. And since there is well-nigh no one who lacks punishable hidden things, let him be loosed, by openly making satisfaction, concerning those things which he remembers to have committed in secret. For the father of a priest and the son of a bishop, unless he is holy, is made like the bramble, which, sprung from roses and bringing forth roses, and amid begotten and begetting flowers, the harshness of the thorns, comparable to sins, fences about with its pricking. Farewell.

[171390] Sidonius to his friend Polemius, greetings.

[171435] 4.14.1. Gaius Tacitus, one of your ancestors, a consular of the times of the Ulpii, reported in his history under the words of a certain German leader, saying: "Between me and Vespasian there was an old friendship; and, while he was a private man, we were called friends." To what does it look, you say, to preface these things? Namely, that you may remember that, at the time when you bear a public character, you ought always to be mindful of private favour. Nearly two years are now drawing to a close in which we rejoice that you are prefect of the praetorium of the Gauls—not by your new dignity but by our affection, still old—and we, if the adversity of Roman affairs allowed it, would scarcely endure it, were not single persons—I will not say provinces—amplified by various benefits through you.

[172241] 4.14.2. And now, since what your means do not have modesty does not ask for, I should like you to say how kind you would have been in deeds, who hold out avaricious in words; for, compared with the skill of your kindred, you can surpass not only the Cornelian orators but the Ausonian poets too, if a new glory for your jurisdiction has suddenly taken you, who have hitherto played the philosopher: we too have borne some name and honour.

[172681] 4.14.3. But if the humility of our profession is to be held in contempt, because to Christ, who is to heal human affairs and lives, we of our own accord lay open the squalid ulcer of rotting consciences—which, in the men of our order, even if something still reeks of negligence, yet now swells with nothing of pride—I would have you know that it is not, as it is before the president of the forum, so before the judge of the world; for as he who has not kept silent his own crimes before you is condemned, so with us he who shall have confessed the same to God is absolved. Whence it plainly appears that it is incongruous for him to be pronounced by your party too much a culprit, whose cause looks rather to another's tribunal.

[173413] 4.14.4. Wherefore you will by no means be able further to pour out the threatening complaint of our grief, since, prosperous things succeeding, whether you forget or neglect the old favour, it is alike bitter. Accordingly, if you weigh future things as great, write to a clergyman; if present things, write to a colleague; and cultivate this virtue in yourself—if it is natural; if not, add it as something grafted—by which you may never disdain old comrades for the novelty of those who follow. For otherwise you will seem to use friends as flowers, welcome only so long as they are fresh. Farewell.

[174015] Sidonius to his friend Elaphius, greetings.

[174060] 4.15.1. Prepare a manifold feast and most capacious banqueting-couches: by very many roads, by many throngs (so it has settled, in the fellowship of good men), one comes to you, since the time of the future dedication has become known to all. For the baptistery which you were once building, you write can now be consecrated. To which festival your vow, our ministry, the office of many, the cause of all the faithful solicits; since it is a thing of great example that, at this time, new summits of churches should be built by you, when scarcely another would dare to repair the old.

[174646] 4.15.2. For what remains, we wish that, as you render your vows to our God through abundant years, so you may vow to render them—and that not only by a hidden religion, but by a manifest conversion; and, the state of the times being mitigated, may Christ indulge both my desire and that of the Ruteni, that you may be able to offer sacrifices also for those for whom you now offer altars.

[175036] 4.15.3. For the rest, although the latest autumn now shortens the day, and surrounds the anxious ears of travellers with the crackling crash of leaves falling throughout the whole grove, and into the fortress to which you invite—girt as it is with Alpine crags—it is harder to ascend in the wintry season, yet we, with God going before, coming along the rugged sides of your mountains, shall fear neither the rocks below nor the snows above, although the deep declivity of the ridges must often be retraced by an embankment broken in a spiral; for, even if there were no solemnity, you yourself are sufficiently worthy—as is that Tullian phrase—"for whose sake Thespiae is visited." Farewell.

[175730] Sidonius to his friend Ruricius, greetings.

[175775] 4.16.1. I received through Paterninus your page, which it is uncertain whether it has more honey or more salt. For the rest, it shows this abundance of eloquence, smells of these flowers, so that it well appears that you profit not only by open but by stealthy reading too—although even this theft, which, deprecating, you confess about a copied little book, glory rather than pardon ought to regard; for what would you do without virtue, who do not commit even your very sins without praise?

[176269] 4.16.2. But I gladly hear of whatever fraud has been imposed on me, absent as I was, and embrace it as a princely gift, that in some way I have endured an unharmed harm. For neither has what accrued to your use departed from our property, nor have you come to the increase of your knowledge through the loss of another's; nay rather, you yourself by right will not henceforth lack rich praise, who have, by a fiery wit, becomingly imitated the nature of fire—from which, if you wish to take anything away, it remains whole, and is wholly transferred. Wherefore now cease to be alarmed, and to believe a little wrongly about the character of a friend; for in this deed the wound of fault would the more pollute us, if the blow of envy should strike. Farewell.

[177029] Sidonius to his friend Arbogast, greetings.

[177074] 4.17.1. Your friend Eminentius, my honoured lord, presented to me the lettered letters which you yourself dictated, filled with the cultivation of a grace shining threefold. Of which virtues the love is surely the first, which compelled you to deign to notice things humble in us—who are strangers, or who now desire to lie hidden; then your modesty, by whose impulse, while you tremble undeservedly, you praise deservedly; the third, your urbanity, by which you most wittily allege that you play the fool, and, filled from the fount of Quirinal eloquence, a drinker of the Moselle you belch the Tiber—so familiar with the barbarians, yet ignorant of barbarisms, equal to the ancient leaders in tongue and hand—but those whose right hand was wont to handle the pen no less than the sword.

[177864] 4.17.2. Wherefore the pomp of Roman speech, if any anywhere still survives, once abolished in the Belgic or Rhenish lands, has settled in you; by whom, whether safe or making your peroration, even if at the very frontier the Latin rights have fallen, the words do not stumble. Wherefore, returning your greeting in turn, I greatly rejoice that at least in your illustrious breast the traces of fading letters have remained; which, if you continue by frequent reading, you will experience day by day that, by as much as men excel beasts, by so much the trained are to be preferred to rustics.

[178457] 4.17.3. As for what you wish—that I, a wicked interpreter, should prattle something on spiritual pages—these things are more justly asked of priests near in place, advanced in age, famous in faith, well known in their work, ready in speech, retentive in memory, and, in short, more powerful by every gift of sublime merits. For, to leave aside the bishop of your city—a most consummate man, and by the conscience and fame of all virtues alike blessed—it is much more opportunely that, about any questions whatsoever, the renowned fathers and chief mystics of the Gauls are consulted by you—Lupus, set not too far off, and Auspicius, not a little near; to the airing of whose abundant learning not even your consultation suffices. Accordingly, that I have not obeyed in this part of your requests, pardon me—kindly indeed, but just too; for, if it is right for you to flee unskilfulness, it also befits me to shun boastfulness. Farewell.

[179395] Sidonius to his friend Lucontius, greetings.

[179441] 4.18.1. You forget what you ask, and, on the contrary, if you enjoin anything, you remember it to the full. It is too long to recall what you and yours promised to me and mine about a quick return, of all which not even the least things have been fulfilled. Nay rather, when you were contriving your flight from us—whereby we thought you would return at holy Easter—no heavy baggage was led from the town to the estate, no wagons, no carriages were brought up to carry the loads.

[179922] 4.18.2. And, that I may complain nothing of the fraud of the matronal party, which you carried off with your light impedimenta, both you and our common brother Volusianus were attended by a retinue scarcely of single clients and boys apiece; whereby you presently cheated the solicitude of those who followed you with the vain hope of returning soon. Certainly brother Volusianus, chancing to be going to the estates of Bayeux and about to range through the whole province of Lugdunensis Secunda, eluded our expectation under the appearance of a shorter journey.

[180486] 4.18.3. And now you yourself, thus idling against your faith for many days, say that, if I have sportively made any trifles in metre afterward, they ought to be sent to you. I grant your injunctions, since you are worthy to read such things; for the very song which now slips from my hands is so rustic and so unpolished that you would think I send it, not to a country-house, but rather from a country-house.

[180897] 4.18.4. The basilica of the holy bishop and confessor Martin, Bishop Perpetuus—a most worthy successor to so great a predecessor—has rebuilt much more capacious than the former which it was hitherto. It is, as they say, a great work, and to be named, which, made in honour of such a man, such a man ought to have made. The aforesaid priest compels me to inscribe on its walls this epigram, which you will review—being, as he is in these things, in whatever he demands, most imperious by the privilege of affection.

[181413] 4.18.5. And would that the offering of this homage of mine in no way disfigure the pomp or the votive gifts of that mass—which I greatly fear will be otherwise, unless perhaps among all things beautiful the foulness of this epigram so pleases as a black mole on a white body, which indeed is wont so to cause laughter as to receive approval. But what more of this? Lay aside your shepherds' pipes yourself, and stretch out a hand to my elegy, since it limps on its foot.

[181885] Martin's body, venerable in all lands, in which, after the times of life, honour lives, a building first covered here with plebeian adornment, which was not equal to its confessor. Nor did it cease to burden the citizens with shame— the great glory of the man, the scant grace of the place; but the bishop who is reckoned sixth from himself, Perpetuus, took away the long reproach, removing the inner shrine of the modest chapel and raising ample roofs with an outer house; and there grew together, the strong patron granting it, the building in space, the founder in merits— a building able to contend with Solomon's temple, which was the seventh wonder of the world. For if that shone with gems, gold, and silver, this surpasses all metals in faith. Begone, biting envy, and let the former men be absolved, let chattering posterity make nothing new or add nothing; and, while Christ comes, who shall raise up all peoples, let the summits of Perpetuus endure perpetually.

[182859] 4.18.6. We have offered, as you see, what of a recent song was at hand; but no less than this, if you weave delays, will we shake the stars, about to use even satiric verses, if the matter demands—which you will falsely think are to be equalled to this song in mildness; for the nature of mortals blames some things more effectually, quickly, and ardently than it praises. Farewell.

[183243] Sidonius to his friend Florentinus, greetings.

[183291] 4.19.1. You accuse both our delays and our silence; each is excusable; for both we come and we write. Farewell.

[183404] Sidonius to his friend Domnicius, greetings.

[183450] 4.20.1. You, to whom it is frequently a pleasure to look upon arms and armed men, what delight, do we think, you would have conceived in your mind, if you had seen Sigismer, the royal youth, adorned in the fashion and dress of his people, as a bridegroom or suitor, seeking the praetorium of his father-in-law! Him a horse indeed, decked with trappings—nay, horses laden with radiant gems—preceded, or even followed; while yet this was seen there more becoming, that he himself, on foot, walked in the midst of his runners and footmen, flame-coloured with scarlet, ruddy with gold, milk-white with silk; then, to so great an adornment, his hair, of one colour with his ruddiness and his skin.

[184144] 4.20.2. But the form of the chieftains and allies accompanying him was terrible even in peace; whose feet were bound, first, up to the ankle with hairy buskins; the knees, legs, and calves without covering; besides this, a high, close, many-coloured garment scarcely reaching to the bare knees; sleeves veiling only the beginnings of the arms; green cloaks bordered with crimson hems; their swords, hanging from the shoulder by overlapping baldrics, had girt their sides shut with studded skins. By the very adornment with which they were decked, they were defended.

[184712] 4.20.3. Their right hands were filled with barbed lances and throwing-axes, their left part shadowed by shields, whose snowy light on the rims, and tawny on the bosses, so betrayed both their wealth and their zeal—everything altogether of this kind, that in the action of the nuptials the pomp of Mars seemed not less than that of Venus. But why these things at greater length? To such a spectacle your presence alone was lacking; for when I saw that you did not see the things which are beautiful to you, at that time I longed for the very impatience of your longing. Farewell.

[185292] Sidonius to his friend Aper, greetings.

[185333] 4.21.1. There is indeed a chief prerogative of the father's side in showing one's lineage; but yet much is what we owe to our mothers too; for it is not right that anything in us be honoured the more meanly because we are the burdens of the one rather than the seeds of the others. But let the matter or reason of defining our origin be with the natural philosophers: let us pursue the point from which we set out.

[185749] 4.21.2. Your father is an Aeduan, your mother an Arvernian. You are owed to the Aedui first—therefore not to them alone—even on account of that example of our Maro, by whose witness Pallas, thus reckoned an Arcadian because at once a Samnite too, could have moved against Mezentius, as a stranger, the arms of the Etruscans, had he not, mingled with a Sabellian mother, drawn thence also a part of his fatherland. Behold, you have a great proof, with the greatest author, that the region of one's mother too is to be reckoned a part of one's fatherland—unless you will judge that the poets lie even when they do not depart from history.

[186387] 4.21.3. Therefore if the Arvernians in turn rightly claim for themselves at least a portion of you, patiently admit the complaint of those who long for you, who, through the office of one mouth, have poured out the secret of not one breast—whom imagine to be saying, openly and to your face: "What so great evil have we committed against you, ungrateful man, that for so many years you flee, as though enemy soil, the ground that once nursed you? Here we cherished your cradle; here we shaped the boastful limbs of your wailing infancy; here you were carried as the burden of citizens' arms."

[186981] 4.21.4. Hence your grandfather Fronto, gracious to you, severe to himself, who could have been an example to those whom we have as an example; hence your grandmother Auspicia, who, after the death of your mother left you orphaned, paid alone the care of two; but your aunt too was from here, and from here was Frontina, holier than holy virgins, whom her mother feared, her father venerated—a girl of the highest abstinence, of the highest rigour, and with such great faith so fearing God that she was feared by men. Here, that you might be imbued with the liberal disciplines, the flourishing studies of the grammarian and the rhetor fostered you by a rivalling warning; whence you came forth not so meanly trained that it is permitted you not to love the Arvernians even on account of letters.

[187778] 4.21.5. I pass over the peculiar pleasantness of the territory; I pass over that plain of the fields, in which without danger the gainful waves of the standing crops billow, which each industrious man, the more he frequents, the less he suffers shipwreck; soft to travellers, fruitful to ploughmen, delightful to hunters; which the backs of mountains gird with pastures, their sides with vineyards, the level land with villas, the rocky with fortresses, the shady with lairs, the open with cultivation, the hollow with springs, the precipitous with rivers; which, in short, is of such a kind that, once seen, it often persuades many strangers to forget their fatherland.

[188450] 4.21.6. I pass over the city itself, always so most loving toward you that you ought to prefer to it nothing of the fellowship of the nobles, into which you, a hand laid upon you, were happily snatched and inserted; and so the pleasure of your presence is to all such that yet no satiety has taken any. Now what shall I say here of your private property, whose state is this, that it would endure your expenditure by that very offence by which it is more frequent? For a master, a husbandman, if he cherishes his hearth here, so makes his expense as to increase his revenue too. These things I, one of all the citizens—certainly of the good ones—prattle by their wish, their petition, in their stead; who, since with so great honour they demand you, with so great love long for you, it is given to understand that you yourself will obtain more of joy, while you grant what you are asked. Farewell.

[189349] Sidonius to his friend Leo, greetings.

[189389] 4.22.1. The magnificent Hesperius, a gem of friends and of letters, when he lately returned to the city from the country of the Toulousans, said that you charge me that, the books of letters now being finished, I should turn my pen to the style of history. With the highest reverence, and with the highest affection, I embrace so great a counsel; for you pronounce him fit for greater works whom you think ought to leave middling ones. But—what must be confessed—I dare to look up to a judgement of this kind rather than to undertake the counsel.

[189937] 4.22.2. The thing is indeed worthy that you should bid it, but no less worthy that you should do it; for of old too, when Gaius Cornelius had urged the like on Gaius Secundus, he himself afterward seized upon what he enjoined; and this, by the example, you will now better attempt, since both I rise as a disciple to Pliny, and you, by your ancient kind of narrating, rightly outstrip Cornelius—who, if he came back to life in our age and beheld of what quality and how great you are held to be in letters, would now be more truly a Tacitus.

[190480] 4.22.3. And so you rightly take up the mass of the theme proposed, you who, besides singular eloquence, have a great opportunity of vast knowledge; for daily, through the councils of a most powerful king, you, anxious for the whole world alike, learn its affairs and rights, treaties and wars, places, distances, merits; whence who would more justly gird himself to these things than he who, it is agreed, has learned the movements of nations, the varieties of embassies, the deeds of leaders, the pacts of rulers—in short, all the secrets of public affairs—and who, set on an excellent summit, has no need either to suppress the truth or to concoct a lie?

[191138] 4.22.4. But our condition is far unequal, to whom this new exile is a grief and the old reading no use; then religion is for profession, humility for ambition, mediocrity for obscurity; nor in present things is so much of substance placed as in future things of hope; finally, languor is an impediment, and now, even late, on account of this very thing, sloth is at heart; and certainly there is now no praise of care, even contemporary, over my studies—nay, not even posthumous.

[191619] 4.22.5. Chiefly it is fixed that I should seek small glory from history, since through men of clerical office our own things are rashly, others' things boastfully, past things unfruitfully, present things half-fully, false things basely, true things dangerously told. For the theme is of such a kind that, in it, if you make mention of good men, scant favour is prepared; if of the notable, the greatest offence; so straightway a satiric colour and odour mingles itself with that composition. So it is: historical writing seems much to abhor from our order, whose beginning is envy, whose continuation is labour, whose end is hatred.

[192254] 4.22.6. But these things come about, if anything is composed with clergymen for authors; who, fixed by the snaky molars of revilers, if we publish anything simply, are called madmen; if anything exactly, presumptuous. But if you yourself, to whom it is given to be able by leaps to trample, or to overrun, the necks of disparagers, should willingly draw by lot the province of this matter, no one would write more loftily than you, no one more in the ancient manner—even if it should please you to speak of recent things; since, filled before with abundance of words, now of matter, you have left no reason for being cut by a venomed bite. And therefore for the future it will be a profit to consult you, a pleasure to hear you, an authority to read you. Farewell.

[193020] Sidonius to his friend Proculus, greetings.

[193065] 4.23.1. Your son—nay, our common son—has run to me, who, having left you, grieves that he has erred, overwhelmed by the shame of penitence for his desertion. So, the tenor of his fault being heard, I rebuked the man as he hid himself—loving in words, with a menacing face—and with my own voice but in your stead, crying out that he was worthy of disowning, of the cross, of the sack, and of the other parricidal punishments. At this he, confounded, blushed, deprecating his error by no shameless excuse; but when I refuted him, convicted on all points, he joined to his modesty the companions of tears, so flowing and abundantly streaming that they gave faith to a correction to follow.

[193753] 4.23.2. I ask, then, that you be merciful to one severe upon himself, and, following God, not hold guilty, with you for judge, one who professes himself worthy of condemnation; whom, if, inexorable, you should bid receive unheard-of kinds of punishments, he cannot be tortured more by grief through you than by shame through himself. Free your own despair from fear, free my confidence; and, if I rightly interpret the necessity of fatherly love, absolve yourself too, who are consumed by a hidden grief, by which your son is consumed in a public one. To whom it is agreed I have done very much injury, if you nevertheless do even a little—which certainly, as I hope, you will not do, unless you are harder than the rocks, or persist more rigid than the unbreakable adamant.

[194529] 4.23.3. Therefore, if of your character and of your friendships I justly presume better things, propitiously indulge the excused, whom, reconciling, I steadfastly pledge will be faithful for the future; and, he being quickly loosed from his fault, I am bound by the benefit, greatly demanding not only that you pardon, but that you do so straightway, and that you admit him, returning, not only to your house but to your heart. Great God, how joyful will the day rise for you, the message for me, the spirit for him, when, cast at his father's feet, from that wounded mouth, that terrible mouth, while he expects a reproach, he shall have received a kiss! Farewell.

[195196] Sidonius to his friend Turnus, greetings.

[195239] 4.24.1. Well does that Mantuan phrase agree with your name and your business: "Turnus, what none of the gods would have dared to promise to one who wished it, behold, the rolling day has brought of its own accord." Your father Turpio, a man of tribune's rank, asked of old, if you remember, for money on loan from Maximus the Palatine, and obtained it, setting aside or pledging nothing—neither of silver, nor binding any of his estates—by way of surety and pledge; but, as is shown by the bond made, the interest is secured to the lender, which, drawn out over a ten-year period, brought the amount of the principal up to double.

[195871] 4.24.2. But when your father, the disease pressing on him, was sinking down to a near death, and on this very account public authority was the more violently constraining the failing head of the household to make good the debt, nor could the wickedness of the executors be sustained, he, now despaired of, commanded me by letter, as I was setting out for Toulouse, that, at my request, your creditor should grant at least a modest respite. To the prayers of the petitioner I quickly assented, since with Maximus I had old rights not only of acquaintance but of hospitality. So I gladly proceeded to my friend out of my way, although the villa was distant not a few miles from the public highway.

[196568] 4.24.3. When I came, he himself met me, whom I had known before erect in body, free in step, free in voice, liberal in face—much unlike his old self in his gait, in his garb a man, in his pace modesty, in his colour and speech religious; then short hair, a long beard, three-legged chairs, Cilician hangings hung at the doors, a bed having nothing of feather, a table nothing of purple, kindness itself so benign as to be frugal, abounding not so much in flesh as in pulse; certainly, if there was anything richer in the food, indulging not himself but his guests.

[197134] 4.24.4. When we rose, I secretly inquired of the bystanders which kind of life, out of the three orders, he had seized—whether he played the monk, or the clergyman, or the penitent. They said he was lately fulfilling a priesthood thrust upon him, to which civic love had bound him, refusing, by faction. The light returned, while the boys and clients were occupied in catching the animals, I sought the means of a secret conversation; he granted it. I embraced him, suspecting nothing; and I first confirm that I congratulate him for the height of his rank, then I mingle the prayers that followed.

[197734] 4.24.5. I set forth the request of our Turpio, I allege his necessities, I deplore his extremities, which seemed the harder to his grieving friends for this, that, bound by usury, he was being loosed by his body: he should remember, then, his new profession, his old fellowship, and should moderate, by granting a respite for a while, the barbarous instance of the exactors barking around him; and, if the sick man should die, he should grant to the heirs a year of mourning free; if—as I would wish—Turpio should have recovered his former health, he should indulge the exhausted man, by leisure, the means of growing strong again.

[198367] 4.24.6. I was still asking, when suddenly the man of charity began to weep greatly—not over the delay of the debt but over the danger of the debtor; and, his sob bridled: "Far be it from me," he said, "that I, a clergyman, should demand back from a sick man these things, which I should scarcely have asked, as a soldier, from a man in health. But I love his children too in such a way that, even if anything turn out adverse to my friend, I am about to ask of them nothing more than the reckoning of my office permits. Wherefore write to the anxious (and, that they may believe your letter more, join mine), that, whatever the issue of his sickness shall be—which, however, we wish prosperous for our brother—I will both prolong the space of a year for payment, and remit the additional half which has accrued under the name of interest, content with the restitution of the simple principal alone."

[199268] 4.24.7. I gave at this the greatest thanks to God, great thanks to my host, who so loved both his fame and his conscience, confirming that the friend sends ahead of himself what he remits to you, and from this buys the supernal kingdom, in that he does not sell earthly benefits. Therefore, for what remains, strive that, on your initiative, at least the loaned sum be paid straightway, in such a way that you nonetheless give immense thanks even in the name of those who, joined to you by brotherhood, cannot perhaps, by reason of their age, understand what gift they obtain.

[199846] 4.24.8. There is no reason why you should begin to say: "I have joint-heirs, the division has not yet been celebrated; it is agreed I have been treated more avariciously than my co-heirs; my brother and sister still act under their years of tutelage; for my sister no husband, for my brother no guardian, for the guardian no surety has yet been found." Which indeed is altogether said well to creditors, but to bad ones; but when such a person has a contract, who would relax the half when he could exact the whole, if he suffers delay, whatever he had conceded mercifully out of pity, he justly demands back on account of the injury. Farewell.

[200492] Sidonius to his friend Domnulus, greetings.

[200537] 4.25.1. I cannot put off imparting to you in haste, a partaker of a great joy, what our father in Christ and likewise bishop, Patiens, having set out for Chalon after the manner of religion, after the manner of his own steadfastness, did—when he had come into the aforesaid town, the college of provincial priests partly going before, partly accompanying, namely that some supreme bishop might be ordained for the township, whose church-discipline was tottering after the younger bishop Paulus had departed and died. The pontifical council was met by the various wishes of the townsmen, and also by those private interests which always overturn the public good;

[201200] 4.25.2. which a kind of triumvirate of competitors had kindled, of whom this one belched out the ancient prerogative of his birth, destitute of the remaining gift of character; this one, by parasitic uproars procured by the suffrage of his kitchens, was thrust forward with Apician applause; this one had promised, by a tacit compact, that, if he obtained the wished-for eminence, the church's estates would be a prey to his applauders.

[201638] 4.25.3. When holy Patiens and holy Euphronius saw this—who held the rigour and firmness of the sounder judgement, free from hatred and favour—the counsel being first secretly shared with their fellow-bishops before it was openly disclosed, and the clamour of the raging crowd being despised, suddenly, with joined hands, they seized holy John, a man distinguished for honesty, kindness, and gentleness—who then wished and suspected nothing less than what was being done.

[202110] 4.25.4. (He was here first a reader, then a minister of the altar, and that from infancy; afterward, by the advance of labours and times, archdeacon; in which degree or ministry, much held back on account of his industry, he could long not be augmented in dignity, lest he could be released from the office.) Yet him, now a priest of the second order, amid the discordant voices of the parties—which deferred to praise one not ambitious, but did not dare to blame one praiseworthy—the factious being astonished, the bad blushing, the good acclaiming, none crying out against it, they consecrated as their colleague.

[202727] 4.25.5. Now therefore, if the Jura monasteries now send you back—into which you were gladly wont to ascend, now playing a prelude to the heavenly and supernal dwellings—it is fitting that you rejoice over the concord of our common fathers or patrons, whether so feeling in agreement or so agreeing in feeling; and exult also in the name of him whom Euphronius created by his testimony, Patiens by his hand, both by their judgement; in which Euphronius did what would befit not only his own old age but also the longevity of his dignity; and Patiens too did—a man equal, however, to even great praises—what well befitted a person to do who is the head of our city through his priesthood, and of the province through the city. Farewell.

[203463] Sidonius to his friend Petronius, greetings.

[203509] 5.1.1. I hear that you spend a pleasurable patience in reading through my letters. This is a great thing, and most befitting a man of letters, that, though you yourself excel in the greatest studies, you should embrace these things, even the least, in others; but from this very thing the most consummate glory is repaid to you, for he stands out sufficiently by the merits of his own talent who has been the patron of another's.

[203940] 5.1.2. I commend Vindicius, my kinsman, a religious man, and most suited to the levitical dignity which he has lately attained. To copy out for him from my tablets what you had bidden was a task that did not suit a province at leisure; here I have delivered to you some trifles by way of a little gift—although, such is your holiness, you always reckon our letters great rewards.

[204321] 5.1.3. Meanwhile I make known the need of the aforesaid bearer, whom a twofold condition of business that has arisen has drawn hither; since he set out on this determination, either to enter a suit or to enter upon an inheritance. For, a paternal cousin having died unmarried and intestate, he prepares to succeed by the prerogative of agnation, unless, however, factious force opposes his undertakings. Against all which difficulties, you alone, after the help of Christ, suffice for your suppliant; of whom I am confident that, if the person earns favour, the cause will obtain victory. Farewell.

[204921] Sidonius to his friend Nymphidius, greetings.

[204968] 5.2.1. The book on the state of the soul, illustrious in its three volumes, Mamertus Claudianus—the most skilled of Christian philosophers and the first of all learned men—took care to adorn and embellish with all the members, arts, and parts of the philosophy he pursued, revealing the nine, which they call Muses, to be disciplines, not women. For in his pages the watchful reader will find the truer names of the Camenae, which beget for themselves their own proper appellation about themselves. For there grammar divides, and oratory declaims, and arithmetic numbers, and geometry measures, and music weighs, and dialectic disputes, and astronomy foreknows, and architecture builds, and metric modulates.

[205678] 5.2.2. Gladdened by the novelty of this reading and excited by its maturity, you asked that it be hastily reviewed and copied, as you had seen; as you had asked, you obtained it, under the promise of a swift return. It is fitting neither that I be deceived nor that you deceive me. It is time that what was lent be restored, since the book itself, if it pleased, ought to have given satiety; if it displeased, ought to have stirred distaste. But you, whatever the case is, discharge your faith quickly, lest, if you prepare to return the requested little book too late, you should seem to love the parchment rather than the letters. Farewell.

[206322] Sidonius to his friend Apollinaris, greetings.

[206370] 5.3.1. It were fitting indeed that our garrulity should be bridled by the retaliation of your silence. But since perfect love ought not so much to reckon up what offices it pays as to remember what it owes, even now, the reins of modesty being loosed, we repeat the homage of an impudent address. Whose shamelessness is from this most of all discerned, that you keep silent. Did I, then, not deserve to know what you were doing in the time of hostility, brother? Did you conceal from a friend alarmed on your behalf either your security or your fear?

[206922] 5.3.2. What else is it, if to one who inquires you suppress your doings, than to suspect that he who is anxious for you would either not rejoice on learning of prosperous things, or would not be sad if adverse ones turned out? Let this opinion of impiety depart from good morals, and let true affection banish, from its own brightness, the blemish of so wretched a suspicion. For, as your Crispus affirms, "to wish the same and to refuse the same—that, in the end, is firm friendship."

[207409] 5.3.3. Meanwhile, if at least you are well, it is well. But I, weighed down by the mass of an unhappy conscience, lately, by the force of fevers, came near to the extremity of my safety—as one upon whom, most unworthy, the weight of so great a profession has been thrust, who, wretched, compelled to teach before to learn, and presuming to preach the good before to do it, like a barren tree, since I have not works for fruits, scatter words for leaves.

[207864] 5.3.4. For what remains, pray that it be worth the labour that we have returned almost from the infernal seat, lest, if we remain in our past crimes, what we live should begin to pertain rather to the death of the soul. Behold, what I do I declare; behold, I still inquire what you do. From our part is done what is pious; do you henceforth do what seems good. But that, indeed, believe to be cut in bronze, like the Attic laws: that we, by Christ's help, will never admit an end of the love whose beginning we have striven to found. Farewell.

[208409] Sidonius to his friend Simplicius, greetings.

[208456] 5.4.1. That I have not received writings, who had sent them, I impute to friendship, but I rather assign to modesty; for, unless I reckon beyond what is fair, that the greeting owed me was withheld, that was not contumacy but bashfulness. But if you further close your door to my prattling page, and set up the bolt, I yield, not unwillingly, to your quiet indeed; but I declare that I shall find my culprits not far from you.

[208884] 5.4.2. For it is not unjust to turn all the odium of your silence to the pride of your sons, who, feeling themselves loved, suffer a kind of distaste at our earnestness; whom you ought to admonish, by your fatherly authority, that they cease not to sweeten, with polished addresses, the bitterness of the offence contracted with us. Farewell.

[209228] Sidonius to his friend Syagrius, greetings.

[209273] 5.5.1. Since you are the great-grandson of a consul, and that by the male succession (although that matters little to the case I am about to set forth), since therefore you are of the seed of a poet, to whom letters would beyond doubt have given statues, if the consular robes had not given them (as even now the words of that author, polished in verses, attest), from whom the studies of his posterity have not degenerated even a little—at least in this respect—it is monstrous to tell how greatly I am astonished that you have seized the knowledge of the Germanic tongue with such ease.

[209863] 5.5.2. And yet I remember that your boyhood was fittingly imbued with the liberal schools, and I have it sufficiently ascertained that you often declaimed keenly and eloquently before the orator. And since these things are so, I should like you to say whence your breast suddenly drank in the euphony of an alien race, so that now, after the canes of the Maronian reading, and after the toiled-over copiousness and loquacity of the varicose man of Arpinum, you burst forth to me like a new falcon from an old eyrie.

[210380] 5.5.3. It can by no means be reckoned how much of a laugh it is to me and to others, as often as I hear that, in your presence, the barbarian fears to make a barbarism in his own tongue. The bent old age of the Germans is amazed at you when you interpret their letters, and takes you, in their mutual affairs, as arbiter and umpire. A new Solon of the Burgundians in expounding laws, a new Amphion in tuning lyres—but three-stringed ones—you are loved, you are sought out, you delight, you are chosen, you are called in, you decree, you are heard. And although they are alike stiff and unhewable in body and in mind, they embrace in you, and at once learn, the tongue of their fathers, the heart of a Latin.

[211089] 5.5.4. This one thing remains, most witty man: that, no less diligently, even when you have leisure, you spend something on the reading of literature, and keep, as you are most elegant, this measure—that this tongue be held by you, lest you be laughed at; that the other be exercised, that you may laugh. Farewell.

[211405] Sidonius to his friend Apollinaris, greetings.

[211453] 5.6.1. As soon as summer gave way to autumn, and the fear of the Arvernians could for a little while be tempered by the reckoning of the season, I came to Vienne, where I found Thaumastus, your brother—whom, by the right of blood and of age, I embrace with a reverend intimacy—most sorrowful; who, although he was greatly afflicted by his recent widowhood, was yet little less anxious on your behalf: for he feared and dreaded lest the barbarian whirlwind or military wickedness should concoct some calumny against you.

[211974] 5.6.2. For he affirms that it was secretly whispered to the master of soldiers Chilperic, a most victorious man, by the venomous report of certain wicked men, that, chiefly by your machination, the town of Vaison was being attached to the party of the new prince. If from this any suspicion is struck into you and yours, swiftly inform me by the return of a familiar page, lest the opportunity of my solicitude or my presence be lost to you. It will be peculiarly my care—if, however, you shall judge anything must be guarded against—to make you either secure by favour obtained, or more cautious by anger explored. Farewell.

[212601] Sidonius to his friend Thaumastus, greetings.

[212648] 5.7.1. We have at last tracked down who, before our tetrarch, slandered the friendships of your brother and, on the other side, those of the party of the new prince—if, that is, the clandestine footprints of the informers have not cheated the faithful sagacity of our comrades. These men, surely, are—as you yourself, set face to face, heard—those whom Gaul has long groaned to endure even among the more clement barbarians. These are they whom even those who are feared, fear. These are they whom this province peculiarly awaits: to bring in calumnies, to denounce persons, to bring on threats, to carry off property.

[213268] 5.7.2. These are they whose occupations in leisure, whose plunderings in peace, whose flights amid arms, whose victories amid wine, you hear praised. These are they who delay causes when called in, hinder things omitted, disdain things charged, forget things admonished, once enriched. These are they who buy lawsuits, sell interventions, appoint arbiters, dictate what is to be judged, tear up what is dictated, drag in those about to litigate, drag out those to be heard, draw the condemned, draw back those settling. These are they whom, if you ask, even with no one opposing, a benefit, it irks them to promise, shames them to refuse, repents them to have granted.

[213938] 5.7.3. These are they to whose comparison Narcissus, Asiaticus, Massa, Marcellus, Carus, Parthenius, Licinus, and Pallas would raise the finger in surrender. These are they who envy the tunicked their leisure, the war-cloaked their pay, the couriers their travel-money, the merchants their markets, the envoys their little gifts, the informers their customs-dues, the provincials their estates, the townsmen their priesthoods, the keepers of records their weights and measures, the enrolled their salaries, the praetorian accountants their arrangements, the cities their gratuities, the publicans their respites, the clergy their tributes, the nobles their reverence and their lineage, the elders their seat of honour, their equals their meeting, the girt their rights, the ungirt their privileges, those to be instructed their schools, the teachers their fees, the instructed their letters.

[214831] 5.7.4. These are they who, drunk with new wealth, that you may know even the least things, by the intemperance of using betray their unskilfulness of possessing; for they gladly come armed to feasts, white-robed to funerals, fur-clad to churches, in mourning to weddings, in beaver-skins to litanies. No kind of men, of orders, of seasons is at heart to them. In the forum Scythians, in the bedchamber vipers, at the banquet buffoons, in exactions Harpies, in disputes statues, in inquiries beasts, in negotiations snails, in contracts money-changers; for understanding stony, for judging wooden, for being kindled flaming, for forgiving iron; for friendships leopards, for pleasantries bears, for deceiving foxes, for pride bulls, for consuming minotaurs.

[215589] 5.7.5. They hold firm hopes in the upheavals of affairs, they love doubtful times the more surely; and, trembling alike from cowardice and from conscience, since they are lions in the praetoria, hares in the camps, they fear treaties, lest these be discussed; wars, lest they fight. Of whom, if the breeze of a rusty money-bag has anywhere breathed upon their nostrils, you will straightway see there applied both the eyes of Argus, and the hands of Briareus, and the claws of the Sphinxes, and the perjuries of Laomedon, and the cunning of Ulysses, and the deceits of Sinon, and the good faith of Polymestor, and the piety of Pygmalion.

[216228] 5.7.6. By these morals they overwhelm a man excelling no less in goodness than in power. But what can one man do, fenced about on all sides by a venomous interpreter? What, I say, can he do, whose nature is with the good, whose life is with the bad? By whose counsels Phalaris would be made more bloody, Midas more covetous, Ancus more boastful, Tarquin more proud, Tiberius more cunning, Gaius more dangerous, Claudius more dull, Nero more impure, Galba more avaricious, Otho more audacious, Vitellius more extravagant, Domitian more truculent.

[216775] 5.7.7. Surely—what chiefly heals the afflicted—his own Tanaquil tempers our Lucumo, and clears away the ears of her husband, filled with the poisonous dregs of whisperers, by the opportune use of salted speech. By whose zeal it is fitting that you know that meanwhile nothing of the poisons of the younger Cibyratans has harmed the quiet of our common brothers in the mind of our common patron, nor will anything harm, God being propitious—if only, so long as the present power rules Lugdunensian Germany, our and his own Germanicus is governed by the present Agrippina. Farewell.

[217357] Sidonius to his friend Secundinus, greetings.

[217404] 5.8.1. It is long indeed since, astonished and proclaiming you, we used to read you serving more familiarly the hexameter. For the matter was pleasant, whether the nuptial torches of the bridal chamber were described by you, or wild beasts pierced by royal blows. But in the triple trochees lately compacted into the hendecasyllabic metre you have made nothing like, not even by your own judgement.

[217804] 5.8.2. Good God, what of gall, of charm, of peppered eloquence I, by no means silent, beheld therein! save that the thunderbolt of your fervent wit and the salted freedom of your eloquence were hampered perhaps by the persons rather than by the causes; so that to me neither does Ablabius the consul seem to have more figuratively pricked the house and life of Constantine in a twin verse, nor to have bitten it with such a distich, secretly hung at the Palatine doors:

[218275] "Who would ask back the golden ages of Saturn? These are of gems—but Neronian."

[218356] since, namely, the aforesaid Augustus had, at well-nigh the same times, destroyed his wife Fausta by the heat of a bath, and his son Crispus by the cold of poison.

[218521] 5.8.3. You, nevertheless, no less diligently, undaunted, spend your labour at least on the witty colours of satires; for your writings will be enriched by the increasing vices of our tyrant-townsmen. For those whom our judgements, by the fault of the age, think fortunate, swell with no such mediocrity that posterity will one day have to labour to recall their very names; for the disgraces of the wicked, equally as the praises of the good, remain immortal. Farewell.

[218992] Sidonius to his friend Aquilinus, greetings.

[219038] 5.9.1. I reckon it to my own credit, most capacious of all virtues, if you too think it worthy, that we should have as many friendships ourselves as we have causes of friendship. It is an ancestral thing that I demand back; my witnesses in this matter at present shall be called our grandfathers, Apollinaris and Rusticus, whom a likeness of letters, dignities, dangers, and consciences had joined in a praiseworthy intimacy, when they execrated together, in Constantine inconstancy, in Jovinus pliancy, in Gerontius perfidy—single faults in single men, all crimes at once in Dardanus.

[219625] 5.9.2. In the age that was the middle, our fathers, under one fellowship, scarcely yet borne from boyhood into full youth, served the prince Honorius as tribunes and notaries, sojourning together with such affection that among them the least cause of concord was that they were recalled to be the sons of friends. In the principate of the emperor Valentinian, the one presided over a part of the Gauls, the other over the whole; but the titles of both were so in a manner balanced by a brotherly compensation, that he was first in the time of his office who was second in dignity.