WORK: Carmina  (slug: sidonius-apollinaris-carmina-0bc4da)

CHAPTER: 01-carmina



[106149] Tell, tell what I ask, Magnus, tell, I pray, Felix by name, by mind, by honour, by form, by children, by wife, by brothers, by parent, by your father's and your mother's kin, and by Camillus, highest of your cousins: why do you bid the rash trifles of a friend, which the jest of tender youth scattered, be reduced into the shape of a little book, and at once a huge and sudden bundle of odium be forged, and the paper perish? I serve your bidding, but first I attest, reader, what rough patches you will suffer here. We do not run the ancient road, nor will you find anything where the Muse wears the old ruts of those before; not here the antipodes and the Red Sea, not here will we sing the Memnonian Indians, scorched by the kindred torch of Aurora; not Artaxata, Susa, Bactra, Carrhae, nor will I sound out baked Babylon, which, lying open to its nursing river, drinks the Tigris enclosed on this side and that. Not here will I tell of Ninus, first of the Assyrians, nor of Arbaces, head of the Medes, nor her in whose rich ash, when he fled the foe, Sardanapallus blazed. I will not speak of Cyrus, grandson of Astyages, whom they say a dog's teat nourished, whose rapacity not even the treasure of Lydian Croesus could satisfy; whose ferocity was not then subdued, when, two hundred thousand slain before, driven into the narrow vale of Scythia, he came to the wineskin of bereaved Tomyris. Not here will you read the Cecropian triumphs, nor in what battle Marathon grows red, nor, when he roused a thousand thousand, Xerxes, puffed with multitude, and this man, the deep waters of the gods swallowed at once, still thirsting; nor too Thermopylae and the waves of Helle, the barriers of land and sea scorned, ridden over with frenzied bands, and, the swelling sea let into Athos, beside the peak of the leaf-bearing Alp to have gone through caverns carved out for fleets. Not the offspring of the Garamantic Thunderer, ruling over realms and princes, will I tell to have flown over the lands of Asia stretched out, driven by his father's bolt, and first to have struck down the tumultuous prefects and satraps of Darius, soon to have bidden the man himself, proud on his fathers' throne and prating of gods akin to him, his wife, his children, his parent taken, return to the chances of a man; who, when he had stirred the greatest wars and set on one field the gathered arms of all Persia from every side, is reported to have gained this only, that the foe might more freely sleep. I will not tell that the Minyans, borne by the speaking wood, stood in the Phasian port, when, struck by the form of the Pelasgian leader, the heroine softened the rabid bulls, nor terrified then, when her own husbandman, after the sown molars of the tamed serpent, trembling among the armed grasses, wondered to see the foe flower into a harvest, and, with the ears of grain fighting here and there, above the war-bearing clods grew wet the brothers, stalked, with green gore. I will not tell here of the earth-born cohort, the more lively for the venom mingled in, to whom, save for a shape now lacking, serpents, with their voluminous bodies, stretching high their scaly legs, ended in their tracks in a mouth. So the wanton youth of triple form, treading the earth with devouring foot, ran, astonishing in the gait of their heads, and when the trumpets of the gods sounded, soon against the thunder, hissing back, dared with their soles to provoke the heaven-dwellers. Nor do you read of the widened fields of Phlegra, while the sent mountains fly through the stars— Pindus, Pelion, Ossa, Olympus, Othrys— with their woods, herds, beasts, rimes, rocks, springs, towns, lifted up by the more spacious right hand of those that brandished them. I will not cultivate here the labours of Hercules, to whom boar, hind, lion, Giant, Amazon, host, bull, Eryx, birds, Lycus, thief, Nessus, the Libyan, the yokes, the apples, the maid, the serpent, Oete, the Thracian horses, the Iberian oxen, the wrestling river, the three-formed dog, and the borne-up pole gave the pole. Not here will I pursue in verse Elis, noble for its chariots, nor the all-too-known river out of love, how through the deeps of the sea Alpheus flows and over the brine falls into the waves of his bride. Not here will I unweave the house of Tantalus, where, through her father Pelops, a daughter became sister to her own offspring, and by a new monstrosity the father begot an infamous grandson; nothing sad is sung here; nor do we paint the tears at the eaten feast of Thyestes, who by his brother's crime, his children devoured, was a living tomb, when after these banquets, suddenly, his car bent back, the setting Titan fled toward the rising the guest, and put the day to flight. Nor will the Phrygian shepherd be read by you, for whom Dindymon, lessened, its peak cut off, is said to have woven a fleet, when, at the bidding of patroness Venus, the ravisher laid waste the Oebalian lands and hospitable Amyclae, seeking his following prey across the sea. But neither Pergama nor the ten-year war nor the savage phalanxes of Agamemnon nor the perjuries of Sinon will I pursue, where the citadel, dedicated to the Palladian sign, unbarred by the deceitful traitor, received the horse that bore the foot-soldiers. Not here with the pen of the Maeonian Muse do I tell the valour and wisdom of the Dulichian and the Thessalian citizen, of whom this one is thought, in the Pelian cave, to have been schooled in hunting, the lyre, the wrestling-ground, and herbs beneath the old man born of Saturn, while now, a boy treading the lairs of beasts, he lies here and there over snowy Pholoe, now, reclining at the beloved mangers, sleeps more softly in his master's mane; thence, given to a parent of the Scyrian maids, to have borne the name of false Pyrrha and among the dances of austere Minerva to have whirled the thyrsus hidden for Venus; at last, drawn by the sound of the Phrygian rape, led on by the praises of Hector to be dragged. But that other, to whom it fell, in the fourth lustrum, to return to his fatherland after Ithaca, not even the volume of Smyrna unfolds enough, for who could continue those toils that land and sea brought him: the Palladium stolen, Achilles found, Dolon caught by his swift feet, and Rhesus' snowy chariots, dragged off before the streams of Xanthus could drink them, and the quiver too which, snatched from you, Philoctetes, the patron god gave; Telamonian Ajax raging because before the ships, pleading his cause, the eloquent one bore off the prize of the warrior; hence Polyphemus avoided and Circe and the hunger of the Laestrygonian tyrant, then the orchards of rich Calypso, and the Sirens pleasing to those that perish, the avoided darkness and the torch of Nauplius and the rabid loins of devouring Scylla, or what cliffs the Tauromenitan Charybdis hollows out, belching from the deep? Not the gods favouring particular fields, cities, and islands do I sing— Saturn for Latium and Jove for Crete and Juno for Samos and the Sun for Rhodes, Persephone for Henna, Minerva for Hymettus, Vulcan for Lipara, Dione for Paphos, Perseus for Argos, Priapus for Lampsacus, Euhius for Thebes and Vesta for Ilium, the Delian for Thymbra, the Arcadian for Lycaeus, Mars for the Thracians and Diana for the Scythians, whom dedicated temples made gods, incense, salt, spelt, meal, or the consecration of superfluous rites. Not with Triptolemus the reverend Eleusis, who gave the first ears of grain to peoples fed through the Chaonian holm-oak grove, nor the Mareotic Apis will I sound roused at the Memphitic sistra. I will not tell that the youth of Lacedaemon dedicated the anointed wrestlings to the daughter of Tyndarus, whom, taught in their native Therapnae, the gymnastic crowd of the Bebrycian theatre fears; not the Lycian lots and those of Caere, nor the answers of Themis, prior to Delphi, nor the powers the Tuscan seeks at the fenced bidental, the lightning expiated; nor those whom, drinking the Euganean Timavus, on Antenor's hill the augur saw, gods moving the Thessalian battle; nor those whom Amphiaraus and Melampus . . . the gods Metellus snatched from the very ashes, through the temple, the flame ill-wavering, rejoicing, with his sight lost. Not here will Cinyphian Hammon be sung, lifting his mitred head from the sands, scarce, after the hecatomb offered, wont to bring himself forth from the chasm of the Syrtes. Not here Dindyma, nor, on rattling boxwood, the Curetes sounding the Berecynthian rite, not Bacchus showing forth his triennial feast will I describe, and the trembling, in festal frenzy, go among the Bassarids, or the fillet-bound initiates whirling at the incense-burning altar. Not here will you behold the rich songs of Hesiod of Ascra and the chords of Pindar; not here the jests of sock-bearing Menander, not the fierce iambics of injured Archilochus, or the more weighty Muses of Stesichorus, or what the Lesbian girl composed; what Mantua, stubborn against Homer, added to the Latin speech, ever envious that to herself was matched Parthenope by Maro's tomb; not what, after the satires of his epistles and the wit of his sermons and his new epode, his books of song and his art of poetry, in praise of Phoebus and wandering Diana written, Flaccus wished to sound; not what your Papinius and mine sounds among the Labdacian frenzies, or when by chance with the lesser rhythm of his foot he paints the gemmed meadows of his little woodlands. Not what Corduba, mighty in her sons, calls eloquent, do you think to be read here, of whom one cultivates rough Plato and warns his Nero in vain, the other shakes the orchestra of Euripides, following Aeschylus, painted with lees, or Thespis, wont to sound from wagons, who, after the trodden platforms, beneath the buskin were leading the male of a stinking she-goat; the third sang the Gallic battle of Caesar, how son-in-law and father-in-law drove kindred Rome into arms, giving so many tears to his own Philippi that he counts the fall of Cremera light, and reckons the Allia less to be grieved, and Jove redeemed on Brennus' balance, that he set after it Trebia and grievous Cannae, nor tells of the Trasimene slaughter, thinks the brother Scipios must be passed in silence, whom the Tartessian world holds, is silent of the Euphrates ill-sought, and the Carrhae wet with the blood of the Crassi, or the swords, Spartacus, which you were wont to put to flight from the consuls with your victorious dagger, nor weeps that war the more, which, after the Cimbric trophies, turbid, and the chained Nasamonian Jugurtha, while he sought the Mithridatic triumph, the Arpinate wished to stir against Sulla. Not Gaetulicus will be read by you here, not Marsus, Pedo, Silius, Tibullus, not what the jest of Sulpicia's Muse wrote, sweet-speaking, to her Calenus, not Persius' rigour or Propertius' charm, nor yet the hundred-metred Terentianus. Not Lucilius is here and Lucretius, not Turnus, Memor, Ennius, Catullus, Stella and Septimius and Petronius or biting, without end, Martial; not he who in the time of the second Caesar dwelt at eternal Tomi under accusation, nor he who afterward, by a like chance, to the thin breath of the brawling mob, was the exile of an angry actor, not he sprung of Pelusian Canopus, who sings the couches of the dusky husband and, with the upper Muse, the powers below, nor those who were to our fathers, in the first time, the greatest companions, of whom one, having followed Bonifatius and headlong Sebastian, as a boy shuddered at his Cadurcan birth, loving more Pandionian Athens; whose varied poem if you read, then Phoebus and the Hyantian maidens drunk from the Hippocrene, then Amphion and the son of Maia, then the Rhodopeian bard you would think to sound in a blended harmony. Not you now will be read here, and your bolt, O most worthy, a second Quintianus, who, scorning the soil and hearths of the Ligurians, your home changed, loved the Gauls, amid trumpets, standards, javelins, squadrons praising Aetius and finding time for the book, ivy-crowned in the laurelled camps. But neither will that third one now be read, who, leaving once his native Baetis, sought the thirst of watery Ravenna, to whom the applauding Quirites a gleaming statue, and the prince, dear in his popularity, set up in the forum of Trajan. But do not try to compare to me those whom, far lesser myself, I yet revere the more— Paulinus and Ampelius and Symmachus, Messala of talent deep enough and second now to no Martius, and Petrus, in a new art of speaking equal to the ancients, and, when he speaks, too astounding, or him whom the senate rightly sets before the municipal poets, a good steward, or those our soil alone keeps eloquent— sweet Anthedius and the Muses of my master Hoenus, venerable enough, keen Lampridius, shrewd Leo, and Severianus, excelling at the trumpet, and no less able to write as Marcus Quintilianus used to do. We trust these measures of a very barren Muse to a rare and brief paper, which may rightly carry mackerel and pepper. For what god will grant to it, rejected, that even, taking up good odours— nard and the rich alabasters tinged with Niceros' juices that breathe fragrance, cinnamon sought from the Indian pyre, by which the Phoenix grows young in dying, costum, malobathrum, roses, balsam, myrrh, frankincense, and balm—it should preserve them? Wherefore guard my misdeed, and the rash modesty of your fellow-pupil who obeys you, I pray, defend, yet remember first to summon Probus, your brother, the pillar of learning, who is able, good man, to apply the strict theta to this scribble. But I know well, I do not refute the fault, nor does a shameless poet please the learned; but neither shall I too much fear the swollen face of an abusive reader, if, as if too weighty and severe, refusing the jest of our Terpsichore, a third Cato, with wrinkled lip, threaten me with rhinoceros nostril. Let not this over-skilled one too greatly frighten you; in truth, if you would prove it, so much no one knows, believe me, as he is ignorant of.

[120227] Preface to the Epithalamium Spoken for Ruricius and Hiberia

[120288] When the wave-dwelling festal bride of Pagasae unfolded Pelion through her caverns beneath the Emathian rock, the abundant furniture of the gods straitened the ground; the pole here, the sea there, vied in treasures; and the father-in-law himself led the dances, nearly clad in green, of like colour with his sea-blue mantle; the nymph too, coming naked to the chamber from the flood, began to fear the limbs of the clothed man. Then whoever of the gods was present, terror set aside, played in the office wherein each was mighty. Jupiter sent a warm, weightless thunderbolt and said: "Better now does Cytherea glow." Pollux then was praised for the glove, Castor for the reins, Pallas then for the crests, the Delian then for the quiver; Alcides for the club, Mars then played at the spear, the Arcadian then with the wand, Bromius then with the fawn-skin. Here too best Orpheus had brought in the Pierians with chords, voice, hand, songs, reeds; ambitious Hymen there gathered all the arts; who, if not by talent, perchance pleased by his native spirit. Yet the Fescennine songs were not admitted before our Apollo thundered on his wonted lyre.

[121436] Epithalamium

[121450] [Among the Cyanean crags, the Ephyraean peaks, where above Idalium the salt-eaten peak of the mountain lifts Orithyion into the air, where by chance, as he fled, trembling Tiphys fixed the wandering Symplegades, and the place belched back, returning, toward harsh Malea,] there goes out into the Isthmian sea, the wings of the rocks closing it, a bay from the cliff, in which recess often, as if the whole light of heaven gathered there, the collected day is straitened, and through the trembling waves follows the secrets of the shoal; the water, transmitted, is steeped in the splendour of the deep, and—wondrous to tell— the wave drinks the sun, and, inserted into the thin stream, the dry light pierces the liquid with an arid ray. Space served the design; for there the Lemnian played, as it were a temple, for Venus, and, leaving the thunderbolt, here the iron-dusky Pyragmon often smoked. Here is stone from five places, giving five colours— Ethiopian, Phrygian, Parian, Punic, Laconian— purple, green, mottled, ivory, and white. The tawny blaze of chrysolith flashes from the doorposts; murrhine, sardonyx, Iberian amethyst, Indian jasper, Chalcidic, Scythian, beryl, agate lift up the twofold leaves of silver on their hinge, through which the shadow of the shut emerald vomits light; thick onyx crusts the threshold, and near it the blue of jacinth casts a concordant colour into the pools. The outer rock is unadorned, but the pumice, rough from the unceasing lash of the waters, juts up high. In the inner place Mulciber feigned in gold the rocks standing forth widely, and by his mistress-art he deceived the uncultivated nature with vast culture, intent on this work, which she did not yet know who afterward condemned the stolen love with Lemnian chains. Hither the scaly Triton, where the borders of his twofold back meet above the windings of his coiled belly, bore Dione through the waters with warm heart. But Galatea presses, with the added weight of a shining shell, the side of the half-beast, which, her thumb fixed, she plucks, and by a secret touch promises marriage; then, rejoicing at the twisting jest, the lover smiles, already with a wound, and lashes his own gentle whale. Behind comes a band of Loves in blazing troops; this one curbs a dolphin with roses, and, borne on a green bullock, this one hangs by the horns, the reins scorned; these, standing, totter in their motion, and with wet foot slip, and steady the prints of their feet with their wings. She had let her soft face droop on her bent arm; the violets were withering, and her neck, heavier with sleep, had begun, worn by the flowers, to sink down. Alone of the number of brothers, he who is the fairer, Love, was wanting, while he prepares the celebrated feasts for the Gauls, which the father-in-law Ommatius, greater than his great forebears and grandson of a patrician house, with happy auspices arranges for his daughter and son-in-law. But when that day by chance shone forth, he himself seeks his mother in swift flight, on whom hung torch, bow, and quiver; but he, head down and hanging on the edge of her left palm, beats with his wings his feet balanced through the void, so plucking his mother's kisses, and, as she lay loosed in sleep, with light feather he tickled her half-slumbering eyes. Then, eager, he was first with these words: "I bring new joys of a happy spoil, mother: that proud Ruricius glows, touched by our torches and by the sweet venom, and sighs in his heart a longed-for grief. Were the present age what it was, the Lemnian woman would spend on him her kingdom, the Cretan the thread of the labyrinth, Alcestis her life, Circe her herbs, Calypso her apples, Scylla her hair, Atalanta her feet, Medea her frenzies, Hippodamia the wax, the maid born of Jove the swan a crown; for him Dido would have gone to the sword, Phyllis to the noose, Evadne into the flames, and the Sestian maid into the waves." To these she answers thus: "I rejoice, son, that you praise and besiege a rebel man; but the maiden's beauty is such that, had the hero, Stheneboea's lover, once beheld it, he would not, out of scorn, have tamed the monsters of Chimaera; or he who, proud of his Thermodontian mother, scorned the rash vows of the Cnossian stepmother, seeing her would have died—I confess—but by a true charge; and if perchance I had been a fourth in the judgement, me too the shepherd on Rhoetean Ida would have condemned; or, if you wish, give me to conquer that maiden, I would rather," she said: "I had given this beauty for the reward of beauty. So great is the honour and grace on her cheeks; matched with her blush the pale purple lies hid, and, pressed down by the light of her face, the flashings of pearls grow dark on her bound neck. You too with manifold sports would she have courted, Hiberia— Pelops with the axle, Hippomenes with the race, Achelous with the wrestling, Aeneas approved in wars, Perseus with the Gorgon; nor less this form, for which Jupiter would so often have been the Delian, the bull, the swan, the Satyr, the dragon, the bolt, and the gold. Wherefore come, let them be joined; for fortune, beauty, and race agree: nothing unequal here has your arrow fixed. But why do I delay the vows?" She spoke and called for her car, to which crystals had given the yoke, which, in the first frost, where the ice of the still-tender world swells Caucasus, the Tanaitic crust congealed with Hyperborean rimes, taking the nature of a gem because it lost that of the wave. A pole shaped of tawny metal pierces this; the river had sent it from whose flood the Nymphs cherished Mygdonian Midas, who, poor amid gold, enriched the streams of Pactolus with his vows reversed. The wheel gleams, girding with a translucent rim its spokes from the jaws of the Marmaric beast, while the brute groans, its curved teeth shaken out, to be disarmed of its mouth; this gift too he sent who, naked, harasses the warm Erythrae, of colour like the Ethiopian, his hair fat with balsam, the flowing Indian, with fragrant huntings. She yet binds the swans wont to feed throughout Cyprus with garlanded myrtle, whose milk-white necks, stretched, are curved with the rest by crimson coral. So, the journey begun: the hanging wheel furrows the empty air, and the track is not loosed in the liquid course. Here the threefold Grace attends in one bond, here Plenty is fragrant with Fortune's open horn, here Flora scatters from her baskets, but flowers perennial, here Pharian Osiris attends Sicilian Ceres, here Pomona bears her pregnant lap according to the season, here Pallas comes among the moist presses with the oil-vats, here, her side picked out with a spotted fawn-skin, the Thyiad whirls the Indian rites of Bromius with the Echionian thyrsus, here too the Corybas who in the Sigean caves mocks Dindyma, now cut, grows warm again; through whose hoarse throat the hollow boxwood pipes groan back fire through their twin caverns. So they came to the marriage-chamber: frankincense, nard, balsam, myrrh are here, here the Phoenix gives the cinnamon of its living pyre. The very neighbouring winter, breathed on by the heat of the feast, is now less cold, and, holding the look of spring, the vows give in this place what the seasons do not give to the world. Then the Paphian, clasping the youth's right hand and the maid's, sang the solemn rites in few words, lest even words should make delay: "Lead your life in concord and happily; may there be children and grandchildren; and may the great-grandson behold in his forebear what for himself he would choose."

[129024] To the Clarissimus Catullinus

[129055] Why, even if I were well, do you bid me make a song for the Fescennine-worshipping Dione, set among the long-haired bands and enduring the Germanic words, praising again and again, with grim face, what the gorged Burgundian sings, pouring sour butter on his hair? Do you wish me to tell you what breaks a poem? Driven off by these barbaric plectra, Thalia scorns the six-foot pen, since she sees the seven-foot patrons. Happy your eyes and happy your ears, and happy I may call your nose, for whom not garlic and foul onion belch forth ten messes at the new morning, whom not, as a grandfather's old age and a nurse's husband, before day even breaks, so many and so great Giants assail at once as scarce Alcinoüs' kitchen could bear. But now the Muse is silent and holds the reins, having jested in a few hendecasyllables, lest anyone call even these a satire.

[129917] To the Emperor Maiorianus

[129944] Reverend antiquity reports that the son of Amphitryon, while he relieved the earth, deserved the heavens. But though, grim, in his bare arm he crushed the grey throat of the Cleonaean beast, and though with blazing sword he scarce laid low the hydra, when death by a wound bore twin lives, and, bearing the captive monster from the Erymanthian wood, laughed at the disarmed mouth of the wild boar, and, bursting the smoking jaws of the flame-born thief, at last bade the oxen go straight forward— bull, hind, Giant, host, wrestler, Amazon, the Cretan, the dog, the Hesperides be the man's memorials— yet no battle is greater than Geryon laid low, to whom alone he bore that three-fold head. These things Alcides once did; but you, a second Tirynthian, yet a prince, the greatest care of the great god, whom snake, stag, boar felt by equal arrows, when tooth, when venom, when flight availed nothing, think me to be Eurystheus and the monster a tribute; from these take three heads for me, that I may live.

[130951] These prayers your suppliant servant dedicated, awaiting a pious and healthful answer, that you may give back his country and at once his life, unburdening Lugdunum of its ruins; this your Sidonius begs of you: so may the purple, re-dyed with Sidonian tincture, clothe you through many years; so, the lustrum of your unending empire passed, may the quinquennial games be vowed to your fasces; so, the swelling of the twofold bank broken, may the shorn Sygambrian drink the Waal. But if you grant this to your poet, I will commit to be read in the perpetual annals whatever you do in your noble triumphs, for now the loquacious Muse is silent for tribute, who, in place of Virgil and Terence, collects the sixths and twelfths of the treasury, and fears the hand and rope of Marsyas, who, out of an old hatred of Phoebus, now threatens the bards with hanging.

[131810] Sidonius to His Polemius, Greeting.

[131847] 1. While after your departure, my Polemius, most loving brother, I greatly considered with myself in what manner I might sing Fescennine verses at the wishes of you, a philosopher, a theme crept upon me which, once run through, can easily be discerned to show that I had more regard for your learning than for your occasion. And so, the tenderness of the epithalamium set aside, I drew my pen through the most rugged and most pebbly rules of philosophy; of which the order is such that, without very many new words—which, with the leave of the rest of the eloquent be it said, are known especially to you and your fellow-Platonists—these very trifles could not be expounded. 2. See whether the ears of certain men, through inexperience, may rashly not think mention of the centre, the proportion, the intervals, the climates, or the myras suitable for an epithalamium; that, certainly, with the consular man, truly named Magnus, the quaestorian man Domnulus, the spectabilis man Leo, as my warrant, I boldly affirm—that music and astrology, which are the consequent members of philosophy beneath arithmetic, can in no way be set forth without these names; which if anyone shall despise as Greek, as they are, and foreign words, let him know that either he must always abstain from the mention of an art of this kind, or that he can discuss it in the Latin tongue either not at all or certainly not to the full. 3. But if any judge that the matter stands otherwise than I assert, I, being absent, do indeed yield to the disparagers; yet let those who think differently know that my opinion cannot be condemned without Marcus Varro, without Serenus—not Septimius but Sammonicus—without Censorinus, who composed an illustrious volume on the natal day. 4. You will read here too a new word, that is, "essence" (essentia); but know that Cicero himself said this very thing; for he named both essentia and indoloria, adding: "for it is permitted to impose new names on new things"; and rightly he said it. For just as, from that which is, for example, "to be wise" and "to understand," we name "wisdom" and "understanding," so regularly, from that which is "to be," we do not keep silent of "essence." Therefore, since, led by zeal for your love, I, a Gaul, have brought in matter from the sophists' school, I seek you above all as the intercessor for my deed. Let Venus and the fictitious pigments of the Loves be assigned to him who has lacked the means to be so praised. Farewell.

[134326] Preface to the Epithalamium Spoken for Polemius and Araneola

[134388] Prosperous for marriage the day flashes, which kindly Clotho with snowy threads, which the white pebble of the pitchy Indian, which the tree of peace and of youth together, the ever-green olive, may mark. Come, Calliope, with gleaming palm give the eloquence of the sacred water, which Pegasus dug with flying foot, his mane wet with kindred venom. No impiety is here, nor does the ambition of suitors grant this maiden to deaths; here Pelops hears no pacts bloody in the circus of Oenomaus, nor does pale Hippomenes, at the foot of the goal, with the thrice-falling apple, delay the daughter of Schoeneus; not here does Aetolian Calydon, astonished from her citadel, behold the Herculean wrestling-grounds, when Alcides pressed the horn of the proud river, ever and again refreshing his wearied breast from the watery foe; but a learned youth and a comely maiden, holding by birth the heights of Gaul, are joined: quickly, goddess, bind your chords, nor, because a greater Muse has thundered, compel our poverty to be silent. At the marriage-torches of Thetis, Phoebus approving, even Chiron sang with lesser plectrum, nor did the pious throng laugh at the rustic, though often the two-formed old man there broke his song with a whinnying note.

[135635] Epithalamium

[135649] By chance, returning from the citadel of stormy Caphereus, Pallas, having well avenged the violated honour of the Iliac Phoebas, was changing Xanthus for Erechthean Hymettus. Her head gleams with golden bronze, and she takes a greater calm from her terror; for, the thunderbolt laid down, she had not yet gladdened her grim limbs with the Cinyphian Triton. The Gorgon holds the midst of her breast, about to make, for the beholder, even when severed, delays; the treacherous image gleams proud, and its loveliness lives though its soul perishes; a high heap roughens the black head with the coils of horned serpents, the biting hair twists its spotted windings, and the angry locks give out foul hissings. The scaly corselet does not reach the middle of her belly, the mantle hanging behind the steel; the robe with the circle of its border covers the edges of her feet, which, when they move beneath the robe, the stiff folds rattle in the crinkled train. Her left a shield covers, full of the Phlegraean tumult: here Enceladus, brandishing, whirls Pindus, struck up to the stars, Ossa becomes a missile for raging Typhoeus; Porphyrion snatches Pangaea, and Damastor lifts Rhodope with the Strymonian spring, and, coming from above, quenches the hot bolt with a twisted flood; here Pallas seeks Pallas, for whom, the Gorgon seen, the lance, now slow, finds a solid corpse already; here Mimas hurls Lemnos against the aegis for his brother, and the missile island shakes the heaven it strikes; here many-bodied Briareus fights in a populous frame, bearing a kindred battle-line, on whom from one head you may see palms sprout from his branching arms. Nor did Mulciber give shapes alone to the monsters; by his art he gave fury, and feared the very wraths he had fashioned. Her right holds the spear which lately in the vale of Aracynthus Pallas herself drew forth from the olive she had set up, which had stood by this genius, that over the goddess' footsteps the Marathonian berry might hold the slipping oil-presses. Here two temples gleam; of which one stands forth above, both in merit and in seat, the place which holds men searching out on high by reason what the engine of heaven, what the earth, what the trench of the sea, what the turbid air, what the changes of night and day, what the monthly increments of the moon prepare, why as many losses follow. Forthwith here sit the seven highest sages, the beginnings of innumerable philosophers: Thales, born of Miletus, condemns standing surety; you, Cleobulus of Lindos, bid that moderation be best; you, meditating, adorn all Corinth, Periander; thence Attic Solon approves the one rule, "nothing too much"; Bias of Priene, you say the malignant are the more; you, born of Mytilene, Pittacus, were teaching to know the time, to know oneself, Chilon of Sparta; this one, the Samian, after the learned silence of his lustrum, Pythagoras, the first chief, asserts that music tempers the solid world and renders harmony from fixed stars, and that the signs which the zodiac circle holds— thrice four—on the highest axle do not run by their own motion, yet are set with equal spaces between themselves and likewise borne, head-down, fixed with the sign-bearer, and that the seven wandering stars too give a chief song from this, since each number is held perfect, affirming by this number, in this order, that all things revolve: that the zone of the sickle-bearing old man goes through the tops of the poles, that the star of Mars next to it advances with Jove in the middle, after these the Sun bends itself by a fourth track, so the gentle Paphian keeps a fifth interval, the Arcadian a sixth, the Moon thus in the highest orbit runs nearly through thrice-ten myras in its tropic climate. If then any measures the lyre, or the harp, or the pipe have given forth with the voice, on this model, the weights being set down, as much as proportion advises, he tells that the intervals follow the seven of the star; saying too that harmony is this—that the four elements so sit in these modes that there is a place lower by weight for the great—in the middle earth (and that which is perfectly in the middle, plainly is the bottom of the sphere); that hence it comes that the lighter wave gleams over the earth, that higher than these too is the air, which, purer, stands forth, that the heaven, with its supreme lightness, encloses all, and that this whole at once hangs from the origin of the centre. Thales here too, by numbers and stars, searches out how to announce beforehand the eclipse of Phoebus and the labour of the Moon; but he sets down a beginning useless for things, while he believes the world subsists by waters. The opinion of his disciple is reversed, saying that single things are ever created by their own beginnings, who decrees that each has certain springs ever-watering and full of the seed of things. Him too follows one who thought this air begot all things and likewise affirms the gods thus arose. Fourth, Anaxagoras keeps the Thaletic doctrines, but feels a divine mind that made the world. Joined to him sits a younger colleague, but the same, believing air the matter for all creatures, judges thence that a god, by whom he might make all things, was present. After these, Arcesilas conjectures that this mass was prepared by a divine mind, made up of those parts which he himself calls light atoms. The Socratic school gleams after him, which, migrating from the weight of nature, transferred its use to the polishing of men's manners. This school, they say, the supreme Plato cultivated, but formed it in a threefold way, since first and one he joins physics to logic, logic to ethics; he, the chief, found out how far the first essence stands from the highest and sixth good: since, finally, stones are only this, and are proved to be nothing within save to be; let the next succeed, to whom to be and to live is ready, to which you can add nothing more, the tree and the plant; let the third be of cattle, whose being and living lacks not motion and sense; then let the fourth creation regard her own, mortals, to whom is given to be, to move, to live with sense, and there stands out that they have wisdom and avail to discern the false from the true; let the fifth substance bring forth the higher creatures, whom some have called gods, since they take on bodies to be contemplated by man, and a little after leave them and return into their own, if any, most subtle, form— so that it is made plain that the highest substance is the creator, the sixth, and above it nothing, but all things beneath itself. In this gymnasium the wisdom of Polemius cultivates his life and cherishes him, joined to her own Plato; and though the Academy with all its schools opposes and denies the truth, with true praises it adorns this man. The Stoic after these—but they being in accord— Chrysippus and Zeno teach to hold their precepts, the Cynics now nearly excluded, but they remain on the threshold; but Virtue thrusts the Epicureans out on every side. But on the other side, in the weaving-room of Minerva, the first robe of Jove gleams ruddy, whose threads, twice steeped in the cauldron, the Sidonian murex dyed silken. Nor only does the drunken sandyx breathe purple; for it holds an inserted lightning, and on the stiff thread the purple, heavy with a fragment of the bolt, blazed, here green Glaucus hung in his spreading cloak; here the folds waved by art, and with feigned swell a woven tempest plunged the curved keels. For the son of Amphitryon a third robe rose: here the little one, girt by the twin serpent of his stepmother, all unknowing smiles at the monsters, and, thinking the snare a game, loves it, while he knows not, and with grieving face weeps that the snakes he himself slays are extinguished; besides, beneath are these things in scattered figures: boar, lion, hind, Giant, bull, yokes, Cerberus, hydra, host, Nessus, Eryx, birds, Thracian, Cacus, Amazon, Cretan, river, Libyan, apples, Lycus, maid, pole, Oete. This work, and whatever else remains that clothes the gods, virgin hands have set down; but in the whole band, among the Cecropian and Ephyraean maidens, Araneola gleams; she strives to match her own hands with Minerva's, and the goddess, vanquished at the baskets, withdrawing, while this one holds the webs, would the more hold weapons. Here then, imitating her great-grandfather's stiff robes, she herself prepares the palm-robe for her father, by which, consul and the same, he might touch his grandfather Agricola and teach his descendants to join the fasces not of a great-great-grandfather only but of a grandfather too. Yet she had woven also the cloaks in which that master, conspicuous, shone through the Tartessian cities, and those in which, at the time of the prefecture thrust upon him, conspicuous as governor, he renders the sacred laws. Yet on the robe, in a high panel, she had played what was illustrious to ancient couches. First the Ithacan tale and the Dulichian household are formed, and Penelope herself, unweaving her slow webs, she wove. Here the Thracian beats Taenarus in vain, his wife twice snatched away, with his lyre, after he profaned the law of Avernus, and, thinking to profit, looks not again at the shade; here Alcestis vows to break her life, her husband preferred, whom you may see, in the very fleece of the Parcae, not yet wholly spun, her safety remaining by fate; here the night of the daughters of Danaus shone in gold, to whom the impious father fits fifty swords and the discordant command gives a concordant frenzy; Lynceus alone, saved by the gift of Hypermestra, escapes; you may behold her fearing little for herself and growing pale only for the husband she let go, and now she changes Jove into the forms in which he was wont to hold Mnemosyne, Europa, Semele, Leda, Cynosura— serpent, bull, bolt, swan, Dictynna; and now the work went on to the tower of Danaë and the rain of metal, and here Jupiter dripped in another gold, when the maiden, looking, saw the Tritonian, her gaze turned, behold more gladly the learned-sounding arts; moved, she shifts her hands, and with skilled thumb began to paint Laïs, victress over the philosopher, who through the fierce Cynic's chin and wrinkled neck tore the fragrant beard with her perfumed pincers. Pallas smiled and added these words from her chaste mouth: "No longer, maiden, will you laugh at our doctrines, about to be wed to my philosopher; rather, taking the flame-coloured veil, let your mother weave this work without you. Rise up, distinguished glory of the sages, Polemius, and now lay aside at last your Stoic eyebrows and, imitating the Cynic lovers, you will begin again to bring me a little Plato." The master addresses the hesitating man with such a voice: "Go gladly, nor condemn perchance to be yoked, since that old man of ours bids it, who not sluggishly drank, contemplating the gods, the poison, Anytus growing pale." He had spoken; that one at once rises and with modest face commends his austere mantle to his knotty club. Then the goddess binds the hair of both with the peace of the green olive, joins their right hands, and bids the covenant, which the grandfather Nymphidius may behold. Atropos approves the omen, and the concordant sisters joined the tawny threads.

[146955] Thanksgiving to Bishop Faustus

[146987] Phoebus, and the thrice-three Muses with the tenth, Pallas, and Orpheus, and the feigned water of the horse's fountain, and the Ogygian lyre, by which you bend the following stones, which raised the listening walls by its song— spurn them, my lyre; come rather now, that Spirit, I pray, about to tell of your bishop, you who entered the breast of ancient Mary, when, snatching the timbrels, dry Israel went through the hollow of the suspended flood, ramparted by the banks of water, and through the midst of the waves the dusty throng cried out your triumph; and you who aided the hand of Judith striking the neck of Holofernes, when, the throat cut, the trunk lay, and the frail sex hid itself well in the strong blow; you who, the basin filled from the pressed fleece, and then staining the earth, the fleece untouched, made firm Gideon—you, Spirit, set in the sounding trumpets, and victory came by song alone; you who breathed too on the king, taken from the flock of fleecy Jesse, when the foe, setting the ark of the covenant on a wagon with no oxherd guiding, betrayed the obscene disease of his swelling parts; you who once sounded in the throat of the three boys, who, set in the furnace of the Chaldaean tyrant, the dewy flame moistened, the kiln burned; you who filled Jonah, wandering through the rolling tracts of the belly, while the monster's entrails resound within, the food singing, or the burden of the fasting yet full belly—but with the prophet unstained— the raw hunger belches up, whom, with its sobbing innards, the hungry brute vomited up, its bite withheld; you who once came twofold into the breast of Elisha, when the fiery axle was lifting up the old Thesbite, and, leaving as a gift his torn skin, the shaggy charioteer entered the burning reins; you too, about to send a second Elijah to the earth, appeased, bound the tongue of just Zacharias, while the wrinkled mother made him a late father, signifying, the prophet bidden to be silent, that, when grace shone forth, the Law should know itself about to be silent; you too, born of a virgin, with no seed, before all time God, and in time Christ, as far as concerns the body, created yourself; you who, wont to give sight to the blind, gait too to the lame, hearing to the deaf, to the dumb to loose speech, came for this also, that dead limbs might rise from bed, from bier, from tomb; you who too bore punishments in the flesh you took on, sustaining blows, mockeries, scourges, thorns, the lot, the chains, the cross, the nails, the gall, the dart, the vinegar, and last of all death—but about to rise—you went, snatching back whatever of ours had passed into the right of the old foe through our crime, when the first woman, breaking the precept, bound us by perpetual fault; who, when he sought you for destruction nor found in you anything that he could prove his own, lost all that Eve gave by her fall; that bond, by which man was overrun, this compensation broke, free of sin, for sinners you become an ample price, and, new Adam, by the turn of a loan the old, while you die, you snatch from death. So death is dead, so it deceived itself by the snares it had made; for while undiscerning it sought the guiltless and the guilty, it brought it about that even those bound by crime could be absolved; you who too bade the just ashes rise at the time with you, when into the dwellings, long-time hidden, hasty salvation burst, and life, suddenly poured in, shook the hardened embers from the tombs: grant me to praise your Faustus, grant me to render thanks, which it pleases to owe even afterward—you, great priest, this lyre of ours sings, though with unequal plectrum.

[150650] This, then, is the first cause or ground of his praises, that, while the slippery age rolls on, my brother is proved kept with you, by the Lord's gifts, and his honour, with no faltering of fame; this regards you, this good, however great; the reward will be owed to him, he to you. Let the praise, if he would not fall, be his; for what he could not do redounds wholly by right to you. Moreover, because long ago, as I came to Reii, when the Dog-star raged, when the scorching fire of the sun with winding cracks wrote upon the thirsting fields, with you as host, peace, home, shade, water, blessing, table, couch at once received our heats. Yet of all these you grant enough in that you willed that I should approach the holy threshold too of the holy mother. I stiffened, I confess, conscious of myself, and suddenly reverence dyed my adoring face with pallor; nor otherwise did I tremble than if by chance Israel led me to Rebecca, or long-haired Samuel to Anna. Wherefore, even venerating you with endless vows, I confess a great affection through small songs.

[151717] Whether the flaming Syrtes and the inhospitable wastes, or a marsh green with mire, or black rocks in a recess more wild hold you, where, the sun removed, the hollow caves keep their long-lived darkness; whether the Alps, stretched out on their sheer cliffs, tremble at you, anchorite, taking your girt-up slumbers on the cold turf (which, though it bear frosts, never tames the heat conceived of Christ), where now Elijah, now John bids you go, now the two Macarii, now the hero Paphnutius, now Or, now Ammon, now the Sarmatian, now Hilarion, now naked Antony calls you in that tunic which his master's kindly hand made of palm leaves; or whether Lerins has embraced you, its ancient parent, where you, now broken, often for the sake of great quiet come to serve the disciples, and scarce, abstemious, take the leisure of sleep, scarce cooked food, and lead your age fat with fasts joined to inserted psalms, suggesting to the brothers what mountains that level island has sent up to heaven, what was the holy life of old Caprasius and young Lupus, what grace remained to father Honoratus, who was that Maximus, of whose city and monks you, bishop and abbot, act as twice his successor, celebrating too with those praises the journey of Eucherius coming, of Hilary returning; or whether the people entrusted to you holds you, and the lesser dares with you in the midst to scorn the swollen manners of the greater; or whether, anxious, you care by what food the sick, or by what the stranger may live, what should feed even him whose slippery legs the prison's fetter thins beneath; or whether, your mind rather distracted with funerals to be buried, if the livid bones of a dead pauper grow green, you yourself, unfastidious, bear the corpse to the grave; or whether the diligent commons, about to hear you preach, stand round you on the conspicuous steps of the venerable altar, that they may drink with their ears the medicine of the expounded law: whatever you do, wherever you are, be ever to me Faustus, ever Honoratus, ever Maximus too.

[153762] To the Clarissimus Ommatius

[153791] Four days before the first light of scorching Sextilis brings forth its ear-bearing head over the world, our sixteenth birthday will be kept, which seeks to be happy at your coming. No banquets will be set out for you on doubled tables, nor will the Assyrian murex give you a couch; nor through the many cells of the gleaming sideboard will I unearth weights of dark silver; nor will a cup be given here whose crusted side by chance a twisted handle of ruddy metal binds. Our dishes are middling, not so made that grand workmanship of size makes up the price; the bread wont to grow yellow on the Libyan Syrtis the rustic table of your Gaul will not receive. My wines are not Gazetic, Chian, Falernian, nor such as, sent from the Sareptan vine, you might drink; the cups here are not illustrious by the name of the village which the triumvir himself set in our fields, yet we beg that you come; Christ will give all, who here made me a fatherland for love of you.

[154756] On the Baths of His Villa

[154783] If anyone deigns to visit our Avitacum, let it not displease you: so may what you have please you. A rooftop, rival to that of Baiae, is raised on a cone, and a like peak gleams with a buskined summit. A more babbling wave murmurs than the Gauran streams, slipped down from the brow of the neighbouring hill. Rich Campania would not wish the Lucrine pool, if it beheld the waters of our lake. That shore is adorned with crimson sea-urchins; in our fish, guest, you see them both. If it please you and you would rejoice with calm heart, whoever you are, here in spirit you make Baiae.

[155368] On His Fish-pond

[155386] Enter the chill waves after the burning baths, that the cold water may harden your warm skin; and though you plunge your limbs in this water alone, your eyes swim through our pool.

[155568] To Ecdicius His Brother-in-law

[155600] Our birthday warns that the Nones of November draw near: that you come I do not ask, but command. Let your wife be with you, you two now hasten; but this we wish: after a year that you come a third.

[155800] On the Fish Caught by Night

[155829] These four fish night first strung on the hooks; of them I kept two; take you also two. Those I sent are the greater; the order is most just; for of our soul you were the greater portion.

[156018] Sidonius to His Pontius Leontius, Greeting.

[156063] While at Narbo, once called Martian but lately made so in fact, I weave my delays, it came into my mind to put together some hexameters in keeping with your love, by reading which you might know full well that, although the household hearth of each of us is dwelt in places set somewhat farther apart than is fair, our minds are not on that account so much sundered as our country.

[156446] You have here, then, Dionysus drooping amid the delights of his Indian triumph; you have also Phoebus, who, by poetic right, is clearly made your tenant out of a deity—that Phoebus, I mean, very intimate with my Anthedius, by whose fellowship that prefectorian man surpasses in the art of disputation not only every musician but even the geometers, arithmeticians, and astrologers; since I should judge that no one has investigated more exactly what the oblique signs of the zodiac, what the wandering planets, what the scattered foreign stars prevail in.

[157003] For he gives so to these, so to speak, members of philosophy, that it seems to me he learned Julius Firmicus, Julianus Vertacus, Fullonius Saturninus, most skilled founders in the books of mathesis, without an interpreter, by his genius alone giving its support; and we, adoring the footprints of his very doctrine, before that tuneful swan confess ourselves a hoarse goose. Why do I detain you longer? Your Burgus, by the right that befitted a friend, I have made mine, knowing well that the material at least will please you, even if as a finished poem it displease.

[157573] THE CASTLE OF PONTIUS LEONTIUS

[157605] The Bistonian king's stable, the altars of Busiris, the tables of Antiphates and the Tauric realms of Thoas, and the Cyclops, by the Ithacan's wit defrauded of his light, bearing on the field of his brow, through the hollows of the mountain, a darksome cavern almost like that of his pierced eye— guest, approach, if any of you has come to Burgus to keep silence. And though Phoebus does not everywhere loose his reins for song, and here does not unfurl all the sails of speech, yet whoever you are, not praising aloud so great a house as you inspect, you are inspected: the will resounds without a voice; for your very silences cry that you, silent, are envious. Come then, Erato, strike for me the Pierian chords; let the Satyrs answer, and, moving finger and foot, sport, nor break their songs with the tremulous leap. Whatever festal applause the Dryad or the Hamadryad ever gave, the Napaeae joined to themselves, let them now pay off to you, Burgus; or the Naiads there, kindly chorus of the Nereids, teach, when by chance, the Garonne returning, you come, and furrow the sea in the river. Unfold then the causes, Erato, and tell what genius belongs to this house; so great a roof is not without its presiding lord. By chance Euan, having laid waste the arrow-bearing Erythrae, was driving to the chariots the tigers haltered with the vine, where the cluster-bearing pole entered the twofold bow; languid himself, he sits in the car; his high neck is wet with the dew of sweated wine; golden horns break from his head and hurl the native fire of the bolt (this he had taken at his first birth, when once he passed from his mother into his father's thigh); his temple bears both seasons, the wealth of spring, and the vintage binds his ruddy flowers; goblet and thyrsus are borne in right hand and left, nor does the mantle cover, but touches, his bared arms; sweetly his eyes swim, which, if chance turn them on a foe, while he beholds them only astounded, he makes the Indians drunk; then, as often as on rough places the leaping axle shakes itself, the wheel-track is everywhere drenched with the falling new wine. The Bassarids, the Satyrs, the Pans, and the Fauns Silenus was teaching to sport, now full of his nursling's godhead, yet adorned as to his head; for, his crown bare, with garlands he strives to excuse his lost hair. Then horned Ganges becomes the pomp of the new triumph; head bowed, he stood, his unkempt face with dripping mouth, and aided the dry waves with glassy tears; his hands, cast into bonds, the vine bound behind his back; here, little by little, the captive moisture flowing again, of its own accord the shoot puts forth leaves along his dewy arms. Likewise there the bound wife of the snatched husband goes, her saffron cheeks lowered, and, the lamp forbidden to be hidden, Aurora blushed with the rays of the Sun. Here too was present, after his lost cinnamon, the Phoenix, fearing that a second death does not remain for him; the captive cohort follows, bearing dishes laden with their own treasures; here ivory, ebony, or gold, and snowy pearls snatched from the pitchy breast, are carried; whoever sustains nothing is sent into fragrant bonds; here you may see the very punishments please, and the green chains breathe with violets. Last in the spoil march the black elephants; shapeless to the herd is their shape: bristling on their back stiffens a hide that scarce bears iron; for the shameless dart does not pierce their native wickerwork, and, in turn drawn in and stretched, the backs of the beasts crackle, and, by their practice of caution, they drive off the impacted missile with their shaken folds. And now the victor was making his way to Thebes through the great air, and had raised his rites to the topmost clouds, when he sees the Delian coming from the Aonian height. He too holds griffins: laurel binds their curved muzzles with leafy bit; with ivy wreathed about the hanging reins grow green; gently the wild bird flies up, the aerial and earthly ways, lest perchance with the swift clatter of its wings it break the woody reins. He himself shines eternal in his cheeks; his temples grew with clusters, and his hair, of like colour, sweeps the gilded axle; on his left side he holds, of vast sweetness, the lyre, hoarse with the carved Python; his right part holds the arrows and the strings resounding with another murmur. The Pierians went along together, and, standing round the midst, shaded the car with their nine-fold train; the Epidaurian serpent hangs through the smooth tripods, spreading the holy venom through his healthful neck. Here too Pegasus joined his hair-set wings, bearing eloquent Croton on his learned-speaking leg. When the choruses joined, each rises into his brother's embrace, but Euan a little slower, while it shames him, if he rise, to betray his unsteady feet. Then Phoebus says: "Whither do you go? Do you perhaps, Bacchus, seek the guilty Thebes? The son of Echion denies, you know, that you are a god. Leave these walls, I beg, leave them, and rather turn your wheels with me. Agave scorned to worship you, and Niobe scorned us; she stiffens thence, proud, suffering as many wounds as she beholds wounds of her womb, and, though she wishes to die, mercy more grievously fixed her; to spare is often an evil, and to bring sense to grief. And the Pentheian mother herself, her son slain, that she may rage the more—is she not, in time, to be unsound? Can we then dwell on the Aonian hills, when the adulterer will possess the chambers of the slain father, to be held the brother of his children, the husband of his mother, his own stepfather? If it is your wish to join our step, I will tell on what land alike we may set our seat. There is a place where, watering the rock, Garonne, you roll, and you who, swift by a like slip into the sea, go out, mossy Durani, with your bent gravel, now mingle little by little your now-sluggish streams. Here the sea runs against them, and with much recoil spurns and seeks the waves that the rivers roll. But when, drawn back by the lunar increments, Garonne himself gathers his tides upon his ridges, with headlong flood he swiftly returns, and seems to go now not refluent but downflowing toward his source. Then the lesser one receives the lesser water, his own, from his stagnant brother; and he too swells to Ocean's size, and makes for himself banks his own shores. Between these rivers, nearer to one wave, is a mountain breaking the air, conspicuous on its high citadel, to have lords more lofty and a spring-like senate, which the chief of his race, Pontius Paulinus, once, when Latium shall rule his country, will encircle with high walls, and lofty towers will send across the air; on whose summits may there sit, gleaming in common, either pomp or aid; not the engine those walls, not the ram, not the high pile or the near mound, not the catapult that whirls the whizzing millstones, nor yet the tortoise, nor the shed, nor the running wheel, the ladders now set, will ever be able to shake. Now I seem to see what shall be yours, Burgus (so you will be called); for the houses rise from the river and shining baths sit along the battlements. Here, when the heat is vexed by pitch-black north winds, the rough pumice begins to bark from its roughened brink; and the torrent, leaping from the broken cliffs, is shaken up on high, and with its spray rains on the very roofs, and lifts the sailors, and often with a playful shipwreck sports; for, the tempest done, it leaves stranded, ebbing, the fleets sent into the baths. But with what columns, and how great ones, they are propped! Let the precious darkness of the crimson cave yield, the Synnadic, and the hill that bears the ivory stones of the Numidians, and the marbles that grow green with grassy veins; I want now no white Paros, now no Carystus; cheaper is the purple that hangs on the red rock. And lest posterity doubt who the founder is, a stone is fixed at the entrance; here it marks the names of the authors; but near it is water, and the pressed footprints, which it snatches and wipes off the mud with its poured flood. The wall, crusted with cut slabs, comes up to a golden roof, too much to be hidden by tawny metal; for the rich fortune of the house, not suffering its riches to lie hid, betrays them, while it so conceals its own roofs. After this rises a portico, itself double, overpassing the double court, unknown to the double wagon; which again, drawn back at its soft summit, the curved wings look back upon a little with their facing horns. It beholds the new-born day with its right curve, seeing the noon in front, about to see the setting on the left. It loses nothing of the threefold hinge of heaven and keeps the whole sun through its crescent halls. Here the sire of Pharnaces plunges in the deep the sacred herds of trident-bearing Jove; you would think the bodies of the horn-hoofed, struck by the axe, and the sure blows to redden with bloody dew; the true horror of the wound stands, and, the four-horse teams slain, the painting lives. Hence the Pontic ruler with numerous arms shuts in Cyzicus; but on this side the consul Lucullus brings aid to his allies, and, compelled to undergo the utmost crisis of famine, the Mithridatic soldier envies the besieged foe. Here the ardour of the Roman soldier swims the sea and carries dry paper across on his wet body. Above, with roofs stretched out lengthwise, the granaries grow and straiten the building with their ample fruits. Hither will come whatever Africa reaps in her warm lands, whatever the Calaber, whatever the keen Apulian cultivates, how great a harvest swells in the Leontine heap, whatever Gargara entrusts to the Mygdonian furrow, how much Attic Eleusis, having worshipped Ceres with silent dances, was storing up for her citizen Triptolemus, when, the peoples of men long melting away upon the acorn, the tawny age was perishing, the tawny grain given. The summer portico lies open hence to the chill North; hence a harmless heat goes out from the winter baths and softens the place against the season; for that part is fitter for the cold; for what flees the face of the Lion, thence it ill bears the rage of the Lycaonian Bear. But to the baths of the citadel comes a far higher stream, and falls upon the mountain, and, driven through wide channels, carries round the shut-in river through hollow partings. Toward the setting sun, after the granaries, rises the shaded house that is the lords' winter dwelling: here a good flame crackles, feeding on the timbers set beside it; the wave of the burning globe, curved in the furnace, perishes, and, the whip broken, scatters its softened vapour over all the roofs. Continuous hence you may see what the founder dared— to raise weaving-rooms rivalling the Palladian temples, where once the reverend wife of lofty Leontius— than whom no Pontic bride ever rejoices more, illustrious for the lot of her husband—will be celebrated in song, either for having emptied the Syrian distaffs, or for having twisted the silken threads through the light reeds, or, with tawny thread, for having spun the softened metal of the pregnant spindle. On the joined walls hereafter gleams the device that bears the beginnings of the circumcised Jews. The painting shines perpetual; nor in long time, cheapened, do the pigments deface their figures. You are turned to the left: a broad portico receives you, curved with straight ways, where at the topmost edge hangs, and a stony forest stands of straitened columns; here a high dining-hall lies open with revolving doors; near it a molten channel; the wave falls from above before the doors, the basin hanging; and, following the vein, swimming fish find the watery dining-rooms. Close by rises a tower, both first and last; the custom shall be here for the lords to set the winter couch. Sitting often on its conspicuous summit I shall behold the mountain dear at once to my Muses and my goats; I shall walk among these laurel boughs; here I shall believe that trembling Daphne trusts herself to me. Now if perchance you turn your steps toward the twin Bear, to come into the temple of the god who is greatest, the storeroom and the larder breathe with joined delights; here, brother, you will be much present. Now divide the dwelling, yielding to me my spring, which, flowing from the mountain, a many-hollowed arch shades with its spacious circle. It needs no adornment; Nature has given it grace; nothing feigned pleases to please; no pomp through art is there; the hammer with its resounding blow will not smooth the rocks, nor will marble fill the eaten tufa. This spring of Castalia suffices us in place of its wave; have the rest, you rich man; let the hills tremble at your laws; loose your captives here, and through the ridges of Burgus let the glad vineyards become the relaxed chains." This voice Silenus, now nearly sober, confirms, and likewise the choruses sang, applauding: "Nysa, farewell to Bromius; Parnassus, twin-peaked, to Phoebus. Let not Naxos seek this one, not Cirrha seek this one, but rather let Burgus be sought, about to please for ever."

[170751] Lo, as often as it shall please you to gladden your banquet with more capacious bowls, I have sent what among your cups and great draughts you may read. You will succour my modesty if these things do not come to sober ears; nor without cause, and otherwise than is fair, do I make this demand, since for my Bacchus, about to undergo a decemviral judgement, a tribunal is raised earlier than is fitting. But if anyone shall judge a poem to be blameworthy in this, that it has exceeded the brevity of an epigram, it is plainly evident that he has never read the baths of Etruscus, nor the Surrentine Hercules, nor the locks of Flavius Earinus, nor the Tibur of Vopiscus, nor anything at all of the woodlands of our Papinius; all which descriptions that most highly esteemed man does not bind within the narrow limits of distichs or quatrains, but rather, as the lyric Flaccus prescribes in his volume on the art of poetry, with many and those purple patches of commonplaces becomingly extends the themes once begun. Let it suffice that I have set these things down for an example of my defence, lest this very plea against length should itself seem long. Farewell.

[171915] To Consentius

[171930] When already, for your merits, I was preparing, Consentius, pillar and glory of manners, to spend the song of a poor reed-pipe on the praises of your hospitality, of your own accord, unbarring the trumpet for songs, you, the order reversed, summoned in verse your companion, wont thus rather to play. The Muse obeys you, but the shameless pen she will move hence much more cautiously; for while you demand songs eloquently, you urge me to write, but make me silent. Lately, when on your hurrying steed you went to Phocis and the Sestian Baiae, cities illustrious by titles and battles, through two trophies of consuls (for the one bore the war of Julianus and, with Brutus for leader, a naval frenzy, but this one the bloody Teutonic battles and Marius raised up at the falling Cimbri), you sent me a manifold poem, learned, noble, strong, delicate. The hexameters went proudly, and bore, with joined but lesser steps, elegiacs through five feet; you sent too, with the metre of the triple trochee attended by spondee and dactyl, sweet hendecasyllables, and your Sollius you bound with a kindly interest. The usury is asked of us and we repay; for what I pay back in verse for yours, this is the hundredth part of your praises. What shall I first revere and worship for you? Unless I err, your country and your father near. Who, though he might claim for himself the highest place by right, yet it is needful that she conquer who bears the parents. Hail, Narbo, mighty in health, good to be seen in town and country alike, in walls, citizens, circuit, taverns, gates, porticoes, forum, theatre, shrines, capitols, mints, baths, arches, granaries, markets, meadows, springs, islands, salt-pans, pools, godhead, merchandise, bridge, sea; you who alone by right may worship the gods Lenaeus, Ceres, Pales, Minerva with ears of grain, the vine, the pastures, the oil-presses. Trusting in men alone, and the aid of nature sought not, far left behind, putting forth a higher peak from the mountains, no open trench, no rampart with the barrier of bristling stakes, crowns you; you do not fix marbles, gold-leaf, and glass, not the sheen of the Indian tortoise, not, if any beams of ivory the broken tusks of the Marmaric elephant gave, upon your walls, nor adorn your golden gates with mosaic pebbles; but, proud through your half-ruined citadels, showing the glory of an old war, you bear millstones shaken with blows, more precious for your praiseworthy ruins. Let other cities be threatening by their site, which humble strength founds on heights, and walls set on sheer crests that, never cut down, may glory: you please by being battered, and the storm endured has made public your strong fidelity. Hence that Martian ruler, and greater than his great father, glory of the Goths, pillar and safety of the Roman race, Theodoric loves you, and proves you faithful to himself in adverse tumults before. But do not on this account seem foul, because the engine has often pierced you; for in the body of brave men the praise is greater, the greater the scar. In the Marathonian camp, to have deserved to lack a great wound is a disgrace; among the Publicolae, fierce of hand, Mucius stands out with maimed arm; when Magnus pressed Caesar's rampart, among so many faces safe from the foe one-eyed Scaeva was the more comely. It is a steep praise to endure hard things; for the cowardly, the timid, and the disproved much idle valour is feigned. What of this, that, fruitful in creating Caesars, happy in the offspring of men, you gave at once sons reigning with their begetter? For who will pass over the Persian expedition or the victorious camp of prince Carus and Niphates, trodden over by Roman legions, then, when the emperor, taken by the lightning, finished a life like the lightning? Mighty in these citizens, city, and country, Consentius, you beget for me a kindly father, him to whom bright wit and Roman rigour were joined with Attic charm. Him Miletus and Thales could have marvelled to hear, and at the same time he who at Lindos is known, Cleobulus, among the citadels; and you, Periander, who are from Corinth, and you whom Priene gave, Bias, and you, Pittacus, the Lesbian sophist, and you who, mighty at austere Athens, besiege the Socratic wrestling-grounds, Solon, and you, born in Tyndarean Therapnae, Chilon, prior to law-giving Lycurgus. Not here, if he wished, his care at leisure, to mark what course belongs to the stars, did he run the divers ways of Aratus; him not, when to geometric arts he composed his mind, could Euclid follow, knowing the space of Olympus; him not, if he wished to whirl rhythms, could Chrysippus delay one whit from his purpose with his heap. Here, when he studied the Amphionian art with plectrum, thumb, voice, and pipe, the Thracian bard, the Arcadian god, and Phoebus were after in every song, and the very Muses you would not think so musical. Here, if dressed in train and buskin he had once entered the Attic theatre, Sophocles and Euripides would have yielded; or if he had wished to sound the platforms with the sock, to him, his finger raised, you would give the palm, Menander. Here, when he polished the six-foot pen, learned in the manner of the Smyrnaean workshop, or when he gave himself to grave history, scarcely could they keep their first places, torrential Herodotus, thundering Homer. Not better than he had been he who once stirred by art the Pandionian cavea, the tumultuous orator, whether he were swept against one-eyed Philip, or pleaded the cause of Ctesiphon, a man ever growing by popularity and justly seated on the citadel of speech, who, begotten of a smith for father, chose rather to polish the file of his mouth. What shall I sing of you, the masters of Latin eloquence, the Arpinate, the Paduan, the Mantuan, and you who teach comedy, Terence, and you who, sprung in a severe age, surpass, Plautus, the Greek wit in charm, and you, venerable enough for the manifold multitude of your writings, Varro, and you who are mighty in brevity, Crispus, and you who, for your flowing genius, must be silenced by no mouth, Cornelius Tacitus, and you, through the gardens of the Massilians, the colonist of the sacred trunk, Arbiter, equal to the Hellespontian Priapus, and you, known through your wanton songs, tender Naso, and sent to Tomi, once to a Caesarean girl under a feigned name subjected, as Corinna? What of the lofty Senecas shall I tell, or of him whom lofty Bilbilis gives, Martial, natives of the Iberian lands? What of the poets whom, yoked in a twofold marriage, Argentaria Polla gives? What shall I unweave of the many of varied style? The witty, the tender, the grave, the keen, if Consentius was present, lay hidden. To this man of supreme genius, and likewise of supreme nobility and beauty, is joined a wife who, transferring to her husband's house the insignia of ancient Jovinus, filled the sophist's home with consular robes. So within your own household, Consentius, proud glory of your country, in the annals your grandfather lives, in the books your father. You, mighty enough through these pedigrees, but mightier in the height of your manners, I could not sound with the praise you merit, not if, singing to me in an Odrysian cave, where, with the streams far trembling, Hebrus re-echoes through the cliffs of the Cicones, that prince of bards had taught me— when his sweet chords, the stones made living, bore them through Rhodope by his drawing song, and, the order reversed, the springs being bound, compelled the panting lands to run, and Ismarus too lay open to the suns, the eared wood seeking the lyre, and, dissolved by no heat, the curved snows rushed down from Ossa, and the Bistones saw the Strymon standing, when the swift water thirsted for the song; nor if, given to the two-formed Pelian one, I had stood at the Centaur's plectra, fearing the whinny of my twofold master; nor if that god had taught me to speak, the oxherd bidden to feed the herd of his client at the Amphrysus' stream, who struck down the iron-dark Cyclopes with his bow beneath the Liparaean furnaces, brandishing a bolt heavier in his arrow. Now, while you were warm from your first tender rising, the nine sisters received you in their bosom, and you, wailing from your mother, they dipped in the ford of glassy Hippocrene: then, plunged in this water, instead of the wave of the loquacious stream, you the rather drank letters. Hence, now a boy fitter than your master, whatever of rhetoric's training, whatever of grammar or the wrestling-ground there is, as, still tender, you had drained, you devoured. And now the court bore you, and the pious prince at once set you among the conspicuous whom the consistories hold, the tribunes; and now too the purple one in the citadel of the realm was wont to preside over your offices, because your manners deserved it by nobility: so great a peak and a wondrous glory the honours written in the annals show. Hence, having followed an ample service, though you ought to have enlarged the camp-revenue by just suffrages, yet, abstaining from the customary little gain, richer in fame you returned home, counting yours only what you had given. Then, if perchance it was that the emperor wished something to come to his father-in-law's Eastern ears by a faithful and skilled interpreter, he chose you, learned to resolve the commerce of the twofold speech, forthwith. O, prithee, how often, as you spoke, the Byzantine realms gave you their "well done," and you, whether sounding in Latin as if born of the Romulean Subura, or, with the roundness of the Argive tongue welling up as if begotten at Marathon, the Bosphorans, applauding, marvelled at, admiring the Attic nurslings less! Hence, if the treaties of the world were loosed, fierce Hun, Sauromatian, Goth, Gelonian would give peace with you for mediator; you would enter the Tuncrus and the Waal, the Visurgis, the Elbe, and the innermost marshes of the Franks, the Sygambri revering you, safe by your manners alone amid arms; you would approach Maeotis and the Caspian gates, you the Bactra ridden by the fluid Parthians, steadfast and undaunted, so that, the haughtiness of the swollen court laid aside, the tyrant who sits above the satraps, belching forth his kinships with the demigods, would bend to you his crescent tiara. You, if the public destinies did not forbid that you should seek Byrsa or the Tanaitic rebel of the African land, forthwith, the rage of Mars laid down, after the pirate's losses, would dispatch keels full of merchandise—the trader's ships— and through you, peace well restored, no more would wars sail against me. Now if perchance, ending grave matters, the spectacles of the theatre had taken you, the whole chorus of actors grew pale, as if the Bowman and the nine Muses sat near the platforms as judges. Before you Caramallus or Phabaton, with closed throat and speaking gesture, by nod, leg, knee, hand, rotation, in his whole figure would even once lie hidden, whether the daughter of Aeetes and her Jason are brought in there, and the fierce Phasis, who, the teeth cast over the Colchian fields, took fright, while, the war sprouting up, the spear-points mingled with the ears of grain wavered; or whether someone tells the feast of Thyestes or your laments, fierce Philomela, or the boy torn apart and made food for his now more innocent wife; or the Tyrian rape, and Jove the bull, more to be feared, the thunderbolt scorned, in his brow; or whether the tower of Danaë is told there, when it was much watered with a rainy fee, giving more by golden theft than by metals; or whether someone acts Leda, and the Phrygian boy, fitting him to the cups, makes for the Thunderer a sweet-smelling waiter with nectar's juice; or feigns Mars now sent into Lemnian chains, or, repulsed, puts on the form of a boar and roughens his head with bristles and his back, and with shaggy jaws curves the smooth ivory, or shapes a shaggy beast on his back, pointing the bent tusks by unceasing rubbing; or whether the Persean maiden, avenged, is acted there by the husband's sickle-sword, or what of song and fable the closed Pergama gives in their ten-year war. What shall I say of the cithara-girls, the flute-players, the mimes, the rope-dancers, the buffoons, reeds, plectra, jests, the wrestling-ground, the rope, to unfold tremblingly before you? For how great things you yourself in the circus games, victor, did, while Rome thundered, it were fitting to grave with a glad Muse. By chance two-fronted Janus brought back his Kalends, Phoebus rounding off the seasons of the year, to the curule chairs to be assumed. This is Caesar's custom, on one and the same day twice (they call them "private") to prepare games. Then a band of youths, but of the court, exercises the grim images of the Elean field with ranging four-horse teams. And now the urn seeks you, and the hoarse acclamation, hissing, of the crowd rouses you; then where the door and the seat of the consuls is, which a wall, arched on either side with twelve crypts and barriers, encircles, one of four axles being chosen by lot, you enter, pressing the curved reins. Your colleague does this and likewise the part opposed to you both; the colours gleam, white or sea-blue, green and red, your insignia; the attendants hold the mouths, and the hands the reins, and the twisted manes they compel to hide in flexible knots, and exhort by the way and help with coaxing applause, and further dictate to the four-footed a delightful frenzy. Those at the barriers roar and lean upon the bolts at once, and through the shut boards they breathe smoke, and before the course the absent field is seized by their blasts. They push, they tremble, they drag, they fight back, they grow hot, they leap, they fear, they are feared, nor do they check their step, but with restless foot lash the hardened post. At last, with the murmur of the blaring horn, the trumpeter, calling the suspended teams, pours the swift cars into the field. Not so the rush of the three-forked lightning, not the arrow shot from the Scythian string, not the furrow of a swiftly-falling star, not the leaden hail of bullets whirled from Balearic slings ever so broke the liquid paths of the pole. The earth yields to the wheels, and the air is soiled with the dust stirred by the tracks; the drivers press on at once with the whips, and now, their breasts bent forward from the chariot, they are dragged, stretched out, and strike the yoke-beasts across the shoulders, the back left empty, nor could you quickly tell whether the head-long masters the poles bear up the rather, or the axles. Now, as you flew out of sight, the space consumed being wider, the field, made narrow by art, had closed your bodies, through which the channel, long, low, and double-walled, stretched out for itself its engine. When the farther goal released them all, your colleague becomes first of the two who had passed you; so you yourself were fourth then by the condition of the turn. The care of the middle ones is, as that first one, pressed by the more rightward urging, if he should lay open his left side, bearing all the reins toward the barrier, to be passed by a chariot driven within. You, redoubled by the very effort, hold in the four-yoked team, and with supreme art keep them well in reserve for the seventh round; the others pressed on with hand and voice, and everywhere onto the field, in falling drops, went the sweat of the drivers and the wing-footed. A hoarse crash of the cheering strikes the hearts, and to the men and horses alike heat comes from the course and chill from fear. So it goes once, and a second time; so is the third orbit and the fourth; in the fifth round, unable to bear the weight of those that follow, the first wrenches back his axle, because, commanding the swift four-horse team, he had felt the yoke-beasts exhausted for himself. Now, the sixth return all explained, and the crowd now demanding the prizes, the adverse part, fearing nothing of your force, was wearing the unguarded tracks first, when suddenly, the curbs tightened at once, the breasts tightened, the foot set forward, as much as that charioteer was wont, dragging Oenomaus, Pisa trembling, so much you wear down the swift yoke-beasts. Here, while one alone presses the winding shortcuts of the goal, urged on by you, the chariots once raised by the rush he could not bend in a joined turn; whom you, because he passed without rule, overtook by staying behind, halting by art. Another, while he rejoices in popularity, ran too far to the right beneath the seats. This one, while he turns his way aside, and long, slow, too late rouses his horn-hoofed with the whip, you yourself pass, twisted on a straight track. Here the foe, following you too incautiously, hoping he had already anticipated the leader, came shameless crosswise upon your axle; his horses are bent, the wanton throng of legs enters the wheels, and the twelve spokes are straitened, until, the intervals crackling, filled, and the whirling rim breaks the feet; then he, the fifth, flung headlong from the toppling car, makes a mountain by his manifold ruin, fouling with blood his fallen forehead. A crash, revived, mingles all things, so great as the cypress-bearing Lycaeus does not raise, so great as wooded Ossa does not, restless through frequent storms, so great as not the Trinacrian Doris, rolled by the South, re-echoes, nor the Propontis, which ramparts the Bosphorus with its whirling brine. Here at once the just emperor bids silken palms be joined with torque-crowns, and merit be rewarded, ordering the conquered, shameful enough, to go off with rugs of many-coloured wool. Now, the games of youth performed, what you showed yourself to be in the following age, sought within the court of my father-in-law when you governed the care of the Palace, we will tell in later pages, if there is more leisure for times to come; now let obedient Thalia, in few words, sound out that hospitality of which we have spoken. O sweet house, O pious household gods, which (a thing difficult and at odds with itself) liberty and modesty cultivate together! O banquets, talks, little books, laughter, seriousness, sallies of wit, the meeting, the company, one and the same, whether the shrines of God were to be worshipped by us, the illustrious roofs, or the houses of Livius to be seen, or steps to be borne to the pontiff, or to the heights of Martius Myro, or to the dwellings of learned-speaking Leo (who, teaching the twice-six tables of law, would make Claudius Appius lie hid of his own accord, the more obscure for his renown in the decemvirate; but if he tell epic, and bend the metre into clipped rhythms, his plectrum thundering, he would make biting Flaccus fall silent, though after his satires and his lyre that one strives to fly to the Pindaric swan); or whether, Magnus, your favour held us, endowed with many gifts of men, beauty, nobility, mind, fortune (whose varied deeds if I should go through, they would weary a hundred iron mouths with praise— steadfast, ingenious, and effective, a prudent arbiter, the best of kinsmen, defrauding his genius of nothing for himself or any, regarding persons, places, and time); or whether your halls held us, my Marcellinus, skilled in the laws (who, too truthful and too severe, believed to be harsh by him who knows you not; but if anyone has well proved you, he learns what you yourself wish to judge; for never do you fear to speak what is just, though Sulla press you and fierce Carbo, though the grim Marii and the savage Cinnae, and though by chance the triumviral swords stand round your head and side); or whether the household gods of Limpidius held us, a magnificent citizen and a supreme man, following well the rule of his brother; or whether the linking dutifulness of distinguished Marinus held us together, whose diligence and fellowship are to be cherished by me with eternal praise; or whatever other brothers it was dear to both of us to see, with whom to have had leisure I count a praiseworthy occupation; when affection wishes to set their names in verse, the metre refuses. Hence you would call us to your own house, when the new morning had gone out, and the warming sun gave the second hour after the first. Here, bringing forth smooth balls and hoops, here the dice in the rattling boxes, arranging us for the strokes of the throws, like the son of Nauplius, inventor of the art, you rejoiced to stir up a merry quarrel. Hence to the baths—not Neronian nor those that Agrippa gave, nor that man's whose tomb Dalmatian Salonae behold— to the baths it pleased, however, to go, well furnished for a private man's modesty. After which your cups and the midmost couch of your Muses held us, such statues and images as neither in bronze nor marble nor colours Mentor, Praxiteles, Scopas gave, such as not Polyclitus himself fashioned, nor a figure made by the Phidian chisel. But now five hundred hendecasyllables beg your pardon for their loquacity. Only, even if it please, the poem is long. Now it suffices; you yourself are hindered, reading much in the verse your friend, more at leisure than those that rule.

[193121] Send-off to His Little Book

[193150] Going out of my doors, little book, remember, I pray, to keep this way, which leads well to our companions, whose names I have carefully marked; nor let the ancient highway be worn by you, along whose space the Caesarean name, old enough, grows green on the columns; but step gently: and by taking your delays you stir a swift affection in your friends. And first you will enter the home of severe Domitius, your Muses trembling: not so censorious was even he whom they say laughed but once in his age; but you can rejoice in his learned rigour: here, if he approves you, you will please all. Hence kindly Brivas will receive you, which cherishes the bones of holy Julianus, which, while they are thought dead among the dead, a living power flashes from the tomb. Hence now you seize the rightward fields, and, the ridge measured in a single day, tomorrow you behold the yellow Triobris; then the land of the Gabali, snowy enough, and—so far as the natives wish it thought— you will see a lofty city in a well. Hence to my own time's Laconians you will hasten, Justinus and his brother, whose famous love, through the lips of the world, tramples Pirithous and Theseus and the faithful comrade of raging Orestes. When you have been received in their bosom, you will go to Trevidon and the ridge too near, alas, to the slanderous Ruteni. Here you will find the father of learned Tonantius, the ruler and pillar of the Gauls, Ferreolus, equal to ancient Syagrius, whom his wife Papianilla, sharing his cares with chaste labour, aids— such as neither Tanaquil was, nor she whom you, Tricipitinus, begot, nor such as the maid dedicated to Phrygian Vesta, who against the swelling Albula drew the boat by her virgin hair. Hence Laesora, surpassing the Scythians' Caucasus, will behold you, and swift Tarnis, bearing in its clear wave the muddy fish pressed with a solid savour. Here add to yourself the wings of Zetes and Calais, and, fleeing, beware the cloudy ridge; for it is fruitful of unceasing storm; but though you be borne in swift course, Vorocingus will detain you, weary. Here you will find our Apollinaris, whether against the heats of the raging Lion he clothes his house in the cold of marbles, or walks in his sequestered gardens, such as grow green in honey-bearing Hybla, such as, gladdening the old man of Corycus, the dark stream of pitchy Galaesus shaded; or whether, among violets, thyme, privet, wild thyme, cassia, saffron, and marigold, narcissi and hyacinthine flowers, he scorns the clod which, the seeker of great price, the incense-bearing Sabaean brings; or whether he rather rests in a feigned grotto on the hill's edge, where the bent wood, striving to give a native portico, makes with its trees not a grove but a cave. Who could now compare the ancient orchards of the Indian king here, and the golden vines with leaves of green amber, when Porus set up, with rattling treasure, a vineyard of metal from a tawny shoot, its clusters flowing with gems? Hence you will go to Cottion and to our Avitus say "hail," then "farewell." You owe a perpetual obedience to the man; for—let my kinsmen grant pardon for this— a parent is not prior to me before a friend. Hence Fidulus, glory of the good, and second to Tetradius, by no hidden gifts of manners or by the tenor of right, receives you with holy hospitality. Thence direct your step to the Tres Villae and seek Thaumastus, either of the two: of whom the younger is my companion and at once colleague and brother in degree; but if by chance the elder is found by you, salute him, prostrate, almost as an uncle. Hence to the ample roofs of consul Magnus and to your Felix come, little book; and, where the paternal library is— such as not even austere Philagrius had— Probus will make you, approved, be admitted; here you will often be read to my Eulalia, whose manners, equal to Cecropian Minerva, and the stern old men, and her father himself, once purple-clad, used to fear. But now it suffices: lo, leave the harbour; lest I press you with more weight of ballast, in these verses lift your anchor.