WORK: Carmina  (slug: sidonius-apollinaris-carmina-0bc4da)

CHAPTER: 01-carmina



[0] Preface to the Panegyric Spoken for Anthemius Augustus, Consul for the Second Time

[84] When Nature set the youthful Jove above the stars and the new god took up the ancient realm, the divine powers vied to honour their own divinity, and in unequal measures sang an equal wisdom. Mars, with blaring trumpet, proclaimed his father's praise and lauded the thunderbolts with thunderous sound; the Arcadian and the Bowman thrummed on resonant strings, this one more skilled at the cithara's stroke, that at the lyre; the chorus of the Castalides applauded in varied measure, with songs, with reeds, with thumb, with voice, with foot. Yet after the heaven-dwellers, even the demigods' middling chants the god is said to have borne with patience. Then the Dryads, fit for the Fauns, and the Maenads for the Satyrs, a rustic throng, poured out a charming melody. The pipe-blowing Pans left the high Maenala, and after the lyre the harsh reed-pipe pleased Jove. Among these Chiron, dancing to the sounding plectra, gracefully bent the awkward limbs of his horse-half; the half-man earned a hearing and earned to please, though, even as he sang, he gave out a whinny. So rich tongue and poor alike offered their sacred rite, and the highest offering of their vow was then a song. Thus we, O Caesar, the greatest hope of our age, after the great nobles bring our little incense, boldly singing before the learned Victor, who is wont to speak with the mouth of Phoebus, or your own; for though he be your quaestor in the eternal court, to us he will be an eternal master. Therefore, prince, let the offering of a varied tongue revere you; for you make our breasts a new temple to yourself.

[1676] Panegyric

[1687] By favourable omen and number, Augustus, raise up the fasces for the second time, and, shining in the mass of consular gold, unfold the new year, an old consul, and without disdain let yourself be written twice in the annals; though crowned in the diadem your hair be lifted high, and a Tyrian cloak enclose your shoulders after the manner of those before you, yet may the painted purple of the toga take you more, since it is always, from the ages, a rare thing—a frequent consul; and you, O Janus, to whom the yearly laurel is due, loosen your torpor and bind your locks with any leaf, nor at the sudden light grow pale, nor believe the prince, or the elements of things, are stirred: Nature works no novelty—this sun too comes from the east.

[2433] This is he, O nobles, whom the valour of Romulus sought, and whom your love; to whom, as if conquered by storms and bereft of a steersman, the state, a shattered ship, gave herself, to be better guided by a worthy master, that she might fear neither the tempests nor you, O pirate. The farmer sought you with prayer, the ally with assenting covenant, the camp with trumpets, the senate-house with applause; the three tribes wrote your name with their votes, and your colleague sent you to us and the realm to you; the suffrages are as many as the world can muster. I confess, we all trembled lest your devout colleague should refuse to grant to your prayer the public prayers. Will posterity believe it?— that you, O prince, who can do all things against us, were not permitted all things over yourself. You surpass the deeds of those before, Augustus Leo; for he stands above kingdoms who bids men reign: better will your commonwealth now be the more one, which was thus made of two.

[3419] Hail, pillar of sceptres, queen of the East, Rome of your own world! Now, with the prince sent to me, to be revered no longer by the Eastern citizen alone, seat of empire—but more precious in that you stand, mother of empire. You who bear Rhodope and Haemus, the land of the Thracians is yours, a soil fruitful of heroes. Here the ice receives the newborn, and from the mother's womb the soft limbs of infants the native snow hardens. Scarcely any is nourished at the breast, but drawn from the teat he drinks rather, through a wound, his horse's blood; so, milk forsaken, the whole race drinks valour; they grow a little while: soon they play at war with javelins; their nurse, the wound, furnishes them these sports; the boys, apt for the hunt, empty the lairs of beasts, and the youth, enriched by plunder, keeps the law of the sword; and ripened old age they are not ashamed to end by steel: in such an order of life the men of Mars conduct themselves; but you, girt by the sea, draw from both Europe and Asia their commingled temperateness; for the nearby trumpet of the Chalcidic Eurus gradually tempers the Bistonian gapings of the North. Meanwhile Susa trembles at you, and in suppliant homage the Achaemenid Persian bows his crescent tiara. The Indian, his hair drenched with fragrant balsam, for your gain disarms the throat of his wild nurslings, that he may pay down the curved ivory; so the elephant, inglorious, carries back his maimed face as a Bosphoran tribute. You stretch out a vast city with spacious walls, which yet the people make too narrow; men go out into the sea on moles, and the new land draws in the old waves; for the dust of Dicaearchean sand, brought hither, within the waters one enters grows solid, and the hardened mass sustains fields carried out into a foreign deep. So set in order, gazing on every side at your harbours, ramparted by the sea, the goods of the earth gird you. Fortunate enough you are, having shared Rome's triumphs, and now we do not complain: let the division of the realm prevail. The parts of the balance agree; while you take up our weight, you have made it equal. From such a city you, a citizen, shine from Procopius your father, to whom an ancient line came down from Augustan forebears; whom to speak of with worthy eloquence is not granted, not even if there now rose from Avernus the one who with his song bent the cliffs, and with sounding fingers compelled the listening woods to run to his plectrum, when the streams of Hebrus stood still, and with the river's course bound, the astonished wave thirsted the more for his song.

[6017] To this man once, in his youth, was entrusted the restoring of peace with Assyria; the Parthian was astounded that in his first years he should not bear an old man's counsel; terror-struck, each satrap stood transfixed who sits beneath his king: so had the envoy's genius bound them all; the Median fields trembled, and Babylon, who had not closed her gates to the dragon-born foe, then at last thought herself laid too widely open. But after the new formula set a treaty for both sides, with Procopius dictating it the more, by them is sworn the fire and the water as god, and—lest the future pacts hold not— he calls his ancestral gods to witness here. The Chaldaean elder, after the manner of priests, performed over the entrails his secret murmurings; the king himself, holding a jewelled bowl, poured the goblets prone before the incense-burning altars. Returning thence, he takes up the height of a doubled honour: patrician, and master too of foot and horse, he is set over the camps, where, holding the bars of Taurus and driving the wandering Ethiopians far off by the terror of war, with the gulf pacified he might watch the Orontes serve. His father-in-law was Anthemius, prefect, consul, and the same, who ruled the peoples by his judgements and the year by his name. Fortune ever attends purple-clad men with the murex; this alone is changed in them, that he who was consul reigns. But we pass them all by: now come you to the plectrum, you whose hair, worn by the helmet, comes to the diadem, to whom the ruddy purple of Caesar is given when the breastplate is laid aside, and whose hand, emptied of the sword-point, must be filled with the sceptre. Your cradle shone with the marks of empire, and the foreknowing earth, with crops transformed, promised golden ages. At your birth, they say, the rivers, with honey welling forth, lingered in their sweetened channels, and streams of oil flowed through the astonished presses, the berry yet hanging. The field brought forth a waving harvest without seed, and the vine begrudged the grapes born without it. The roses of winter blushed, and, scorning the frost, the lilies leaped up amid the mingled rime. As often as Lucina brings such a birth to pass, the custom of the elements yields, and faith in a reign to come is made by the newness of things: that blessed gods have come Nature thus declares: the gentle flames licked the tender locks of steadfast Iulus; Astyages, fated to be driven out by his grandson Cyrus, took fright at the cluster of vine spread from his loins; the teeming she-wolf offered her teats to fearless Quirinus; Julius came into the light while the laurel blazed; great Alexander and Augustus too are held to have been conceived by a serpent-god, and Phoebus and Jove they divided between them: for one of these sought his father beneath the Cinyphian Syrtis; the other, by his mother's birthmarks, rejoiced to be held Phoebus-born, boasting the Epidaurian standards of the Paeonian serpent. Eagles have girt many men, and over the sudden sky the attendant pinion has played at crowns to come. But that this one, illustrious nobles, was called to the sceptre was given to be known even then, when by chance in his father's home the cut vine-shoot put forth shoots not its own. That was the spring of empire; beneath the image of foliage the omens flowered on the dry branch on his right hand. But after the infant had passed his first years, he crawled over his father's arms, and the breastplate that pressed his narrow neck he clasped with both arms and, the plates loosened, went between to dark kisses, the crests pushed back. It was the boy's play, with hurrying hand, to handle arrows snatched from the foe, and through captured bows to drive the reluctant sinews to the curved horns, now to hurl the trembling javelin with his tender arm, and on the back of a snorting horse, with the weight of a pole, to carry by a leap the chains of steel he wore; to drive the beasts he found, and seek those hidden in foliage, to shut them, once caught, in close-meshed nets, now to pierce them with the twisted spit: then often by the din of his comrades to be praised, when the gnashing beast bore the steel and the weapon went out through the entered shoulder-blades. Lay by, alert boy and huntsman, your Pelethronian titles, son of Aeacus—though pressing the back of your subjected master, and therefore ranging the lairs secure, you were the rather guided by your horse. Not better than our prince did Paean aim his shafts, standing over the Python, when, troubled with quiver nigh empty, he pierced the numerous coils with numberless darts.

[10648] No less did he hear, among these, the ancient sages: how you, Thales, born of Miletus, blame standing surety; how you, Cleobulus of Lindos, say, "moderation is best"; how from Ephyra you devise the whole, Periander; how you, Attic Solon, look well to the end of life; how to you, Bias of Priene, the crowd of evils is greater; how you counsel to know the time, Pittacus, born of Lesbos; how you would have all know themselves, Chilon of Sparta. Moreover he learned the various schools, new doctrines: whatever Anacharsis praised in the Scythian fields; whatever Sparta gained from the law-giving Lycurgus; whatever the Cynic throng turns over in the Erechthean gymnasia, imitating, Epicurus, your fellows; whatever the twofold Academy, deciding nothing true, proclaims; whatever Cleanthes tastes with gnawed nail; whatever Pythagoras, Democritus, Heraclitus wept, laughed at, kept silent; whatever Plato's genius—which dwelt on the height—teaches in due order on the throne, or whatever Aristotle, dividing the limbs of speech, gives as snares in his argumentative syllogisms; whatever Anaximenes, Euclid, Archytas, Zeno, Arcesilas, Chrysippus, and Anaxagoras gave; and the Socratic mind, alive after death in the Phaedo, looking down on the vast chains on his thin leg, when death itself trembled at the accused and the lictor's pale hand brought the poison to the untroubled master. Besides, whatever the ancient age took pains to set in the books of Latium, he was wont to run through whole: what battles Mantua, and what perils of the sea, played out, imitating the Smyrnaean trumpet; whatever aid of speech the Arpinate consul gives, having followed without end the smith's son, by whom—his father scorned—the tongue polished with eloquence counted more; or whatever into the ages the Paduan volumes send on Euganean pages; with what brevity Crispus pleases, with what weight Varro, with what genius Plautus, with what thunderbolt Quintilian, with what pomp Tacitus, never to be named without praise.

[12655] Formed by these studies, sprung from such a birth, steeped in such character—him the prince to whom the world from East to West then gave the sceptre, to whom his cloudy and only daughter owed grandsons of the purple, chose for son-in-law; yet not so as in sluggish luxury, content with his father-in-law's fortune and snatching at ease, to owe nothing to himself; but, the rank of count received, he circled the banks of the Danube and the line of the broad frontier, he exhorts, disposes, examines, arms; so under his father Pius, governing his parent's camps, so Marcus while Pius lived, men who would later give laws, held command over countless legions. Hence, returning, every honour is given him; and master of both services and consul he shines, the joined power of the patriciate his; and at swift pace his private heights ran up, and as a youth he mounted the curule chair of old men, and a young veteran sat in well-earned gold.

[13596] And now his father is among the gods: but in you there was no desire for empire; the diadem, having long endured rebuff, chose a man so distinguished that, when he in turn chose, you could not scorn his choosing: to you alone did Fortune grant this honour, though the order demanded you, that you should seem chosen prince rather than left behind. After your father-in-law Augustus you reign, but the purple came to you not through the marriage-chamber, and the royal consort was praise rather than cause of your reign; for with the reins of power the state chose not a son-in-law, but a man of noble worth. I err, unless the world proves it from its four-fold quarters: the West courts you as ruler, the East appoints you, to the North you wage war, and to the South you are feared.

[14381] Yet before your colleague made you his partner, it is fitting to touch on what triumphs the Illyrian coast beheld, which, ravaged by the arms of Valamer, mourned itself forsaken—through the fault, by chance, of our own general. Not otherwise, when Caepio, slain of old, gave up the strength of Ausonia, did the terrified state, the sudden ruin compelling it to choose a leader after Jugurtha's throat was broken, set the Arpinate camp-follower, avenger of the Calpurnian pacts, against the raging Cimbri. Here, as soon as the province saw your eagles, it ceased at once to shudder at the hostile dragons. Forthwith, tamed by war and bereft of plunder, soon they themselves lie as your plunder. But we pass these by as mere ravagers: rather I unfold the deeds of war: which war no small band—nor you, Spartacus, bound, having broken from the prison, did prepare for the gladiator's school— but a wandering swarm of the Scythian region, abounding in savagery, dread, rapacious, fierce, even among the very peoples there barbarous to barbarians, whose leader was Hormidac, and a citizen of theirs. What is that soil, and their manners and race: where the white Tanais, driven through Hyperborean valleys, falls from a Riphaean crag, beneath the Bear's axle there lies a race threatening in spirit and in limb: thus in their very faces their own horror dwells; the rounded mass of the head rises to a peak; beneath the brow, in twin caverns, sight is present, the eyes absent; the light, driven into the vault of the skull, scarcely reaches the retreating orbs, yet not the closed; for under the narrow arch they see great spaces, and the use of a larger light they make up with clear pupils in their deep wells. Then, lest the twin channel grow out beyond the cheeks, a band wound round blunts the tender nostrils, that they yield to helmets: so for the sake of battle a mother's love deforms her offspring, since the stretched expanse of the cheeks grows broader with no nose set between. The rest of the men is handsome: vast chests stand out, notable shoulders, and beneath the loins a girt-up belly. Their form, indeed, is middling for a footman, but tall it stands if you behold them as horsemen: so they are often thought tall when they sit; scarcely has the child, leaving its mother, stood before the steed offers its back; you would think the limbs kindred to the men: so the rider ever clings, as if fixed, to the horse; another race is borne on horn-hoofed backs, this one dwells there; smooth bows and arrows are their delight, their hands terrible and sure, and to bear death in the javelin is their fixed faith, and beneath the unerring stroke a fury taught to err. This race, bursting forth suddenly and carried on wheels across the solid Hister, had come, and their wheel-rut had cut the dried-up waters. Sent against them as they wandered through Dacian fields, you go, attack, overcome, surround them; and when Serdica beheld you with your camp-space measured out, you press it with a siege, which for a long time marvelled that you, set in the rampart, kept your soldier from going into the fields by sallies neither lawful nor by stealth. And though Ceres often failed him, and Bacchus always, yet discipline did not fail; therefore, with the foe near, they feared their leader the more; so at last it came to pass that he who was then by chance your ally, soon your betrayer, turned his back to them in vain at the time of the joined battle. When now he fled, baring his wings by his bent course, you stood the battle alone; you the scattered band sought, its leader in flight; you the horseman, sweating in the foot-fight, sought back; following your standards, the soldier did not feel himself forsaken in the contest.

[18121] Go now and bring forth the praises of old Tullus, white age of the fathers, since with fair urging the lying Mettius concealed the wavering covenant of his retreat! Nothing like this is yours, and to deceive your foe pleases you not; then the soldier conquered while he thought himself to be aided: here he conquered after he found himself abandoned. The leader flees: you pursue; he renews the contest: you besiege him; he is shut in: you storm; he slips away: you crush, and you set his own death as the price of the Sarmatian peace, and it is granted; the deserter has now undergone the ordered death, and your victim fell by a foreign blade. Lo, again, if perchance it please you, contend, Antiquity! That fierce Hannibal, by chance demanded for punishment, though he had no power over his life at his last hour, yet had power over his death: him, whom the blind prison and the hook and the lictor about to break his throat awaited, he drank, more steadfast than the Bebrycian host, the venom; but the one who fled from you, slain by the death you ordered, perished not so much by the victor's mouth as by the judge's.

[19245] Now be present, O Paean, you whose curved-beaked griffins the skilled bits bind whenever through the leafy reins you bend the feathered flanks with bicolour ivy; hither turn your lyre: it is no time now to tell of the Python destroyed, nor to sound the twice-seven wounds of Tantalus' brood, whose deaths your song preserves, and whose dyings live in eternal verse. You too, Castalides, declare in a few words by what divinity Anthemius came to us with the bond of a twin realm: the peace of the world has sent the one to govern its wars.

[19785] Augustus Severus had by Nature's law increased the number of the gods; which fall as soon as Oenotria beheld, from the cliffs of the airy Apennine, she goes to the glassy halls of the blue Tiber, not with her cheeks shut in a helmet (nor did a sewn-up ring weave her corselet with driven-in hooks), but bare-headed; instead of hair, the cluster-bearing vine comes forth, binding many a town across her brow, and over her smooth shoulders, over her ruddy arms, the hanging robes were bitten by jewel-bearing studs. She walks more slowly with age, and her venerable limbs, holding a vine-tressed staff, she binds, in place of a staff, to an elm. Yet Abundance follows: wherever she draws near, she makes the road fruitful by her gait; and the Vintage, glad, attending her step, drips down through the planted footprints. As soon as she enters the cave of the Tiber's flood, the river was running, then, settling, the woods, matching colour with the green hair of the tall reed, floated; the wave falling gives a sound at his chin, though his beard, bristling with bristles set beneath, much softened the crash; from his breast he belched the waters, and with rushing slip the now-torrent channel furrowed his sodden belly. He is terrified at the goddess' coming, and, his hands slackened, the oar and the urn fall; then, as he prepared words of pardon, she first: "I come, that Rome, widowed of our pontiff, may, through you, if it please you, be bent by tears: let her seek the regions of the Dawn, and, disdain set aside, grant this one thing—let her now deign to be loved the more; teach her what forces to seek, and to the prostrate world say from what world she may demand a head. Whomever she begot, born under my sky, at once Fortune broke upon him the wheels of empire; hence the Vandal foe presses, and against our destruction with a numerous fleet campaigns each year, and, the order of fate reversed, the scorched Byrsa brings against me Caucasian furies. Besides, the unconquered Ricimer, whom the public destinies regard, alone with his own sword scarcely repels the pirate roaming through the countryside, who, shunning battles, a fugitive, plays the victor. Who could bear a foe who refuses both peace and combat? For no treaty does Ricimer cast with him; why he should hate him too much, hear. That one prattles of an uncertain father, though his mother is surely a slave; now, that he may be a king's son, he flaunts his mother's adultery; then he is envious that two realms call Ricimer to a kingdom; for a Sueve by his father, by his mother a Goth. He recalls this too, that his grandfather, Wallia, on Tartessian lands laid low the Vandal squadrons and the Alans joined in war, and corpses covered the western Calpe. Why tell of ancient routs, why the losses of old? He recalls the disasters of the Agrigentine plain, and hence he rages, that this man has shown himself well enough the grandson of that hero at whose sight, Vandal, you always turned your back; for not more illustrious from Sicilian fields do you return, Marcellus, through whom by land and sea our arms pressed the Syracusan dwellings; nor you, to whom it fell, Metellus, to surpass the chariot of Curius, displaying to us the elephant in throngs, when the black herd hid the white yoke-beasts with their bulk and the pomp of triumph concealed its own author. Because Noricum holds back the Ostrogoth, this man is feared; because Gaul binds the war of the Rhine, this man is a dread; because the Vandal foe with his kinsman the Alan tearing at me plundered me, he, by his arms, took vengeance for his own. But he is one man, and cannot alone remove such great perils, but can defer them: now we have need of an armed prince, who in the manner of our forefathers of old will not delegate but wage wars himself, at whose moving standards land or sea may tremble, that at last, the right recovered, the Roman trumpets may govern fleets long disused."

[23720] Her the father heard, and at once assented. She goes to the city, straightway sees the goddess herself, bows low, and adores; the horns touched the breast and the bared bosom; thence she bears the entrusted prayers; which the goddess, having heeded, prepares to go her way. Grim, she binds her loosened hair, and the towers lay hidden, shut in her helmet; the laurel was her fillet. Rough with hostile bosses, a baldric on her left fastens the rising sword, her victorious hand is thrust into the shield; its orb the sons of Mars, the wolf, Tiber, Love, Mars, Ilia fill. A clasp with biting tooth catches at the breast the robes that flee back, the threatening spear gleams, and the oak, curved with trophies, trembles and wearies the goddess with its welcome load. Her foot stands ever on the ground, but the binding is stayed at the first toes; from the fastened cord her thumb sends two thongs into the buskins facing each, to draw the sandals tight, and, the loops meeting, weave the bent chains of the bonds along her legs. So then, just as she was, borne through the liquid air she sought the warm risings of new-born Hyperion.

[24855] There is a place of Ocean, nearest to the far-off Indies, beneath the Eastern axle, stretched toward the Nabataean Eurus: there spring is continual, and the earth, broken by no frosts, does not grow pale, but, painted with perennial flower, the fields know not foreign chills; the countryside breathes with roses, and through the unmarked fields fragrance is wafted; violet, cytisus, wild thyme, privet, lilies, narcissi, cassia, colocasia, marigolds, costum, malobathrum, myrrh, balsam-juice, frankincense the fields bring forth; and as old age knocks, the neighbouring Phoenix seeks from here his reviving cinnamon. Here is the house of Aurora, crusted with ruddy metal, roughened, displaying the smooth pebbles of pearls. Diverse things snatch the eyes, and by the mistress-art this conquers, whatever you see; but all the beauty is hidden in the present mistress, and with the gems' too great redness she loses their varied fires, since she possesses them. Her combed hair poured out saffron, and from her bent arm a comb, lowered, dressed her yellow temples. Her eyes poured out rays; a fiery colour was in them, yet not heat, though, the night shaken off, the dews she received are wont to feign sweat. Twice the girdles encircle her breasts, and to her small nipples the very fold makes envy; the outermost part of the robe carries crimson folds down to her reddening legs. Thus the queen sits on her throne; in place of a sceptre her right hand the spear of a torch fills; Night stands next the goddess, turned now to her retreating feet, and behind the tribunal Light shows her topmost summit, scarce understood. Thence, seeing Rome coming by a liquid path, she leaped up quickly and, with coaxing words, was first to begin: "What, O head of the world," she said, "do you revisit my realm? What do you command?" She, a little silent, mixing harshness with gentleness, thus began: "I come (cease to be moved nor tremble overmuch), not that the Araxes, pressed, should flow for me beneath an imposed bridge, nor that in ancient order the Indian Ganges be drunk from an Ausonian helmet, nor that through the tiger-bearing fields of quivered Niphates the consul, exulting, lay waste Caspian Artaxata. I do not now pray for the realms of Porus, nor that with these arms the ram, driven home, shatter the Hydaspian Erythrae. I am not borne against Bactra, nor do the Semiramian gates laugh at our trumpets joining battle. I do not seek the Arsacid houses, nor is the watchword given for a camp at Ctesiphon; this whole region I have yielded to you: and do I not so deserve that you should guard my old age? All that lies once between Euphrates and Tigris you alone hold: a thing bought for me with the blood of Crassus, at Carrhae I wrote the price; nor did I remain unavenged, nor did the field so bought perish; if I lie, you have proved it, Sapor, slain by Ventidius; nor is that enough: Armenia and Pontus I gave; with what war they were sought let Sulla tell you; perhaps it is not believed of one: consult Lucullus. I am silent now of all the Cyclades: acquired by my Metellus, Crete serves you; I made over the Cilicians: these Magnus once had routed. I added to Syria, governing them now, the Isaurians: these too Servilius subdued in my years. I granted the ancient Aetolians and the Acheloian fields; I made over—too trusting—the testament of Attalus; Epirus you hold: you know to whom Pyrrhus owes it. To Illyricum I look to see you send laws, and to the lands of the Macedonians: and you have grandsons, Paulus. The corn of Egypt I gave: Agrippa had once conquered for me on the straits of Leucas. Judaea is held beneath your sway, as though you had sent thither illustrious Titus with his father; to you the Cyprian gain is brought: I, a pauper, praise the warlike Catos. The Doric land and the Achaean fields tremble at you, and you stretch your happy realms to twin-sea'd Corinth: tell me, what Byzantine Mummius did the deed for you? But if perchance it please you to lull old complaints to sleep, grant me Anthemius. Let Augustus and long-lived Leo be for those parts; let him whom I have sought govern my laws; let the divine star of her parent rejoice that his daughter Euphemia is clothed in her father's murex. Add besides a private bond to the public: let Augustus be a happy father-in-law to his son-in-law Ricimer; they shine in nobility: you have a royal maiden, that man is royal to me. If, in concord, you assent to this, soon you will grant me to hope for Libya; look round at the marriages of old: no such match is ready to your hand. Let Greece bring forth here the marriages of old won through peril, if there is shame in it: let Pisa, the chariots restored, rouse Oenomaus, falling by his daughter's fraud when the waxen pin, the axles loosened, betrayed him; let the Colchian maid come forth, known to her husband first by crime rather than by sex; let Atalanta from the barrier of the circus behold her pale suitors, and gather the apples of fair Hippomenes no longer now for the gold alone; Deianira, let Achelous, fat from the wrestling-school, light up your marriage-torches, and, pressed by panting Hercules, let him refresh his wearied foe with rival streams: however far I call up the unions of the ancient age, these surpass the heroes here, those the heroines there. This marriage, Ricimer, Virtue demands for you as bridesmaid, and the martial laurel gives the Dionaean myrtle. Come then, hand over the man who cherishes no sluggish ease and is weighed with delights, but whom the sailor's heat now burns, and the gulf of Abydos and the Sestian shore shouted round by Hellespontian storms; which sea-straits I would not believe even that man held thus, for whom Athos was cut through, and whose swelling sails ran by Median oarsmen across the wooded Alp; nor was this strait so girt by Lucullan keels, when the sluggish foe sat before notable Cyzicus, who, compelled by hunger, chewing the corpses of his kin, lived by his own death. But why do I delay my wishes? Hand him over rather." Then in few words the Tithonian spouse replies: "Lead him, holy mother, though I have the greatest use of an unconquered and supreme leader, so that you may be the gentler and we may better govern the reins, not divided. For if perchance it please you to recall the ancient toils, and him who would fight for his country as your Iulus did— to say no more—I first sent Memnon from here." They had finished; Concord joined the twin parts, and Rome at last possesses a chosen prince. Now, Antiquity, boast that you chose some by like prayer or love—you, ever envious of the highest and most deserving men. Against Brennus' arms bring forth Camillus from exile, and to Cincinnatus restore the axes, Caeso driven out, and bid the weeping parent come from the harrows to the rostra; and in wretched tumult first drive out those whom, beaten, you seek; if the Carthaginian breaks the Alps, run back to the afflicted and condemned; that the shameless Metaurus may blush at the Barcine slaughter, let your consul, having been fined, conduct the war, who, routing the thousands of Hasdrubal—when he has forged for himself a ruddy sword— bears himself a clotted head: far other is our gratitude of judgement: it knows it is loved, unwronged.

[32120] But now too-mighty gusts drive on my sails; stay, Camena, your slender measures, and as I seek harbour let the anchor of my song now sit for me in a calm and placid floor. Yet, O prince, what fleet and arms are now handled by you, how great deeds you do and in how short a time, if the god prolong my prayers, in due order I shall tell, when twice your son-in-law or thrice you are consul. For now the festivals already call us, and to the Ulpian forum the Quirites demand you—those whom you will gift with liberty, whose glad cheeks await the blow. Go on, father of your country, fortunate and with happy omen, about to bind new captives, absolve the old.

[32778] To His Little Book

[32798] What makes glad harvests, what season is to be loved by crops and herds, by vines and bees, was once published under the name of Maecenas; hence, Maro, you afterward dare to speak of arms and the man. But for me Petrus will be the Maecenas of this time; for over the sea of fame I run beneath his own star. If he approve, he sends it forth; if he condemn the songs, he hides them, and brands us not with the snorting rhinoceros. Go, book: this man, believe me, guards our modesty; with this censor even to have displeased is to please.

[33335] Preface to the Panegyric Spoken for the Lord Emperor Caesar Julius Valerius Maiorianus Augustus

[33432] As once Tityrus, beneath the cover of a spreading beech, rolled forth his murmurs through swollen reeds, Caesar granted to the afflicted man the right of life and field, and his lofty wrath halted not at a slender defendant; but while he praised the granted countryside in the bounteous prince, the rustic Muse gave heaven in return for lands; nor was it less to repay the gifts of Phoebus: this man had made a lord, and that one made a god. And to you, Flaccus, who had followed the ranks of Brutus and Cassius, the author of your song was he who was also of your pardon. So to me, lately falling beneath an adverse war, you, the victor, bade me be unconquered in spirit. Let then the tongue of the saved poet serve you, and let your praise be the price of my life; I will not now dig at Maro with biting tooth, nor carp at your citizen, Sabine land. The matter is less than my talent, but greater than my Caesar; let them conquer in eloquence, so long as we conquer in our lord.

[34414] Panegyric

[34425] Conceive in mind, O state, your past triumphs: the consul now holds empire, whom the purple covers no more than the corselet, whose brow the diadem covers not by luxury but by law, and after the palm of his mind's labours comes the palm-broidered robe; the fasces heap up all the glories of the realm, and the prince grows with the consul. Therefore through your sky, your country, your cities, your waters Europe, exulting, sounds "well done"—because, having a ruler, you who had been victor, I confess, the trembling world trembled while you would not conquer for yourself, and with too great shame grieve that you deserve the realm, and by a sad rebuff take up, not to govern, what you thought must be defended.

[35141] Warlike Rome had been seated, her breast bared, her crested head turreted, behind whom from her capacious helmet the slipping hair pours over her back. Sternness awaits her gladness, and terror grows with modesty, and unwilling beauty overcomes her valour. Of purple hue is the woven robe, which a biting clasp pierces with twisted tooth; then whatever covering the breast flings back, this a gem encloses in its open recess. Hence a ruddy boss, with spacious circle, props her left side; here you may see, poured in thick metal, the cave of Rhea and the teeming she-wolf, whom, throat bared, even to fawn was a terror; though she fears to devour the painted sons of Mars; the nearest part shows the Tiber; here, poured beneath the rough pumice of porous tufa, he breathed forth a moist slumber through his grey-green throat; a mantle covers his breast, which his wife Ilia had woven, who, joined to the flowing bed, would still the murmurs of the waters and keep the sleep of her billowy husband. These gleam on the shield; the spear-point rises on an ivory shaft, drunk with the slaughter of men; beside it Bellona builds a trophy and bends the oak with a captive's weight. The throne rises from stones which, cut, fall from the ruddy mountain of the Ethiopians, where, the sun near, a native purple has breathed upon the scorched cliffs. Here Synnadic marble is joined, there the Numidian stone is added, counterfeiting ancient ivory; then, after the Laconian rock, a radiant order of grass-green marble shows green between.

[36670] So when she gave herself to the midst of the throne, all the earth flies up at once, and then each province set forth its own fruits: the Indian brings ivory, the Chaldaean balsam, the Assyrian gems, the Chinese fleeces, the Sabaean frankincense, Attica honey, the Phoenix dates, Lacedaemon olive-oil, Arcadia horses, Epirus mares, the Gaul cattle, the Chalybian arms, the Libyan corn, the Campanian wine, the Lydian gold, the Arab gum, Panchaia myrrh, Pontus castor, Tyre purple-dye, Corinth bronze; Sardinia silver, Spain brings ships and the thunderbolt-stone; the darting lightning stains the rocks and the fruitful wrath of the gods weds the kindled flint; as often as the heaven stirs itself there, the earth there has the more power. Suddenly Africa, weeping, fell prostrate, her black cheeks torn, and bowing broke on her head the now ill-fruitful ears of grain, and thus began to speak: "I come, the third part of the world, unhappy through one happy man. Once born a slave, this brigand here, the masters destroyed, long holds barbarous sceptres in my land, and with nobility utterly banished, the stranger, raging, loves not what is not his. O drowsy vigour of Latium, he laughs that your walls have yielded to his stratagems: do you not brandish the spear? Do you not grieve for me, even captive? Surely your fates are thought to rise by ills, and to be loftier by ruin; but better, that the terror departs: now it remains to conquer, if you fight as you are wont when conquered. Porsenna, hurling proud Tarquin on, once filled the Janiculum with Etruscan soldiery; but while he prepares by siege to burst the gates, he endured your whole might on the single shield of Cocles; many thousands of men pressed the ground, the path hanging in air; nor when the bridge was loosed did he fall when it fell; that king at last, warned by his scribe's death, learned that wars were stirred against him not only when there were wars; soon, peace sought, he returned to his kingdom, put to flight not so much by the wounding man as by the burning. For with frozen heart Scaevola had stood and condemned his right hand at the applied fire, the more fortunate by his erring hand, when by chance the guard grew pale at the steadfast accused, and the captive's tortures he fled who was the torturer. You trembled at Brennus, better afterward: whatever is yours, by whatever name you are called, the Tarpeian rock alone was then yours; but one man even then drove back the whole battle-line, while the chattering goose announces the Senones and keeps watch over your fate without a soldier. Me too (grant pardon that we once waged war) after Trebia and Cannae you tame, and my Hannibal saw the Roman houses before your Scipio saw mine. What did I deserve? By fate I am compelled to wage wars on you, when I will, when I will not. The trembling foe frightens you, but is safe with the strait shutting him in, as a bristling boar lies near the high wilds and, shut in, points his black mouth, white with darts, ready; round him barks a huge throng of hounds, in case he should wish to charge on the plain; he swells and is haughty behind the thorns set against him, slight in strength but strong in his ground, while close at hand "hey there!" the hunter sounds from the hill: the known voice of the master renews his wearied rage; then his blind fury scorns to feel the wounds. Why do you put off the battles? Why fear the sea, for whose triumphs even heaven is often wont to fight? What of this, that you have now an excellent prince, whom the foreknowing ages proclaim will come to the destruction of Libya, who, the third from me, will take his name? This the fates owe to your toil, Maiorianus. Why he should wish to mount the fleet and enter my harbours and approach the city, if you bid, I will tell briefly in order. It is told that where warlike Aquincum is mighty in Pannonia, his grandfather ruled the Illyrian soil with the tracts of the Hister; for Theodosius, at the time when at Sirmium he took the name Augustus, through both masterships of the army, when about to come to the Eastern parts of the realm, had Maiorianus with him. Set down in the Latin annals are the leader's deeds, as often as the trumpets, brought against the Scythian dwellers, pressed the Hypanis, and frozen Peuce the camp-follower mocked, hailing in mind the rimes. This man's father has him as father-in-law, a man renowned, and content ever with one peak of service, that he might follow one friend, joined to him in dubious chances. Not once did Aetius try, the fasces offered, to snatch that man to his court, but he stood firm, greater than the honoured: he began to be more precious; so faith was not bought with a price; he was what he once had been, quaestor to consuls: he handled the public moneys by his own law: and kept such measure that report told that he now spared his son's estate. But the leader's envious wife had by chance perceived this— that the boy's fame was growing—and, suffused with bile, had cooked an inward venom through her barbarous heart; forthwith she searches the sky, and runs through all astrology with rolling numbers, questions the shades, scans the lightnings, sees the scales, rejoicing on every side to have snatched a secret from a god. So the grim Colchian of the Pelasgians had stood on the stern, her husband trembling, about to scatter Absyrtus for his father, and to do, by the slaying of her brother, a wickedness greater than his death, while she fights by murder and makes her brother her weapons; or when she quenched the fire of the bulls, herself burning more, and wove a chill flame round the trembling man, who, the poison defending him, they say grew cold among the blazing bullocks. So, long impatient in spirit, after she heard empire and a long reign appointed for that man, her arms torn, she enters where her husband lay, and broke forth in a raging voice with these words: "You lie at ease, forgetful of your own, O sluggard: and to the world (so the ages demand) a prince Maiorianus shall be; the stars proclaim this by their signs, men by their prayers; why do I seek the stars for him, for whom love has made another fate? Nothing is braver than he, and a boy is never greedy, but sparing of having; poor as yet, he already scatters wealth, urges mighty counsels and follows them, all he plans is lofty, he presses what he hopes; if perchance I retrace his sport, one day of his consumes whatever you might think done with javelins: at his three arrows trembled snake, stag, boar. Not so did that man balance shafts against the foe who, his son girt by a serpent's body, feared more when he aided him, while by the same casts he gave death and life and held with trembling heart a steady hand, and went out wholly into his art, fear set off by nearer hope, giving, between the limbs of two, the death of one. Should it please to decide with the boxing-glove: Sicilian Eryx yields, nor did Sparta flourish by like art, when Amycus, laid low on the Bebrycian sands, looked up to the boxer, fat with the Therapnaean wrestling-school. What vigour in his feet! In vain did Opheltes' son award himself the Sicanian palm, nor did the Arcadian so swiftly bear his proud soles over dry Nemea— whose mother, flying in the Aetolian dust, Hippomenes shuddered at, who, sent ahead in scorn on the much-turfed circus, when from the den of the barrier the swift heroine flashed forth, the people trembling, to touch nothing with her whole stride, while he, pale, looked back to see the mid-field shrink behind him and the long ways to the goal, and, pressed by her near breath, now ran anxious in his foe's shadow, until, at the bend of the post now all but left behind, she broke her hurried steps thrice, the apple scattered. Whoever sees this horseman scorns the Ledaean nursling and your youth, Stheneboea, to whom Antiquity grants the back of the winged horse, and the Lycian Chimaera he is said to have conquered, when with one wound he took three lives. Had the fates given you life then, fierce Maiorianus, you would have forbidden Castor to know reins, Pollux the gloves, Alcon the darts, ready to leap upon the spoils of Bellerophon. If he take the shield, he conquers Telamon's son, who among the Greek ships, against Hector's fire, defended even the fleet of faithless Ulysses. If you ask with what weight he hurls the missile, more feebly, trembling for the burden of inserted Camilla, did Metabus loose his dart, nor with so great a whirl did the whizzing ash-spear of Achilles go out through Troilus; nor so did the Attic son of Aegeus, delaying the heroes' graves, shatter Creon with the Marathonian oak; nor so, avenger of the violated Phoebas, did she hurl the twisted bolt against the Greeks, when Greece had a night like Troy's and a like torch, and, fixed on the rocks of Caphereus, amid the waters Oileus belched flame. I speak of small things. What of this, that as often as wars are waged for you, a disciple, not a soldier, attends? And he molds a pupil: the rival, on the other hand, watches; what you conquer he hates, and those whom you besiege he loves. Wholly drowses against this man great Alexander, whom his father's glory tormented. What shall I, unhappy, do? What realms shall I prepare for my son, shut out from the Getic sceptre, if the state passes me by and little Gaudentius is, besides, trampled by this man's fate? Now Gaul praises him and whatever is throughout Europe. Him with their stiff waves the Rhine washes, the Arar, the Rhone, the Mosa, the Matrona, the Sequana, the Ledus, the Clitis, the Elaris, the Atax, the Vacalis; and the Loire, hewn into pieces by the axe, it drinks, when, the war-fearing Turoni defended, you were away; soon, a little while after, you fought together, where the Frank under Chlogio had overrun the open lands of the Atrebates. Here the meeting roads shut up the narrow ways, and the rampart, a vicus subdued by an arch called Helena and a river together, in a long course had passed over its joints on beams set beneath. There, the bridge set, beneath that very bridge fought Maiorianus the horseman; by chance on the bank's near hill a barbarian wedding-song resounded, and with Scythian dances the new bride, like her yellow-haired groom, was being wed. These, then, as they tell, he laid low; the helmet rattled at the blows, and the corselet warded off the spears' strokes with its scales, until the routed foe, turning, gave his back; you might see gleam on the wagons the wandering festivities of the barbarian couch, and scattered everywhere the dishes flung down and the captive feasts, and the garlanded cauldrons, dripping with curled hair, bearing fragrant wreaths. Forthwith Mars swells, and Bellona, more ablaze, shatters the marriage-torches; the victor seizes the chariots and the bride-to-be, the daughter-in-law. Not so did Semelean Euan mingle the Pholoetan monsters and the Pelethronian Lapiths, when the orgies inflame the Haemonian mothers and rouse Venus and Mars, and first they consume the bloody food for war, and, the wine-bowl whirled, they think the cups weapons, when, the tumult growing raw, Centaur blood befouled Emathian Othrys. Nor let the quarrels of the cloud-born brothers be more famed: here too he tames monsters, on the height of whose ruddy skull the hair, drawn to the forehead, lies, and the bared neck gleams by the loss of bristles; then with grey-green light the watery sight grows white, and on faces shorn on every side instead of a beard thin lines are furrowed by the comb. More tightly sewn garments confine the tall limbs of the men; beneath the raised covering their knee lies open, and a baldric hangs the broad sword and the narrow belly. To hurl swift double-axes through the vast void and to foreknow the place of the blow, to whirl the shields and outrun the twisted spears with leaps and to come at the foe first: in boyish years the love of war is ripe. If perchance they are hard pressed by number or by the lot of the ground, death, not fear, overwhelms them; unconquered they stand firm, and survive in spirit now almost after their life. Such men, with you for witness and praiser, he put to flight; who could bear it? With you he does all; without you he does much; all fight for the prince: how I fear lest now that man fight for himself! If he holds the realm, to him you besiege whatever you tame. The fates leave no middle here: for if you refuse to be a slayer, you will be a slave. Surely if the Chaldaean truly keeps the stars on a straight path, if the Colchian knows herbs, if the Tuscan the lightnings, if the Thessalian draws forth shades, if the Lycian lots have understanding, if our birds speak our fates by their flight, if Hammon with learned bleatings groans his holy oracle beneath the Syrtis, if at last the truth, Phoebus, Themis, Dodona, you dog-star—after our days this Julius will be Augustus. Joined besides in love is the youth, whom the great spirit of his royal grandfather arms. Whither will you turn? To the heights of the world this man bears fate, both bear spirit; rise up and at once attack them unawares; neither will you be able to slay, if you bid both die; but weave deceitful blandishments for the one, yet let that one be sought with steel. Why do I speak in vain? It is nothing that we guard so greatly: that he may reign, he shall be the one to live!" Stirred to wrath, Aetius thus replies in few words: "Curb the impious prayers of your raging mind. Shall I be able to order the death of an innocent man, and be silent of my own? Does anyone pray that to be well-born be made a crime without crimes? Who would summon the fates to punishment? Your flesh with steel, Maiorianus, will I seek, if Phoebus shines by night, the Moon by day, if the twofold Parrhasian Wain is renewed in the sea, if the Tanais beholds Atlas, the Bagrada Caucasus, if a boat woven from the timber of the Hercynian wood furrows the Nabataean Hydaspes for the Rhine, if the Spaniard drinks the Ganges, and from the warm Erythraeans the Indian water-carrier comes to the Tartessian Iberus, if Castor drenches himself with the blood of Pollux, if a frenzied hand laid low the Theseus of Pirithous, the Pylades of Orestes, when the pious matricide was carrying off the Tauric rites. But lest I seem to have scorned your grief, let him live and for a little be without service; alas! he might have owed his fortune to us, had you not thought it a sorrow." So he speaks, and bids that man on his father's farm exchange his wonted toils, the wheel of the fates running on, that he might learn what awaits a landholder, and what manners at last the civil law prepares, lest he bring the soldier's art alone to empire. Forthwith the discharged youth hung up his arms, fertilizing with the ploughshare the fasts of a barren land. So once, with a stooping consul, you turned the fields, if, peace being intervening, you had loosed the war-trumpets a little, whose strong left hand guided the plough-handle after the eagles, while the palm-broidered robe, joined to a humble hearth, drank the smoke of the victorious oxherd.

[51779] Meanwhile Aetius had closed the prince's tearful fate with his sword; and that he might the more safely join his great forces to the Palatine squadrons, he summoned this man by entreaties, but the penalty did not delay for the blood he had shed (for he had gathered the number, not the spirit, of the people): he loosed the evil crimes of the sword by the sword, and fell the more to your ruin; even then the golden fates were rolling the empire of the present prince on their distaff; but the public losses escaped the man's odium. Whoever have been chosen to the name Augustus have held the throne left to the Caesars: after you, captive, labour, this man did what he has. Nerva summoned Trajan, when the pledge was already victor: that he might be Germanicus in titles, as he had been in merits, the matter runs in order; whoever so begins courts this fame. Once, after Tiberius' Capreae, after the foul godhead of Gaius, the censorship of Claudius, the lyre and marriages of Nero, after the pomp of the monstrous mirror, in which he beheld himself foul on this side because, Otho, you were fair—after Vitellius' five thousand, condemned to the abyss for his notorious gut— by these titles a prince was chosen, and by like toil Vespasian was. But lest perchance you think me shut in by the valour of a brigand, in him his vice of life consumed the vigour of his race; Scythian ferocity not strength but wishes hold, and, master of immense spoils, he has lost in luxury all the strength by which he was strong while poor. My flesh for himself he now arms against me; I am torn, captured through so many years, burned by his own fire, by my own valour, and fruitful of penalties I bring forth those whom I suffer; with his own arms he accomplishes nothing: by the Gaetuli, Nomads, Garamantes, and Autololes, the Arzuges, Marmarid, Psylli, Nasamon he is feared, sluggish, and now knows not steel from huge gold. But his own colour is bloodless, which surfeit vexes and a pallid fatness holds, and, pressed by perennial gluttony, his stomach does not work off the souring breath, his life is like his swine's; not so did the Barcaean Hannibal perish at rich Capua, when in war the strong limbs were softened amid the delights of Baiae, and where Gaurus slopes into the Lucrine waves, the Massylian swimmer flung his black arms. And therefore give me back, I pray, at least after so many ages this lord as my avenger, lest any longer Carthage do battle against Italy." So having spoken, with grief she groaned and aided her prayers with rising tears. To these Rome answers thus: "Gird up your long complaints, O devoted to me: by the name of the gods your avenger will be Maiorianus. But in few words I will retrace a few. From the time when Theodosius restored the common laws to his author's brother, the foe being driven out—whose throat a hand, afterward to be turned against itself, broke— my Gaul is still unknown to the lords of affairs, and, knowing nothing, serves in ignorance. From that time much has perished, since, the prince shut in, whoever he was, of the wretched world it was the custom that the divers parts be laid waste. What life could please, when the ruler himself was in need of governing? For so many years scorned, the nobility lay low: the state gave as reward to the brave man odium; our prince corrects all this, and adding to your strength out of the nations comes to war through wars; for to have gone, not to have fought, is the greatest toil. Why do we waste the time in words? He arrives and conquers." With such discourse the council was ended, and, the metal serving the goddess' words, the concordant sisters drew out golden threads.

[55450] These toils of Rome and Libya that I have sung, the prayers of men taught me to speak; now it is time to bear my foot to those things which I must tell even if Apollo be mute: in place of the Muses, your Mars will serve. The fierce Alaman had mounted the Alps and, led through the long silences over the ridge of the Raeti, had gone out over Roman soil laid waste, and through the fields once called by the name of Canis had sent forth a hundred times nine of the foe for plunder, and now you were master: Burco you direct thither, a scanty band attending, but that suffices when you bid them fight; victory is sure for our men that you commissioned the battle-lines; Fortune accomplishes the triumph not by your people but by your love; I do not wish for columns on the field to which you send few, that fortunate outcome of war regards you; it was contended for by the right of the master, the destiny of Augustus. Lately the fierce foe was wandering slowly over the open sea, after in order every order had given you the realm—the commons, the senate, the soldier, and the colleague together. Entering the Campanian land with the South winds blowing, secure with his Moorish soldier he attacks the farmer; the fat Vandal sat across the thwarts, awaiting the plunder which he had ordered to be dragged thither, the captive doing the capturing, but your forces suddenly had given themselves between both foes on the plains which cut sea and hill and make a harbour by the withdrawn bend of the river. At first the terrified throng seeks the mountains, which, shut in by the abandoned timbers, became plunder of the plunder; then, roused with his whole band, the pirate joins for battle: part from the hollowed boat unloads the now-docile horses, part puts on iron-woven mail of like colour, part unfolds the smooth bows and the shafts that bear poison poured into the iron, to strike twice though sent once. Now the woven serpent runs along either line, whose throat swells with the driven-in zephyrs; with open gape the painting feigns an angry hunger, and the breeze makes a fury in the cloth as often as the turning back is thickened by the blasts and the belly no longer holds its too-great void. But the trumpet, hoarse, blared heavily with earth-resounding crash, the shout answers the clarions, and valour suddenly rages even small in cowards; on every side the steel falls, yet here into throats: this one the twisted falarica crushes with its cast, scarce to cease at a second death; this one the pole's blow whirls down; this man falls, pierced by the dart, from his horse, and another by the spit; here this one lies at once by the winged weapon, having suffered an absent right hand; part, the knee cut, lives to the spite of death, and part of the brain this one snatches with part of the helmet, and with strong arm scatters the wretched skull with the two-edged sword. As soon as the Vandal turns his arms and gives his back, slaughter succeeds the battle: with no distinction they are laid low everywhere on the plains, and every brave deed the helpless one did, in trembling flight the pale rider enters the sea and passes through the ships, and by a foul swim returned from the deep to the skiff. So was the third battle of Pyrrhus once: when, his thousands slain, Dentatus pressed him, he scarce dragged the fragments of his shattered fleet into Epirus—he who had scattered the Chaones and Molossians, the bands of Thracians and Macedonians, along your shores, and at whose strength pale Oenotria and Tarentum herself, anointed, whom he sought, had trembled. The foe driven out, there is now leisure to survey the field, which stands vast; here, beneath that carnage, you may see the spirit of both sides: none not slain in the breast, whoever was yours; none not pierced in the back, of theirs whoever. This the wounds proclaim of the foremost of the pirates, by chance their leader, to whom the greedy king's sister, they say, was wedded, who, shut in blind dust and crushed by javelins, still bears the shameful footprints of his disgraceful flight. So your bands, with the spoils, hold the field and enjoy the war.

[59590] Meanwhile, while you weave a fleet on a twofold shore, the lower sea and the upper, all the forest falls into the deep for you, and too long, Apennine, your flank is cut on both sides, rich in ship-timber, sending into the sea no fewer woods than waters. Though Gaul be weary with continual tributes, she wishes to have pleased by this levy, nor does she feel the burdens which she proves to be of profit. Not with such a fleet did greater Atrides cover the Carpathian sea when the Doric foe, about to snatch the Sigean wealth, shut in Rhoetean Pergama; nor was the fleet of Xerxes so great, about to join Sestos to Abydos, when he laid low the swelling waves and gave a sea beneath a bridge, when with proud step he burst profaning into the violated pools, and the thronging squadrons ranged over the Hellespontian deep; nor so did the Mareotic fleet hide the Actian waters in the Leucadian harbour, when into her husband's war came the dowried throng from Pharian Canopus, when fierce Cleopatra, girt by her ancestral sistrum, or laden her tawny keels with even pitch-black soldiery, pressed with Ptolemaic treasure the wide-spread Doris. You fight not with this array, but, in the manner of those before, richer in steel, to which deservedly gold lies subject, the gold of a rich coward; do not scorn such rebels: even if no battle-lines, yet these adorn triumphs. Nor will it irk me to have recalled the Lagean stock as an example of your foe; for I foretell for these same realms a like fortune, since the luxury in that part is equal, nor is the Caesar worse in this. Forthwith you attempt what no Augustus in our time could: the stern host of the seven-fold Hister you snatch to arms. For whatever the languid axle, on the Sithonian hinge beneath the Parrhasian Bear, brings forth, all this fears your standards; the Bastarna, the Sueve, the Pannonian, the Neurian, the Hun, the Goth, the Dacian, the Alan, the Bellonotus, the Rugian, the Burgundian, the Vesian, the Alites, the Bisaltan, the Ostrogoth, the Procrustes, the Sarmatian, the Moschian came after your eagles; for you serves all Caucasus and the Tanaitic drinker of the Scythian wave. What might not the man's fortune do? Whatever hands it threatens, these Rome has already trembled at; now beneath you as prince she thinks it almost slight not to fear, unless that serve her which she feared when another reigned. Now you were moving camp and thousands with their divers standards crowded you; one race refuses obedience, which lately from the Hister brought back its untamed band, fiercer than its wont, which through wars lacks lords, and against the proud people Tuldila supplies wraths to be punished in battle. Here you, your arms scarce laid down, take up arms again: as when the Bistonian women of the Cicones by chance fill the rimes with Ogygian thiasi, whether on Strymon's fields or through Rhodope or where cloudy Ismarus rolls Hebrus into the sea on Hyperborean crags, the wandering throng gives itself to sleep, and at once the wearied orgies grow quiet, and the pipe no longer re-echoes with twin breath; scarce rest, and now the inspired Bassarid whirls her thyrsus and, bristling with the spots of an Erythraean fawn-skin, rouses the Odrysian initiates to the languid drums. Yet you defer this punishment, but, while you spare, you were the author of greater bloodshed. No further did this hand, more cautious for you, bear it, and your sense of honour it scorned for your sake; the first sacrifice of the war falls, whoever was rebel. The plunder too you divide among those whose mind had been devoted: that which, terror-struck, serves by the example, rejoices at the price. Caesar, seeking the Pharsalian fields, curbed his sudden wraths with the sword; but cutting his own limbs, as if compelled by the weight of the cause, he wept those whom he slew; this sedition profits your arms: whatever you bid, unless the barbarian hears, he falls here, that the soldier may fear.

[63555] Now in the season of winter the marble Alps and the rocks that meet the joined sky, and cliffs of ice, and crags threatening dry rain, you first traverse on foot, and likewise make firm your slippery steps with a pole sent ahead. The greatest throng had begun, at the middle of the rock, to grow rough with inner cold, which, shut in by the narrowed ways on the sloping hill, could not creep on the stiff, rolled-back ground: by chance one from that band, whose wheel had worn the white-flowing Hister, cries out: "I prefer swords, and the wonted calm that the cold of death brings; a numbness binds my limbs with sluggish stiffness, my body, scorched by a certain fire of cold, perishes. We follow without end the youth pressing on his toil; whoever that bravest man is, whether king or people, shut now in camp, lies in the sunny warmth or beneath a hide; we have changed the use of the year. What this man commands will be the law for things; he is never bent from his beginnings, and thinks it a loss if he fears the wraths of the season, even through losses. From what race shall I say he is sprung, whom a Scythian I do not endure? Whose lips, an infant, drank a tigress' milk beneath a Hyrcanian crag? What land, heavier than my axle, bore him? Lo, on the topmost peak he drives the freezing squadrons and laughs at the cold, while he alone glows the more in mind, when, following the trumpets of an Arctic king, I had heard the Roman prince's arms and the Caesarian house grow torpid in unending luxury: it profits nothing that earlier lords have gone before, if this king too was brave." As he prepared to say greater things, you kindle him with bitter words from the cliff: "Whoever you are, who fear the slippery things of the opposing slope, break the skin of the hanging water, and, the stream carved, let the ice be a step for you, lay aside your base complaints; ease has cold. Surely Nature did not give me the limbs of two-formed Hylaeus? Did Pegasus aid me with wings, whatever I tread, and give feathers to me as I fly? Are Calais and Zetes mine—whom you see now treading the snowy backs of the ridge? Does cold break you, do the Alps? Now, now let me strive to weigh the rimes; I will give summer beneath the Syrtis." So with your voice you raise the bands and lift them by your example, and first you attempt the toils, whatever you bid; then the rest of the throng obeys gladly: the author serves under his own laws.

[65995] What companions besides were yours, and how great a master of the soldiery, who drove your band on after you— yet not unwilling! Worthy to whom alone Sulla in the line, Fabius in genius, Metellus in piety, Appius in eloquence, Fulvius in force, Camillus in art might yield; if you ask how great a man governs the honour of the prefecture where Gaul stretches her broad bounds, he scarce had manners like the man to whom, the senate witnessing, Ulpius entrusted even the sword drawn against himself, who now dictates laws to the Goths; beneath your judge the skin-clad foe looks up to the grey-haired herald. Why should I tell here of him who governs the sacred archives, who, while he dispenses the reins of the civil part, sustains the cares of the armed, the interpreter under whom the savage race is bent to your terms? Why, rash Clio, do you attempt to praise Petrus with small strength?—from whose mouth Caesar deigns to speak to the world, though he is mighty too in an eloquent quaestor; yet this man lately, most placid prince, the hostage received, from the walls of our city drove out the sword thrust into our wretched vitals. And because to our weary fortunes you came as the one hope, we beg, succour our ruins, and your Lugdunum, as you pass, behold, O victor: broken ease after too great toils demands you. To whom you give peace, give back spirit: the wearied neck of the bullock, the plough laid down, better furrows afterward the clod of solid earth—of ox, of crop, of farmer, of citizens she is drained. The fortune of the standing was hidden; while she is taken, ah, how great it was! After joys, prince, it delights to remember the ill. Though by ravages, by fire we have fallen, yet coming with all things you restore everything: because we were the cause of your triumph, the very ruin pleases, when as victor you will begin to mount the chariot, and the mural, the rampart, the civic laurel will bind for you the sacred hair after the manner of those before, and the tawny Capitols will behold the chains of kings, when you will clothe Rome with spoils, when with rich wax you will paint the captive huts of Cinyphian Bocchus, I myself, through the resisting peoples and hoarse crashes, will go before, and in a slender song, as now, will say that you tamed the twin Alps, the Syrtes you, you the great sea, you the straits, you alike the Libyan hordes, yet first conquered me. Because you turn your eyes and now with serene face regard the wretched, it is good to exult: I remember, when you wished to spare, this was your look; gentle beauty gives the signs, assent: so may Byrsa breathe again at your trophies, so may the Parthian flee for certain and the Moor go, white with fear; so may Susa tremble, and, the quivers laid down, disarmed Bactra stand about your tribunal."

[68798] Preface to the Panegyric Spoken for Avitus Augustus

[68851] While the Thracian Pallas, armour-sounding, has her festal birth sounded by the Ismarian bard with songs, and while through Mopsopian Marathon are thronged the rivers that had stood still and every land that ran together, while the sweet-sounding murmur is shaken by the plectrum on the strings, they say the goddess approved these praises with praise: "Goddess, whom in the time of the Giant war an armed birth poured from a cloven crest, whom Latona bore not beneath the Delian caverns, about to fix the wandering Cyclad by her pledges, nor she who, bearing Alcides on Cadmean shores, suspended the childbirth for a triple night, nor she whose tower was soaked with rainy metal, when the gold-begotten son filled his mother: but you, when Phlegra beheld the trembling Thunderer, the burst peak, struck from his crest, drove forth; and when sheer force alone drew the gods into battle, his strength, much confounded, was nothing without you: as soon as your father's crest brought you forth, Wisdom, then the more they conquered, when the gods had you. Through you the engine, built by dread hands, already stretched almost across the ruddy pole, gave way. Pindus, Othrys, Pholoe fell by the right hands of Giants, and Ossa, now heavy, fell by Rhoetus' hand. Aegaeon is laid low, Briareus, Ephialtes and Mimas, wont to lick with their heels the Arctic wheels. Enceladus lay for the father, Typhoeus for the brother; this one upholds the Euboean rock, this the Sicilian." Hence Orpheus turned himself to the whole mother and taught his chords to tell of Calliope. The Muses rose up at their sister's praise, and the goddess' piety pleased more than her song. But if to sing a mother's praises is to win favour, and I cannot equal the ancient lyres, this is a public father, to whom I have vowed my song, Avitus: the matter is greater, if my Muse is lesser.

[70709] Panegyric

[70720] Phoebus, about at last, the world traversed, to see one whom you can endure as your equal, give your light to heaven: this man suffices for the earth, nor let the standard-bearer now boast himself among the stars, whom Marmaric Atlas wears down with his crest: to this man these are mere stars. As they, sunk, grow bright, so amid adversities Rome gleams, for whom from her rise it was a fixed order to have grown by ills; now she rises with a prince for consul; surely, fathers, it delights you to see the fasces brought together, and the curule chair given as ally to the sceptre: believe me, you will give more: now bind the two-fronted chariots, ambiguous Janus, your hair, and gird yourself with twofold laurel; formerly a prince's, now a consul's, this year gleams, and the diadems grow with the well-earned robes. In vain now, Muse, you fear that the South wind has driven the sails of our ship; for since we have begun to run over the sea of fame, lo, the star to keep us through the deep.

[71719] By chance the father of the gods looked down on the lands from heaven: lo, whatever he sees flourishes; to have looked on the world was to have remade it; his nod alone cherishes all things. And now, that the gods might assemble, the Tegean bird flies now on feet, now on brow; scarce has he touched the fields and come down with his whole height: sea, land, or air sent their native gods. Brother of the Thunderer, you come first, who, wont to cleave Doris with your green car, scatter swift calm over the startled backs; the moist Nymphs Phorcus attends, and there sea-green you come, Glaucus, and surest of seers, Proteus, you were sure. In long order after come the gods: vine-clad Liber, fierce Mars, shaggy Tirynthian, naked Venus, fruitful Ceres, quivered Diana, weighty Juno, prudent Pallas, turreted Cybele, exiled Saturn, wandering Cynthia, youthful Phoebus, fearful Pan, stiff Fauns, wanton Satyrs. There assembled too those who hold heaven by valour, Castor by his horse, Pollux by the glove, Perseus by the sickle-sword, Vulcan by the thunderbolt, Tiphys by the ship, Quirinus by his race. Who could sing here the hall of heaven, whose very ruddy stars are the pavement? Now the father, tranquil, sets himself on his golden throne; thence the elder gods took their seats (the rivers too had it granted there— but the aged—to sit in that place; to you, greatest of floods, Eridanus, broken into cups by the yellow Sygambri, swelling Rhine, ridden by the wandering Scythian bands, Hister, and, better known by an unknown rising, Nile): when from afar, from the upraised part of heaven, Rome dragged her sluggish steps, her neck bent down, bearing her face bowed; her hair hangs from her head, covered with dust, not a helmet, and the shield strikes against her ailing steps, and a weight, not a terror, is borne in her spear. And when first she fell at the knees of the loving Thunderer, she said, "I call to witness, holy father, you, your divinity, and that— whatever Rome I was: by my supreme fate overwhelmed enough, I envy the lowly; the narrow house does not bear the weight of a great roof, nor does the thunderbolt threaten the valleys. What, I ask, did the Tuscan soothsayer portend to me with twice six vultures? Casting the walls for my first race, why was I already lofty in omens, while you, O poor Romulus, open for me the foundations on the ridges of the Etruscan hill? I was safer by the sword, when, in joined whirlwind, the Rutulian, the Veientine, and likewise the Auruncan and the Aequian, the Hernican and the Volscian pressed me; I seemed great enough even to you, while a woman bursts her body, defiled by steel, and you return to a chaste wound, O rooted-out shame. Now, when Tarquinius shut me in, ramparted with his Etruscan ally: O fires of Mucius! O waters of Cocles! O grief! Here, where now is he who brought beneath my laws the Samnite, Gurges, who cut down the back of the Volscian, Marcius, and the dictator and exile who routed the Senones? I would wish the life of Fabricius, the deaths of the Decii, either thus conquering or thus conquered: give me back my beginnings! Alas! where now are the pomps and rich triumphs and the poor consul? My spear-point terrified the Libyan axle, and I set a third yoke on the faithless Carthaginian. The Indians' Ganges, the Colchians' Phasis, the Araxes of Armenia, the Ger of the Ethiopians and the Tanais of the Getae trembled at my Tiber. With the Teuton joined, once, broken, you submit, O Cimber, and the hands burdened with swords I ordered to carry chains alone. Woe to me! What was I, when at my bidding they bade Sulla, Asiagenes, Curius, Paulus, Pompey give to Tigranes, Antiochus, Pyrrhus, Perses, Mithridates peace and realms, flight, tribute, chains, poison. I am silent of the Sauromatian and the Moschian and the Getae, wont to drink bloody milk and dye their cups with blood, or, when they flee, then the more to-be-fled-from Persians. Nor is it enough to have told of lands: in gleaming arms so many seas I entered with you for leader, and the nations set far beneath the setting sun. Victorious Caesar carried his standards even to the Caledonian Britons; and though he routed both the Scot and the Pict with the Saxon, he sought foes, whom now Nature forbade to seek more men. It beheld you break Leucas, fierce Augustus, and Pharos, while the fleet-borne soldier shook the Actian pools, and Antony, fugitive in arms and bibulous, emptied the unchaste Ptolemaïs of her ancestral realm. And though I once complained of the narrowed hinge of the world, now there is no limit even for me. More, supreme of gods, than is just I seemed to you mighty, since the Parthian Sapor of his own accord restored my standards, and, the tiara laid down, wept while he purged the deaths of the Crassi; and from this now (O grief!) the right of people and senate shaken off, I incurred what I feared; I am wholly in the prince, wholly the prince's, and from a Caesar I become a torn realm, who once was queen; and Tiberius' Capreae and Gaius' boots the censorship of Claudius followed, and a husband by death—Nero; with sad Piso you lay low the reverend Galba, Otho, who, while you sought to be held fair by the mirror, made me foul; the loathsome gullet of Vitellius brought me a belly, who, reigning a short time, perished too late; the wearied me illustrious-in-arms Vespasian holds, then Titus, and after him his brother too; after whom tranquil Nerva scarce began to give me back to myself, made greater than the adoptive Caesar; thence comes Ulpius, by whom Agrippina was dreaded by the Sygambri, brave, pious, upright, keen. Such a one, captive, I pray for. Trajan I know not if any could equal, unless perhaps you again, Gaul, send one to conquer." Tears closed the voice of the suppliant, and whatever sorrow remains she begs; on every side of heaven the nobles rise, Mars, Cypris, Romulus, and the gods who were your authors, Rome; now milder, the Saturnian herself is bent and pardons her ancient wraths. Jupiter answers thus: "The Fate by which all things are ruled, and by which I too, was not permitted to be broken; the lofty ever labour, and the strength raised by our gift Fortune begrudged to herself; but conceive great spirits, though broken, if Porsenna feared you the more, roaring from the loosed bridge; if your captured walls soon saw Brennus' flight; if at last we drove back dread Hannibal with joined tumult of earth and sky (when his camp now stood next your walls, the thunderbolt ran for the Colline tower, and there again Nature feared, after Phlegra, to see Jove fight, frightened): lift your drooping eyes, let the darkness leave your cleared mind. It is a marvel that you are conquered; when you begin to conquer, it will be no marvel. And that it may be plain to you by what you may at last rise, weary as you are, learn—in few words I will teach. I have a land that lifts up a nursling from Latin blood, famed for its men, to which once not even Nature, best artificer of things, gave a peer; fruitful from the city its field is mighty, which, scarcely broken by the first plough, thirsts for slow seed, or, with the bullock luxuriating, lays bare the pitchy clod with secret richness. There rose up against it what the scorching South cooked, the Nile-land and the Libyan soil, and ever the dry Mygdonian Gargara, compared, the sickles condemned; the Apulian and the Calaber yielded; the one hope of things, cherishing this, O Arvernian, you yield to none in arms, you besiege any with your horse. Let Caesar's Fortune, too greatly fearing, be my witness here, when, driven from the hill of Gergovia, the soldier scarce stood firm in his very camp. These so brave I willed; but while I prepare to yield Avitus to you, Rome, to whom long since the greatest pedigree gleams, his stock having embraced—the palm-robe ran through his great-grandfathers, and, you witnessing, Philagrius, the patrician peak of his race shines forth. But how small a part is this of his praises, to praise his fathers, whom indeed the curule chairs and prefectures owe to their descendant? Let others be those through whom a later origin boasts itself, and let another count an ancient line by titles: Avitus, you alone are the nobility of your forebears. It pleases to set forth the deeds of so great a man and to run through his early life in few words. A noble mother had loosed in childbirth the burden of her chaste womb; I gave at once plain signs of the future prince, and filled the whole hall of the trembling father with happy augury, though the same man blamed his son's great destinies and saw already the boy's reign; but, perceiving a deposit of the world entrusted to him under so great a pledge, lest anything be lost to you, Rome, he aided fortune with his zeal. First he gave his vaunting limbs to the snows, and bade him break the ice with his soles and, a little child, laugh at the trodden rimes. The rising powers of his mind are formed by the Muses, and with him by whom you thunder, Cicero; he learned too the deeds of your former leaders; he learned wars, and read again in books what he should wage in the field. Scarcely had he first begun to be a boy out of an infant, when by chance a she-wolf, rabid with bloody jaws and preparing food for her cubs with hungry maw (for there were fragments near), he laid low with a rock snatched from the crag, and her broken skull leaped apart with the millstone, and the stone settled in the wound. So my Alcides, while he wandered in Nemea's glades, met the monster empty-handed, not bearing his club, not his quivers; he stood, wrath roaring, and, the foe near, his deceived valour took counsel of his arms alone. Small things indeed, yet to be told: who readier than he to lower the stretched neck of the chained Molossian and to recline at the lairs of beasts, to learn by the interpreting nostril things unseen and to seek footprints in the air? Now if perchance the shameless Umbrian had terrified a boar with barkings, it was his sport to break the white crescents beneath the black throat, and with wrestling arm to drive vast hunting-spears through the opposing prey, how fair, when by chance returning home after the lairs he gleamed with the horror of the boar, and his struggling valour betrayed against his will, by brave deeds, his modesty! So in the fields of chaste Tritonis at Pandion's Hippolytus shone, cloudless, from his rosy face, but together, when the Cretan, blazing with twofold frenzy, passed in passion beyond mothers and in fraud beyond stepmothers. What of his zeal for birds, which Nature gives as ravening upon a kindred kind? Who more learned than he taught to join various contests through the clouds? By a bird he conquers birds, and with swift wing through the air no fighter wars better with the talon. No less, having followed civil law among these things, he is chosen first, a youth, alone, to bind the ills of his broken country and demand that the shapeless tribute be removed; then, by chance more powerful there among the nobles, and afterward even a prince, Constantius grants all, fixed in wonder at such great character, and marvelling in years so small a great good, and in the mouth of the praying youth an old man's words. Hence it pleases, Rome, to unfold the leader's battles and the treaties of kings: struck by the varied storms of wars, your Gaul was ordered to give to the Getic king pledges of peace, among which, a noble hostage, you, Theodorus, come; whom, for love of your kinsman, you seek out in the midst of the skin-clad prince's hall, safe, Avitus, in his good faith. This now Theodoric's high example of duty proves, a wondrous thing and worthy of report, that you, gentle, pleased a fierce king; hence little by little he tastes you in his inmost senses and wishes too greatly that you be his own; but you scorn to bear the part of a friend more than that of a Roman; he is amazed at the rebuff and from it pleases the more. So, Pyrrhus, you saw Fabricius stern, when the poor man fled the wealth heaped on his rich spirit, scorning the king, while with a suppliant fee the king begs a pledge of friendship from cheap gold. Aetius meanwhile—because by the Scythian war he is often instructed—you follow; who, though lofty in arms, did nothing without you, while you did very much without him. For after the Iuthungi and the Norican wars, the Vindelician subdued, you, victor joined to him, freed the Belgian whom the fierce Burgundian had oppressed. There is conquered in the race the Herulian, the Hun by javelins, the Frank by swimming, the Sauromatian by shield, the Salian by foot, the Gelonian by sickle, or anyone who weeps a wound, whom to be struck is to grieve, and to have furrowed his cheeks with steel, and with threatening face to have buried the red traces of his scars. Now then he is given the lofty illustrious honour, and, scaly and still bearing on his face livid marks from the ruddy crests, scarce had he brought home from camp his arms befouled, when the perjured foe stirs new wars again and battle beneath the very walls of his country. Litorius then by chance, lofty, the Aremorican subdued, was hurrying the Scythian horsemen into the Getic line through your lands, O Arvernian; who, all the nearest places by raiding, flames, steel, ferocity, plunder, were destroying, belying the empty name of peace. Then a certain one of these, more savage—soon to be struck— you strike his servant; he rushes on, and commends his sad fate to his absent lord, and dying bears to the Stygian stream, in hope, the part of vengeance to come. And now rumour brings to the man guarding the towers and gates, in the gaze of the trembling commons, the crime committed. He is shaken, he halts, grows pale, blushes, freezes, and burns, and varying his look through one face he makes for himself many faces of wrath, or—the way of one who grieves often— he loves the dead the more; at last he bursts forth and "Arms, arms," he roars, and even now is borne the corselet fat with blood, and the pole blunted through barbarous wounds and the sword toothed beneath unceasing slaughters. He shuts his calves in greaves and sets on his head a gleaming helmet, on which a tawny cone grows high and from its top hurls an angry light. And now he mounts his horse, and, the gates torn from their hinge, he flashes forth; Valour and Grief stand by their comrade, and Honour: with his pike he eagerly seeks the armed wings, seeking battle by fighting, and through the trembling line by the death of many makes up for the one who lies hidden. So, demanding the Phrygian victor with his Emathian spear, the son of Aeacus reined in his grief at his slain friend, through so many of your deaths, Troy (for the cheap throngs in themselves), content to rush on, and through broad peoples to thrust his drawn sword; the earth swims, overwhelmed with blood, and while the throng blunts his heavy hewing weapon, Hector, absent, is now falling at his side in every wound. When at last he was betrayed who was the cause of so great a tumult, Avitus said: "Come, you reared beneath the Scythian Bear, who rage and trust only in a slain unarmed man, meet me armed; my wrath has already done you much: I have granted you battle and bid you resist; it pleases to have slain one contending." So he speaks, and into the midst of the plain he leaps forth, and the fierce foe comes as well. As soon as they bore breast against breast or face to face, this one trembles with wrath, that one with fear. Now the rest of the throng flutters with divers prayers and through varied strokes hangs on the outcome, but after the first, the second, and the third wheel was driven, lo, the lofty spear comes and pierces the bloody man, and after the borders of the back the corselet, burst, yields, the breast twice pierced through, and while the blood sobs through the twofold gap, the divided wounds plucked away his doubtful life.

[87647] After these deeds of the man (you I call to witness, livid Styx) he ruled the prefecture's laws for me unstained; and Gaul, taking up for herself this head, worn out by her wonted ruins, was growing pale with Getic wrath. By no prayer, no price, no soldier broken, Aetius did nothing; with Litorius captive the losses of the lands lay open; to advance their bounds to the Rhone was the fixed purpose of the sons of Theodoric, nor was it needful to fight, but for the Goths to migrate; the fierce victor sharpens his rabid wrath; what he felt—the Scythian foe before the walls— he charges to another; and nothing is heavier, if perchance ever it fall to conquer, than to be afraid—after on every side no garrison and to your leaders nothing, Rome, was left— you, Avitus, make a treaty anew; your read page tames the savage king; it is enough that you have ordered what the world asks. Will the nations and peoples to come ever believe this? A Roman letter cancels what, barbarian, you besiege. He ruled the laws, then; for this too was fitting, that he should then become the asserter of laws who now will be their author, lest the prince to be given to the peoples—the head, the commander, the Caesar and Augustus—should know fierce battles alone.

[88896] Now having at last discharged the height of the prefecture, he had given himself to the country (yet never ease, never unwarlike sloth, but zeal and care for arms ever in his quiet): suddenly, with a tumult broken loose, barbarism had poured all the North upon you, Gaul; the warlike Rugian, the Gelonian attending, the fierce Gepid follows; the Burgundian musters the Sciri; the Hun, the Bellonotus, the Neurian, the Bastarna, the Toringian, the Bructeran, or he whom the Nicer washes with its sedgy wave, the Frank bursts forth; quickly the Hercynian forest, cut by the axe into boats, wove the Rhine with alder; and now with his terrifying squadrons Attila had spread himself into your fields, O Belgian. Scarcely had Aetius left the Alps, leading a thin and scattered force without soldiery in his auxiliaries, too credulous, falsely presuming the Getic band would be present in his own camp. But after the messenger struck the leader—that the Huns, the now-scorned foe almost in their own seats, the Getae awaited—he turns all his counsels over with himself, wandering, and presses his mind with waves of cares. At last, to him wavering, the resolve settled to entreat the lofty man, and, all the princes gathered, in their presence he begins thus, suppliant, in such words: "Salvation of the world, Avitus, to whom it is now no new glory that Aetius begs—you have willed it, and the foe does no harm; you wish: it profits, you hold so many thousands shut in by your nod, and to the Getic peoples your favour alone is the boundary; ever hostile to us, they grant you peace. Go, bring forth the victorious eagles; make, O best, the Huns, whose former flight had once shaken us, twice conquered, profit me." So he speaks, and that man, having promised, made the vow a hope. Forthwith from there he flies and rouses his servant wraths to battle. The skin-clad squadrons went after the Roman trumpets, the Goth running at the name; the demolished barbarian fears to be summoned by the bronze, dreading reproach, not loss. These to war Avitus, now the hope of the world, draws, whether now a private man or still in office; so, bearing cinnamon from the pyre on the Erythraean hill, the bird of Phoebus rouses all the throng of birds; the attendant bands run, and the narrow air does not unfold their wings.

[91205] Now near the fates of your vulture were filling the twice-six wings (for you know your toils, you know, Rome): Placidus, a mad half-man, slew Aetius; and scarce had the diadem been set on your head, Petronius, when at once came barbarism, and Rome seemed even captive to the Getae, and the land about to yield to their fury; as ravening wolves by chance, to whom by keen scent the smell shows a fat air from the closed sheepfolds, provoke and sharpen their hunger, and bear the look of plunder in their faces, with open jaws cheating their fasts; now, now in hope the tender lamb is broken, and the absent prey crackles already on the greedy palate. Moreover the Aremorican tract hoped for the Saxon pirate, whose sport it is to furrow the British brine with hide and to cleave the grey-green sea with a stitched skiff. The Frank laid low first the German, second the Belgian, and you, fierce Alaman, drank the Rhine on the Roman banks, and, proud in both fields, were either citizen or victor. But seeing the lost spaces of the lands, the prince now Maximus chose for himself the one thing that there was in affairs, the master of foot and horse, you, Avitus; the rumour of the conferred honour finds him a farmer, while by chance he works the teeth of his bent mattock, or, bowed over the curved plough, turns the unbaked clod through the fertile acres. So once to your country's broken fortunes, a poor ploughman, you come, Cincinnatus, when your wife clothed you, the old man, in the robe before the oxen, and the willow doors received the dictator, and to his own dwellings, bearing what he had not sown, weighted from his base bundle, the triumphal purple bore the cheap seed. As soon as he took up the weight of the imposed honour, "Choose those who may beg pardon, Alaman, for their fury"; the Saxon's onset ceases, and the Chattan with marshy water the Elbe binds; and scarce thrice the monthly moon sees all this, and now to the peoples and fields, stretched by the fierce Goth, he presses his way, where, driven by the tide, the Ocean scatters the refluent Garonne over the tilled lands; into the river, the sea running, the bitter water passes over the gentle streams, and, driven through the river's channel, the salt wave sails for itself a foreign deep. Here now, the battle arranged, the leaders of the Visigoths loosing the reins of war, rumour suddenly suspended from their wrath, reporting that Avitus, girt with a diploma, now entered the Getic homes, and, the burden of the mastership laid down for a while, had taken up the rights of a legate. The leaders were astounded alike, and the Scythian senate, and feared lest perchance he refuse them their peace; as when the ruddy axle, snatching up light Phaethon, the day now growing pale, and, the world kindled, the disturbed peace of the elements raging, or the near heat raging through the dry pools, and the mud thirsting in the dusty bottom of the sea, then the single mild flame of Phoebus extinguished the unwonted heat. Here by chance a certain Goth, while with reforged sickle he shapes by strokes and points his sword on a stone, now ready to have warmed to the trumpets, now, now about to bury the land with frequent slaughter, the foe not buried, as soon as the name of coming Avitus shone forth, cries: "The war has perished, give back the ploughs again. If I retrace the well-known ease of ancient quiet, not once has that man borne off my steel—O shame! O gods! That good faith should have such power! Why do you threaten me with sluggish treaties, to my loss, by good faith my own? The savings of peace you bid us both furnish and owe; who ever would believe it? Lo, the Getic kings, willing to obey, think they have reigned the lower! Nor can I even say under the pretext of sloth that you would not fight: brave, you love peace. Now Avitus lays the factions low; besides, sent ahead, Messianus restrains the Getic wraths; you have commanded still more, and we lay down our arms. What remains that you might wish to be able? That we are not foes I count a small thing; if you are known to me in your old deeds, I will be your auxiliary: even so it will be allowed to fight." While the Visigoth turns these things in his stern heart, they had come into view; the king and the master had halted near; this one upright in countenance, but that one blushed with joy and by his blush begged pardon, then thence, the king's brother held on one side, the king on the other, with clasped hands they entered Palladian Toulouse. Not otherwise, their palms inserted at the couches, Romulus and Tatius cast a treaty, when, with the steel of their parents and the rabid husbands joined in kindred war, Hersilia thrust the Sabine women on the Pallantian hill.

[95938] Meanwhile the Vandal with stealthy arms takes you unawares, and the Burgundian, with treacherous leading toward you, wrings out the trembling wraths of slaying the prince. Alas, the crime! Into wars again and the fourth labours the perfidious trumpets of Elissaean Byrsa grow cruel. What ill did you nourish, O fates? The Massylian phalanx had mounted the citadels of Evander, and the Marmaric feet pressed the mountains of Quirinus, and again brought back the captive tribute that Barce once gave. The exile of the fathers, the ills of the commons, the prince slain, rumour bore the captured empire to Getic ears; at new dawn, after the custom of the Getae of old, an assembly is gathered; there stands an old age, ancient in years yet green, of the consul; his garments are squalid, and the soiled linen grows greasy on his lean back, nor can the raised skins touch his calf, and with bare knee a poor knot suspends his horsehide boot. After honoured poverty came into the council of the elders and the king at once demanded the words of peace, the leader said: "I would have wished, I confess, secure in my native fields, ever to have cherished a well-earned quiet, from the time when, after the three offices of service, I held the proud peak of the prefecture, now a fourth height. But while the prince now of our world, Maximus, calls me—unknowing, absent—through a thousand refusals of the nobles to the trumpets after the laws, and wished to change his herald for the sounding clarions, most ready I seized that office, by which as legate I might come to you. The ancient treaties I beg, which he, my own, would now hold, had I perchance commanded, the old man for whom to follow Avitus was ever his growth. I was wont once to handle Getic affairs; you know you have often not known what I urged, unless it were done; yet Fortune snatched away the earlier genius; whatever I deserved perished with your father. He had beset Narbo, dissolved with corruption (you were a small child); girding the trembling thousands, he had now, now driven them to infamous foods; now, sad, he believed his own prey would fail him, if perchance the shut-in one perished, when he approved our counsels and slackened the walls, the war drawn back. And you yourself (lo, here are old men)—propped on this breast these hands held you weeping, if perchance your nurse lifted you to me to be suckled, when you would not—lo, I come and now seek again the pledge of ancient love. If you have no faith, no reverence for a father, go, hard man, and refuse peace." There bursts from all the council a murmur and a roar, and condemning battle the seditious throng raises a concordant tumult. Then the king declares: "Long since, illustrious leader, I blame you for begging our peace, when you could compel servitude, and drag the following peoples into wars. Do not, I pray, brand me with odium by a father's name: what do I deserve, if you command nothing? To persuade under him whom you could—now to will is enough; and the only delay to what you would wish is that the Getae did not know it. To me Roman laws have long pleased through you, and my father bade me, a small child, learn at your words by what docile page the ancient verse of Maro might soften my Scythian manners; now you teach me to wish for peace, but learn what is the condition of obedience: perhaps you will approve the ratified pacts. I call to witness, Rome, your name venerable to us and our kindred race from Mars (or whatever from the ages, the world has nothing better than you, nothing than your senate), that to keep peace with you, or to be willing to abolish what our grandfather did amiss—whom this one thing darkens, that he took you, Rome—but if the gods favour my prayers, the vengeance of the present will avail to purge the crime of the old destruction, if you, illustrious leader, will only take up the name of Augustus. Why do you turn your eyes? It is fitting to be the more unwilling; we do not compel this, but we attest: with you for leader I am Rome's friend, with you for prince a soldier; you snatch the realm from none, nor does any Augustus possess the Latin citadels; where it is vacant, the court is yours. I attest, this is not enough, that I do no harm; and would that by your diadem it might come to pass that I do good! To persuade is mine; for if Gaul compels you, as by right she can, let the world obey you, lest it perish." He spoke, and likewise to the asked-for words gives, with his brother, holy faith. You depart, Avitus, sad, who know the Gauls cannot hide that the Getae can serve with you for prince; for as soon as it was plain to the trembling citizens that you bring treaties, they run up eager and before the unknowing tribunal fling themselves down; and when the nobility, numerous enough, seemed to her to have assembled—she on whom the snowy rocks of Cottius look down, whom on divers sides the water of the Tyrrhene and the Rhine surrounds, or whom the long ridges of the Pyrenees, shut off from Spanish law, confine— the joyful throng approaches the man, sad with too great a weight of cares. Then the one greatest of the nobles, worthy to take up the person of his country, begins: "How long fortune, through varied toils, beneath a boy prince, has worn us, harsh to affairs and prostrate, perhaps it were long, great leader, to complain, since indeed you were the greatest part of the grieving, while, mourning your country's wounds, you are driven by vehement anxieties. For us, amid these disasters and the deaths of the world, death was to have lived. But while through our fathers' words we cherish slothful laws and think it holy to pursue the old order through losses, we have borne the shadow of empire, content to bear an ancient race and its vices, and to suffer a people wont to be clothed in the murex more by custom than by right. Lately a most ready chance shone forth, by which Gaul might put forth her own strength, while Maximus seizes the trembling city; he could have done enough for the world, had she with you for master reformed all her realms for herself. Who of us stirred the Belgic fields, the Aremorican shore, who the Getic wraths, is no secret: in these so great wars we have yielded to you, illustrious one, now at last the summit calls; in a doubtful time the realm no sluggard rules; all ambition is set aside when the last extremities seek out the renowned: after the losses of Ticinus and Trebia, the trembling state came in haste to Fabius; the famous Cannae, Varro routed, and the Carthaginian swelling even with the death of the Scipios, Livius, chosen, broke; captive, as they say, the world lies in the city; the prince perishes, here all the head of empire now is; we beg, mount the tribunal, raise the fallen; the times do not now demand this, that another love Rome more. Nor perchance think yourself not equal to the realm: when the Brennic standards pressed the Tarpeian rock, you know, then our state was wholly Camillus, who, owed his country's avenger, covered the smoking ashes with hostile slaughter. Gold did not procure for you the popular centuries, nor do the tribes now, venal and bought with a numerous as, run together to the vote; the suffrages of the world no one buys. Poor you will be chosen; what alone suffices, you are rich in merits. Why do you delay your country's prayers, which bid that you may bid? This is the verdict of all: if they have a lord, I shall be free." The din fills the halls of Viernum, where by chance the loyal throng of the senate had brought their force, prayers, entreaties; the place, the hour, the day are called fortunate for empire, and forthwith there the watchful skill gladly assigns the watches of the nobles. The third light had poured Hyperion from the retreating stars: the nobles run together, and, the soldiery poured round, a mound composed, they set him up and crown with the camp torque the sad man, and give the insignia of the realm; for before he had put on the cares alone of a prince. With no other look once did the Tirynthian hero take up the weight of heaven, at the same time as, from the Libyan rock, the Giant withdrew himself, and when, safer, the engine had sat on Hercules' back. This man, Rome, I have given to you, while through her broad fields Gaul thunders "Augustus" with applause, and Boreas, now stronger, bears the happy crash to the bloodless South. He will restore Libya to you through a fourth chain, and he whose journey alone called back, after many ages, the lost Pannonias, it is now easy to believe what he may do in wars—O what nations he will often yoke for you, the eagles inflicted, who fled the greatest omens of the realm as a private man, when by chance, as he journeyed, a swift bird shook off his plebeian cloak! But gladder now in so great a prince, ancient parent Rome of the gods, lift up your cheeks and your foul lethargy lay down: lo, a greater prince will make grow young her whom the boys made old." The father had scarce given an end with his mouth: the gods applauded, and a roar ran through the council; the sisters wove a fortunate time for your empire, Augustus, and in the year of your consulship spun out tawny ages with their turning threads.

[105147] To Priscus Valerianus, a Man of Prefectorian Rank

[105198] Priscus, ever our glory, to whom, with Avitus as prince, the lofty purple joins a kindred line, since to your sifting my trifles run, I say: "Stand still, you wanderers; whither so near a chasm? He loves. A censor strict is ever the one who cherishes; with stern brow tender friendship reads. Nothing wholly profits, this added to your praises— that the Ulpian portico gleams ruddy at my cost, or that still, the people and the senate applauding alike, hollow Rome re-echoes our 'well done.'" They answer: "We will hasten, we will go, and you do not hold us back: before so great a judge a fault is pleasing, no examiner is better than this; well he weighs songs, slow in scorn, swift in judgement." And because I could not stay these rash words, this I ask: do not hesitate to dedicate to the pyre what you have read.

[106018] To Felix

[106028] This bounteous gift Sollius Apollinaris, his own Sidonius, sends as greeting to his happy lord and pious brother Felix.