WORK: Letters  (slug: sidonius-apollinaris-letters-727be6)

CHAPTER: 01-letters



[330396] 7.18.2. At the same time I judged that the book, which you, a most delicate reader, would desire, would be both handy enough and not a little excusable, if—since the lightness of the senses and the structures could offend you—you were at least the less burdened by the bundles of parchments. I commend, therefore, the various motions of our breast to your judgement, by no means unaware that the mind lies as open in a book as the face in a mirror; for I have composed some things by exhorting, very many by praising, and some by advising, a few by mourning and not a few by jesting.

[330981] 7.18.3. And if anywhere you have read me as somewhat too vehement against certain men, know that I wish you to understand—the right hand of Christ aiding—that I shall never endure a servitude of the spirit, holding it most certain that the judgement of men upon these characters is twofold; for as the timid call me rash, so the steadfast call me free; among which I myself decide that his person lies low enough, whose opinion must needs lie hidden.

[331433] 7.18.4. I return to my purpose. Meanwhile, if you take any breathing-space from the continuation of sacred reading, you may be diverted by these trifles. Nor will the matter, as being boundless, cause distaste, because, since the several causes are finished almost in single letters, the eye, quickly recognizing the things on which it is bent, will cease to read before it ceases to wish to read. Farewell.

[331842] 8.1.1. You do well (this is your way; persevere in it), a man most worthy of the praise of all good men who dwell anywhere, in that you flatter the glory of your friends wherever there is room. Hence it is that you ask even the Arvernian writing-cases to be aired out, although we supposed it would suffice you if we had brought forth something by the earlier publication. So we will comply with what is enjoined, yet prolonging the work of the pen only so far that the series of letters—begun, of course, from the beginning of the volume—may at the very end be drawn out by the sum of a number still small, namely so as to crown the finished work with a kind of fringe upon its own margin.

[332534] 8.1.2. But more care must be taken lest, on account of the additions to a volume already made public, we should perhaps late fall foul of certain fault-finders, whose tongues, naturally sharpened on the whetstone of envy, not even the artful maxims and well-wrought eloquence of Demosthenes and Cicero could escape—of whom the earlier orator endured Demades, the later Antonius, as his detractors; and these men, though envious with a famous malice and an obscure diction, have nonetheless run down to the knowledge of posterity through their hatred of virtues.

[333097] 8.1.3. But since you exhort me, let us loose our sails to the storms revisited, and we who have, as it were, crossed seas, let us sail across this as though a pond. For I have sufficiently resolved that, as diligence is to be applied in the writing, so steadfastness is to be kept in the publishing; and indeed there is no middle course: for either the least is to be feared from these things, or one must be wholly silent in all. Farewell.

[333539] 8.2.1. I believed, most skilful man, that I should commit a sin against learning if I delayed to pursue with praises that which you have prevented from being abolished—I mean letters, of which, as of something already in a manner buried, you are celebrated as the reviver, the patron, the champion; and through you, one master, in this storm of wars, Latin shores have kept their harbour, though arms have suffered shipwreck.

[333966] 8.2.2. Therefore our contemporaries and our posterity universally ought, with fervent prayers, now to consecrate you—a second Demosthenes, a second Cicero—if it be allowed, with statues, now with portraits; you, by whose teaching they have been formed and instructed, will, in the very midst of an unconquered though foreign nation, retain the tokens of their ancient birth: for now that the grades of dignities are removed, by which each highest man was wont to be distinguished from each lowest, the only mark of nobility henceforth will be to know letters.

[334527] 8.2.3. But us above the rest the benefits of your teaching bind, who, accustomed to write something and labouring at what those to come may read, shall have at least a competent throng of readers proceeding from your school and instruction. Farewell.

[334779] 8.3.1. The Life of Apollonius the Pythagorean—not as Nicomachus the elder copied it from the draft of Philostratus, but as Tascius Victorianus from that of Nicomachus—I have sent, because you had bidden it; which, while I hastened to obey, a translation turbid, headlong, and uncouth quickly cast out into a hasty copy. And do not turn it to my discredit, as though a thing long elaborated, believe me: for while the delay of the Livian walls held me shut in (the end of which inconvenience, after the help of Christ, I owe to you), my mind, sick with cares, had not the strength to run through, even by snatches, what was to be rendered, distracted now by nightly sighs, now by daily duties.

[335473] 8.3.2. To this add that, when the dusk-bringing hour had recalled me, worn out from my watches, to my lodging, scarcely was a little rest granted to my drooping eyes; for at once there was an uproar, which two certain old Gothic women, neighbours to the open court of my chamber, would raise—than whom nothing will ever be more quarrelsome, more bibulous, more given to vomiting. Indeed, when first there was some leisure on my return, this unpolished and half-raw book—a book, as they say, still new like must—mindful more of your desire than of my own duty, I have offered.

[336050] 8.3.3. Wherefore lay aside for a while the Pythian laurels and Hippocrene, and those modes of song most intimately familiar to you alone, which yet, with learned persons such as you are yourself, are sweated out not so much from the fount as from the brow. Suspend that too most renowned river of pleading, which is poured into your breast not only as your nation's but as your household's, transmitted through the succeeding ages from your forefather Fronto. Lay aside for a very little your most celebrated declamations, which you compose in the king's stead—by which the renowned king himself now strikes terror into the hearts of nations beyond the sea, now, from a position of superiority, binds a treaty as victor with the barbarians trembling at the Waal, now, along the boundary of his advanced lot, as he curbs peoples under arms, so curbs arms under laws.

[336917] 8.3.4. Strip yourself somehow from your most continual cares, and steal your leisure from the burdens and motions of the court. You will then recognize the history you demanded, opportunely and competently, if with our man of Tyana you now travel to Caucasus and the Indus, now to the gymnosophists of the Ethiopians and the brahmans of the Indians—wholly given to the reading, and yourself in a manner a wanderer.

[337333] 8.3.5. Read of a man—peace be first granted to the catholic faith—in very many things like yourself: that is, courted by the rich, yet not courting riches; desirous of knowledge, continent of money; abstemious among feasts, linen-clad among the purple-robed, censorious among the alabaster vases; thick-coated, rough, shaggy in the midst of perfumed nations, and among the satraps of kings tiara'd, scented with myrrh, smoothed with pumice, anointed with malobathrum, precious with a venerable squalor; and since he contributed nothing of his own from a beast for food or clothing, he was on this account to the kingdoms through which he wandered not so much an object of suspicion as of awe; and, with the fortune of kings obsequious to him in all things, demanding only those benefits which he was more wont to bestow when offered than to take.

[338181] 8.3.6. Why many words? If we measure and assess truly, it may chance that the writer of the philosopher's life approached, equal to the men of greater times; certainly an equal to my age has fallen to me as a reader, through you. Farewell.

[338422] 8.4.1. Will that field of yours, the Octavian estate—and not so much yours as your friends'—ever, by God's will, my lord, see us together? It, near to the city, the river, and the sea, feeds guests with feasts and feeds you with guests; and besides this, it is, to the eyes of the beholders, fair in its situation: in the first place, in that the dwelling rises with walls skilfully placed for architectural harmony; then it gleams far and wide with a chapel, with porticoes, and with conspicuous baths; to this add that, with fields and waters, with vineyards and olive-groves, with vestibule, plain, and hill, it is most delightful; and now, above its provision and its plentiful furniture, it is largely stocked with the treasures of a library, where, while you yourself bend no less to the pen than to the plough, it is hard to discern whether the master's land or his mind has been the more cultivated.

[339331] 8.4.2. Therefore here, as far as I recall, swift iambics, sharp elegiacs and well-rounded hendecasyllables and other songs, redolent of the flowers of music and of thyme—now to be sung by the people of Narbonne, now by those of Béziers—you laboured into being, doubtful whether more swiftly or more beautifully, about to enlarge your favour with your equals and your fame with posterity. Certainly so it seemed to me, as often as your verses were brought, still as it were warm from the anvil of meditation; for though I write not well, I judge well.

[339883] 8.4.3. But, as must be confessed, an earlier age might justly be at leisure—or, what is truer, was occupied—with such studies; now it is time for serious things to be read, serious things to be written, and for thought to be given to eternal life rather than to memory; and to remember overmuch that, after our death, not our little works but our works are to be weighed. Which indeed I do not say of the present as though you did not accomplish both that are to be praised, or, if cheerfulness still endures in your speech, censure were not kept in your action; but that, as one who by Christ's favour is secretly holy, you may now be openly venerable for your religion, submitting alike neck and heart to the healthful yoke, and that your tongue keep watch upon heavenly things as their herald, your soul upon their maxims, your right hand upon offerings—chiefly, however, your right hand upon offerings, because whatever you scatter to the churches, you gather for yourself; to which exercise of virtue this above all can kindle you, that, set amid riches of whatever kind, which fools falsely call goods, if we give anything, it is our own; if we have anything, it is another's. Farewell.

[341077] 8.5.1. You too shall go into our pages, pillar of friendship, Fortunalis, illustrious glory of the Iberian regions; for your familiarity with letters is not so small that it should not be fitting, through these very letters, that something of you survive after you. There shall live at once, shall live for posterity, the glory of your name.

[341420] 8.5.2. For if there is in my pages any grace, reverence, or trustworthiness whatever, I wish a future age to know that nothing is firmer than your faith, fairer than your form, juster than your judgement, more enduring than your patience, weightier than your counsel, more cheerful than your feast, more pleasant than your converse. This too, above the rest, it will recognize: that the heralding of your praises came from the contrariety of fortune; for it is well-nigh the case that a thing is the more eminently esteemed which adversities proved you steadfast, than if prosperity were concealing you happy. Farewell.

[342041] 8.6.1. Gaius Caesar the dictator, than whom, they say, none administered military affairs with more generalship, the studies of composing and of constant reading claimed by turns for themselves. And although, in the person of one and the same man, the leading man of his time, the care of camp and of oratorical science contended with well-nigh equal glory, yet he never deemed himself sufficiently placed at the summit of either art, before, by the testimony of your man of Arpinum, he was preferred to all other mortals.

[342565] 8.6.2. Which has likewise befallen me too—if it is permitted to compare small things with great—after my measure, though by a most dissimilar likeness; and it was fitting, before all, that you first of all should learn of it, because my glory is as much your care, and my modesty very much. Flavius Nicetius, a man most illustrious by birth, of the rank of spectabilis, illustrious by his merit, and well-nigh the greatest of the men of our homeland in prudence and skill alike, extols, as far as I have learned, the volumes of my present little work with immense heralding; declaring, besides, that I have surpassed very many of the young and not a few of the old in various kinds of composing and of soldiering—I being still green in age.

[343307] 8.6.3. Indeed, as far as it can be done without boasting, I rejoice in the authority of a most excellent man, if he is sure; in his love, if he is mistaken: although who, challenged now to the deeds of his forefathers, will be most inert? Who, too, will be most speechless at words? For the Ruler of the ages engendered the virtues of these arts rather in the ancient times of the ages, which—through the age of a world already growing old, the seeds, as it were, wearied and drained of marrow—show at this time something small, and that in only a few, to be admired and remembered.

[343891] 8.6.4. Of this man, however—although he is the head of all studies and letters, because I have always cherished his person—I fear his opinion, uttered with too weighty an affection, beyond what truth holds. Nor on this account would I deny that I have often stood by his brilliant pleadings, of which, though I seem to render a mutual return, it is right that I be made mindful, at least in part and in passing.

[344304] 8.6.5. I heard him as a young man, and then but lately a boy, when my father, prefect of the praetorium, presided over the Gallican tribunals; under whose magistracy, of course, the consul Asturius, robed in the trabea, had opened the doors of his votive year. I clung to the curule chair, if not concealed by my place in the order, certainly not seated by reason of my age, and, mingled with the troop of the cloaked assessors, I was next to those nearest the consul. So, when first the brief largess (and it was not brief) had been completed and the fasti given, it was acclaimed by all the assembly of Gaul to the leading advocates that, the festivity being forestalled, they should grace the hours before dawn—they who awaited the late day in silence—with a fitting praise of the merited fasces.

[345105] 8.6.6. The conspicuous men at once looked round for Nicetius; who, sought not gradually and one by one, but tumultuously and all at once, modestly cast down his face and blushed, with a kind of preface of bashfulness. And on this account modesty, before eloquence, gave him the greatest "Bravo." He spoke in order, gravely, ardently, with great keenness, greater eloquence, the greatest discipline; and that palm-bordered robe, drunk with Tyrian dyes, amid its rustling fringes, he made the more comely with a speech more painted, more golden.

[345650] 8.6.7. Through that very time, to speak in the manner of the Decemvirs, the law concerning the prescription of thirty years had been promulgated, by whose peremptory rubrics every suit abolished was bounded, drawn out to the sixth lustrum. This law, before unknown within Gaul, the orator of whom we speak first introduced into the proceedings, published at the tribunals, set forth to the parties, added to the records—with a full assembly, the bench seldom sitting, with few decisions, with many praises.

[346158] 8.6.8. Besides these things, on other occasions I observed his learning unnoticed—in the way by which a man is more quickly learned—at the time when the prefecture which governs the provinces with its fasces was governed by Nicetius' counsel. Why many words? I heard nothing that I would not wish to be my own, nothing that I did not admire.

[346501] 8.6.9. On account of all these good things set in the man, I rejoice that, at the marks of a censor, he is celebrated by the voice of all. For his opinion of me, in either direction, weighs greatly; which, if we find it true, is as much a favour to my security as it would be, opposed, a cause of fear. For the rest, it stands fixed and settled with me, according as I shall come to know the matter to the full, either by silence to slacken the reins or to tighten the bridle on my chatter. For if I am confirmed by the assent of the aforesaid, I shall be more talkative than Athens; if not, more silent than Amyclae itself.

[347127] 8.6.10. But of my comrade and of myself enough has been said. You, now, amid these things, what of your affairs? Which it is no less at my heart to know in turn—do you hunt, do you build, do you play the countryman? Or any one of these alone? Or each in turn? Or all alike? But whether you follow Vitruvius or Columella, or one or both of them, you do most becomingly; for you can do either in the way that he who is best does it—that is, as some first-rate husbandman and architect.

[347612] 8.6.11. For the rest, that you may flatter yourself as little as possible on the office of huntsman, I particularly enjoin. For you call the boars in vain to your hunting-spears, whom you have been wont rather to start than to set in motion with your most merciful hounds, of which you abound—and indeed alone. Be it so, let it be worthy of indulgence that your whelps shrink from approaching beasts terrible and corpulent: but I know not how you excuse this—that they pursue the roes, the flat-nosed flock, and the does alike, prone to flight, with downcast spirits, breasts erect, sparse steps, frequent barkings.

[348229] 8.6.12. Wherefore, for the rest, more fruitfully with nets and toils, a stationary applauder, you beset the rocky crags and the woods fit for shading lairs, and—if there is any shame—you forbear to beat the open plains in your runnings and to lie in wait for the little hares of Oléron; whom it is not worth while to disturb (since they would be overcome though you seldom give chase) by leashes led openly—unless perhaps, while our Apollinaris comes between you and your father, it will be done more rightly that they be exercised.

[348763] 8.6.13. Jesting apart, let me at last know what concerns you, what concerns your household. But behold, while I now wished to close a letter which has long chattered, a sudden messenger from the Santones; with whom, while in regard to you we draw out some hours in conversation, he constantly affirmed that you had lately sounded the trumpet in the fleet, and that, amid your duties, now of a sailor, now of a soldier, you rove along the winding shores of the Ocean against the curved skiffs of the Saxons, of whom you may think that, however many oarsmen you see, you behold so many arch-pirates: so do they all at once command and obey, teach and learn brigandage. Whence now even a very great cause has arisen for warning you to take the utmost heed.

[349518] 8.6.14. The enemy is more truculent than any enemy. Unforeseen, he attacks; foreseen, he slips away. He scorns those who oppose him, he overthrows the unwary; if he pursues, he intercepts; if he flees, he escapes. To this add that shipwrecks exercise them, they do not terrify; with the perils of the sea they have a certain not acquaintance only, but familiarity. For since any storm renders the secure ripe to be caught, and forbids those who would catch them to be seen, in the midst of waves and broken reefs they take joy in the hope of a surprise and gladly run risks.

[350094] 8.6.15. Moreover, before they loose their sails from the continent toward their homeland, and pluck up their biting anchors from the hostile shoal, it is the custom of those returning to slay every tenth captive by drowning and crucifixion—sadder for this, by a superstitious rite—and over the gathered crowd of those about to perish, to scatter the iniquity of death by the equity of the lot. By such vows they bind themselves, by such victims they discharge them; and, purified by sacrifices of this kind not so much as polluted by sacrileges, the perpetrators of an ill-omened slaughter deem it a religious thing to exact tortures rather than ransoms from a captive's head.

[350772] 8.6.16. Wherefore I fear many things, suspect various ones, although on the contrary great things urge me: first, that you accompany the standards of a victorious people; next, that I allow it less lawful for chance accidents to assail wise men, among whom you are rightly reckoned; thirdly, that for comrades joined by faith, parted by abode, even safe things frequently strike grief, because fear the more readily augurs every sinister thing concerning distant and doubtful actions.

[351258] 8.6.17. But you will say that the things at which I shudder are perhaps not so greatly to be cared for. That indeed is true; but neither is this false, that for those whom we love more, we fear more. Whence nonetheless, I pray, for your sake remove as soon as you can, by a prosperous report, the anguish arisen in my senses. For I can never anew be bent to this, that, concerning friends abroad—since, indeed, the trumpet and the military watchword wear them down—until I learn the favourable, I should not fear the adverse.

[351785] 8.6.18. Varro the logistoricus, as you had asked, and Eusebius the chronographer I have sent; whose polish, if it reach you—if, amid your watch-cares, as in camp, you have at least some leisure by lot—you will be able, after you have wiped your arms, to remove from your mouth too the rust of speaking. Farewell.

[352099] 8.7.1. Where now, I would have you say, in the world do they hide, who often flattered themselves on the masses of their heaped-up means and on the piled-up stacks of silver now blackening? Where, too, is the prerogative of those who, against the natural gifts of their juniors, swelled on the mere occasion of their precedence in age? Where are those whose kinship is recognized by no greater token than enmity?

[352513] 8.7.2. Surely, when first there was room for good deeds, and at last there was weighed at the balance of the imperial judgement not a pound of coins but of characters, there remained those who most proudly thought that they were to be assessed by their fortune alone, and who, brooding thus on their vices as on their riches, wish another's person to be seen to have risen out of vanity, when they are unwilling to be branded with covetousness, that their own substance has grown; in which, however, exercised in the wrestling-school of detraction, they are wasted away, as if by oil, so by the infused venoms of their rivalries.

[353144] 8.7.3. But you, amid these things, all hail—you who, enlarged with the titles of the prefecture, although hitherto you were reckoned of an illustrious lineage, have particularly, no less actively, laboured that your posterity might be the more gloriously numbered from you. For nothing is, by the opinion of every good man, more nobly born than he, whoever he is, who, with a steadfast and combined effort of mind, body, and means, exercises himself to this end—to be preferred to his own forefathers.

[353647] 8.7.4. For the rest, I ask God that your sons may match you, or—what it more befits you to wish—surpass you; and that whoever cannot endure to love one advanced, seething to the marrow, may always exact from himself the penalties of his own envy; and, since he will never have any causes of pity in you, may have causes of envy; for justly, under a just prince, that man lies low who, by himself least and only by his possessions greatest, lives small in spirit and very great in patrimony. Farewell.

[354149] 8.8.1. Tell me, flower of the Gallican youth, how long at last, busied with rural works, will you disdain the city? How long will the implements of grain claim for themselves, against right and divine law, hands once worn smooth by the throws of the dice? How long will your Taïonnacus weary you, a farmer of patrician stock? How long will you, not as a knight but as a herdsman, bury the spoils of the maned meadow in the wintry fallows? How long will you lay down the weight of a blunt mattock not before the headlands are dug through?

[354688] 8.8.2. Why, a rival of the Serrani and the Camilli, since you guide the plough-handle, do you make a show of not wishing for the palm-bordered robe? Forbear only to play the countryman to the envy of nobility. If you cultivate your field moderately, you possess it; if too much, you are possessed by it. Give yourself back to your father, give yourself back to your homeland, give yourself back even to faithful friends, who are rightly placed among the affections. Or if the life of the dictator Cincinnatus alone delights you so, first bring along a Racilia to yoke the oxen.

[355267] 8.8.3. Nor would I say to a wise man that domestic matters are not to be cared for, but with that moderation by which he considers not only what he ought to have, but what he ought to be; for if, the other arts of noble pursuits being repudiated, the nettle of propagating his estate alone solicits you, although you recall your name derived from the trabeae and the ivoried curule chairs and the gilded litters and the purple-dyed fasti, you will assuredly be found such a man that a censor ought not so much to honour you, industrious as you are because hidden, as a tax-assessor to burden you. Farewell.

[355875] 8.9.1. As soon as I came to Bordeaux, your courier presented me a letter full of nectar, flowers, and pearls, in which you blame my silence and demand some of my verses for your verses—which are wont to be poured forth for you, ringing with a varied voice through the musical hollow of your palate, as if from many-holed pipes. But this you now do, abusing the royal munificence enough, secure after your gifts; because perhaps you do not recall that satiric saying about the satirist: "He is full when Horace cries euhoe."

[356400] 8.9.2. Why many words? You rightly bid me sing out of leisure, because it now delights you to dance. Whatever it is, I obey nonetheless, and that not only not under compulsion but even of my own accord; only do you somehow moderate the Catonian judgement of your supercilious brow. For you know well the cheerfulness of poets, whose talents are wrapped in griefs as little fishes in nets; and if anything is harsh or sad, the tenderness of poetry does not at once unloose itself from the bond of the anguish that has befallen it. For I have not yet obtained anything from my mother-in-law's inheritance, even for the use of a third part at the price of half.

[357060] 8.9.3. Meanwhile do you see how the theme of the epigram you demand will please you; me, however, my anxiety by no means permits to have one thing now in my business, another in my song. That indeed you would do beyond justice, if for the present you should, as it were, compare our writings in turn: I act the toiling man, you yourself act the happy one; I act still an exile, you yourself act already a citizen; and on this account I sing unequal things, because I ask for like ones and do not obtain equal ones.

[357576] 8.9.4. But if by any chance you should receive, with a more indulgent nod, these trifles which I have written amid the torments of my mind, you will persuade me that they were like the songs of swans, whose tuneful clangour is in their pains; like too the lyric string more violently stretched, which the more it is twisted, the more musical it is. For the rest, if verses devoid of leisure or cheerfulness cannot be approved, you too, in the page which I have woven below, will find nothing to please you.

[358084] 8.9.5. To these add still this, that, for matter which has fallen not to a hearer rather but to a reader, the delivery of an absent author in nowise helps; for after the work is sent, there remains nothing which a poet, even the most vocal, may do, whom distance of place does not permit even to do this—what the choirs of pantomimes are wont to do, who by good singing commend things ill written. Why do you try now to stir to song Cirrha, or the Hyantian Muses, or the learned waters of the Heliconides, carved out by the stroke of the neighing winged steed, O Lampridius, glory of our Thalia, and so again and again compel me to write, as if I had brought the Delphic instruments to your Delian, and, a new Apollo, should drive the tripod, cauldron, lyre, quiver, bows, and griffins, and shake from the double foliage on this side the berries, on that the clusters? You now, Tityrus, your fields recovered, roaming through myrtles and the plane-grove, strike the lyre, and as you sing together your lips and quill ring back the measures to you, astounding harper in string, voice, and metre: but us, set here and seen but once, the monthly moon already beholds twice over, nor has the lord himself much leisure, while the subjugated world seeks his answers. Here we see the dark-blue Saxon, accustomed to fear before only the sea, now the land; along the outermost edges of whose crown the razor, not content to keep its own bite, narrows the margin of the hair, and so, the locks cut to the skin, the head shrinks and the face is added. Here, the back of his head shorn, the aged Sygambrian, after you are conquered, draws back new hair to his old neck. Here the Herul wanders with grey-green cheeks, dwelling in the lowest recesses of the Ocean, nearly one colour with the weedy deep. Here the seven-foot Burgundian often, with bent knee, supplicates for peace. Under these patrons the Ostrogoth flourishes, and pressing in turn the neighbouring Huns, because they are subject to him, hence grows proud over those. Hence, Roman, you seek your safety, and against the throngs of the Scythian region, whatever tumults the Parrhasian bear bears, Euric, your hands are entreated, that, strong through his settler's warfare, the Garonne may defend the slender Tiber. Here the Parthian Arsaces himself prays that he may hold the height of the Susian court under a tributary treaty. For because he perceives that arms rise hence against the Bosphoran regions with great preparation, sorrowful Persia, at the sound of war, scarce thinks the Euphrates' bank to be defended; who, though he feign that the stars are kindred to him, and swells with his nearness to Phoebus, yet here, mortal, fills the air with his supplication. Amid these things we wear away empty delays; but you, Tityrus, forbear to provoke me; for I do not envy, and rather marvel that I, while I deserve nothing and spend my prayers in vain, have begun to be a Meliboeus.

[361022] 8.9.6. There is the poem, which you may review at your leisure, and, gazing at my sweat and dust, like a charioteer already crowned from the platform. For the rest, there is no reason you should suspect that I will repeat a like kind of service, even though you be delighted with the present one, unless I myself first cease to prophesy losses rather than songs. Farewell.

[361396] 8.10.1. That letters are alike of use and at heart to you I greatly rejoice; for what flame of meanings or wave of words accompanies your pen I would more freely assert, did you not, while you study not a little to praise me, forbid yourself to be praised at all. And although in your letter charity preserves its sweetness, nature its eloquence, skill its discipline, yet in the choice of matter alone you have erred—although this very thing can be proclaimed in your intention, that you seem to have erred in judgement. You apply huge titles of heraldings to my character; but if you had taken any account of my modesty, it would have been fitting for you to think of that saying of Symmachus: "As true praise adorns, so false chastises."

[362138] 8.10.2. In which place, however, if I measure your mind well, beyond the affection which you show as the greatest, you have also done this with art; for it is the custom of eloquent men to prove the faculty of their talents by the difficulties of their tasks, and there to fix their skilled pen, like a kind of ploughshare of a fertile breast, where the argument of a barren matter, like the dry clod of a lean turf, starves. The world gushes with like examples: the physician is known in desperation, the helmsman in a tempest; the fame of all these the preceding perils extol, which assuredly lies hidden, unless it find where it may be proved.

[362786] 8.10.3. So too the great orator, if he undertakes a narrow business, then more applaudably makes manifest his ample talent. Marcus Tullius, in his other pleadings, conquered the rest; in defence of Aulus Cluentius, he conquered himself. Marcus Fronto, while he was eminent in his other orations, in the Pelops preferred himself to himself. Gaius Plinius, on behalf of Attia Viriola, brought home more glory from the centumviral platform than when he delivered before Marcus Ulpius, the incomparable prince, a comparable panegyric.

[363318] 8.10.4. So too you yourself have done, who, while you wish to exercise your knowledge, have not feared that even my conscience would be a hindrance to you. Nay rather, by supplicating, heal my languors, and do not, by the snare of an ill-flattering eloquence, weigh down the frailty of a soul still sick with the burden of false glory. Indeed, since with you, though your speech is beautiful, your life is more beautiful, you indulge me more, if for my sake you would rather pray than plead. Farewell.

[363821] 8.11.1. What do your people of the Nitiobroges, what your people of Vesunna do, among whom, in claiming you for themselves on either side, a holy contention always arises? One people holds you by patrimony, the other even by matrimony; and while this holds you by origin, that by marriage, better is this, that both hold you by judgement—you, however, by the gift of God happy amid these things, over whom, to be the longer engaged and possessed, it is worth while that the votive zeal of the peoples should clash!

[364337] 8.11.2. But you, having disposed your presence to both, parted by turns, now restore to those a Drepanius, now to these an Anthedius. And if rhetorical instruction be demanded of you, these do not require a Paulinus, those an Alcimus. Whence I marvel the more at you, whom daily the riddling of so manifold a library, aired out, wearies, that you demand of me some of the old ditties. I obey indeed, although the recollection of jests seems unseasonable at a time of grieving.

[364815] 8.11.3. The orator Lampridius is now first known to me to have been slain; whose death would consume my love with the highest anguish, even had not a violence inflicted snatched him from human affairs. He once, as jests among friends, called me Phoebus, himself having received from me the name of the Odrysian bard. Which it suits to be told beforehand, lest the figured names obscure the poem set below. To him, at a certain time, visiting Bordeaux, I sent, as it were with the Muse going before, a billeting page. I think this is more freely offered than if, composing something mournful upon the death of one departing, I, who did not please by my eloquence, should displease by my matter. Phoebus' reminder to his too-beloved and special Thalia. Lay aside a while your quill, foster-child, and bind your scattered hair with a green fillet, and let the readier ivy gird up for you the wrinkles of your trailing robe. Beware to wear the comic sock, nor, as it was wont, let your high foot swim in the loose buskin; but take care to bind such sandals as Harpalyce, or as that maiden bound, who cut down with the sword her vanquished suitors. So will you go better with flying leap, if the bandaged steps of your bare toe guide you over the surface, with firm and quickened gait, and the chain, bent back by the meeting loops of the bindings, rise to your leg through the arch. Remember, nimble in this guise, to visit my Orpheus, who daily softens stones and oaks and horny fibres, tuneful, by his sweet-speaking art; whom now the Arpinate enriches with thundering tongue, now the pen of Maro, or that with which you bless Latium, Horace, a better lyrist than Alcaeus himself; and now he swells the epic of tragedies, now jesting comedy tempers him, now satires inflame him, and the declamation of tyrannical controversies. Say: "Phoebus comes, and after his post-horses beats the sail-winged Garonne with oars; he bids you come to meet him, but with lodging made ready at once beforehand." And to Leontius, whom old Livia gives from the ancient senate, say: "He will be here even now." And see Rusticus, witty enough in his very name. But if they refuse their roof as occupied, go straightway to the thresholds of the bishops, and, holy Gallicinus' hand kissed, ask the loan of a small roof, lest, if I am abandoned, my home denied, mourning I go to the dripping taverns and, holding both nostrils shut again and again, groan because of the smoking kitchens, where in the thyme-bearing dishes the red sausage smells among twin berries, or the clouds of the pots, their vapour joined, smoke with the crackling pans. Here, when the festal day has begun to rouse the hoarse songs and to clatter the pleasurable complaint of the buffoons, then, then, stirred by the Muse of a wine-soaked host, songs more worthy of you I, a barbarian, would whisper more than they.

[367680] 8.11.4. O abject necessity of being born, wretched of living, hard of dying! Behold to what point the wheel of the volubility of human affairs is led. I loved the man, I confess, well enough, though he was entangled by certain—yet pardonable—errors, and mingled lesser things with his virtues. For he was often roused by light causes, but lightly; which I nonetheless studied rather to persuade was nature rather than vice; and I urged the better view, so that the wrath which reigned in the man's breast as in its native matter, because it had been infected with a blemish of cruelty, might at least under the pretext of severity be cleansed of its spot. Besides, though frail in counsel, he was most firm in faith; most incautious, because credulous; most secure, because doing no harm. No one was so his enemy as could wring from him a curse; and yet no one so his friend as could escape his reproach. Difficult of approach, though easy when inspected, and to be borne indeed, but bearable.

[368675] 8.11.5. For the rest, if you measure his orations, he was keen, well-rounded, well-ordered, vigorous; if his poems, tender, of many metres, witty, an artist. For he made verses thoroughly exact, with a marvellous variety both of feet and of figures: hendecasyllables smooth and without knot; hexameters resounding and buskined; elegiacs indeed now echoic, now recurrent, now connected by anadiplosis at end and beginning.

[369098] 8.11.6. Hither, as the work he had seized counselled, he varied his ethical diction according to the quality of person, time, and place; and that not with words of any sort, but with grand, beautiful, elaborated ones. In controversial matter he was strong and brawny; in satire careful and biting; in tragedy savage and tearful; in comedy urbane and multiform; in fescennine verse blooming with words, seething with wishes; in bucolic watchful, sparing, song-full; in georgic so playing the rustic much, that he was in nothing rustic.

[369634] 8.11.7. Besides, as for epigrams, he pleased not by abundance but by sharpness, which were finished neither shorter than a distich nor longer than a tetrastich; and these, though you saw not a few peppered and many honeyed, you saw all salted. In lyrics, however, following Horace, he was now borne swift in the iambic, now grave in the choriambic, now winding in the alcaic, now swelling in the sapphic. Why more? Subtle, apt, well-furnished, and most eloquent wherever his mind carried his pen—so that one might rightly judge him, after the Horatian and Pindaric swans, about to fly forth on the wings of glory.

[370249] 8.11.8. To dice and ball he was not equally given; for while with the dice he was occupied to his labour, with the ball only to his pleasure, he gladly wearied others, and—what is more sweet—was the more gladly wearied himself. He wrote assiduously, although more frequently he wished to write. He also read the authors incessantly, the ancients with reverence, the recent without envy, and—what among men is most difficult—he yielded to none with difficulty the praise of talent.

[370731] 8.11.9. This indeed was not only blameworthy in the man, but fatal, that he once consulted the astrologers about the end of his life—citizens of African cities, whose mind, like their region, is the more ardent; who, the constellation of the inquirer being inspected, named alike the year, month, and day which—to use a term of the mathematic art—he would have as climacteric, inasmuch as to them, the theme being offered, the scheme as of a bloody nativity had lain open; because, of course, in the year of the friend's birth, whatever gentle globe of the planetary stars a prosperous rising had raised into the zodiacal intervals, this, at its setting, the reddening with learned fires—whether disjoined Mercury over the diameter, or retrograde Saturn over the square, or restored Mars over the centre—had exasperated.

[371553] 8.11.10. But of these things, if any or in any way they are—although they are utterly false and therefore deceiving—if anything more fully and plainly, better face to face; though you yourself too study arithmetic and, with your diligence, anxiously unroll Vertacus, Thrasybulus, Saturninus, as one who always meditates nothing but the arcane and the lofty. Meanwhile, for the present, nothing was done conjecturally, nothing by riddles, since the time and the manner of his foretold death entangled this our rash inquirer into the future, who long shuffled in vain.

[372121] 8.11.11. For at home, pressed and strangled by the hands of his slaves, his breath stopped, his throat constricted, he perished—not to say by the end of Lentulus, Jugurtha, and Sejanus, certainly by that of Numantine Scipio. In this slaughter these things were the less sad, that the crime itself, with the author of the parricidal deed, was discovered at daybreak; for who is so far from the sense of men, who so blinded in both eyes, as not, the corpse of the dead man inspected, at once to gather the signs of a life wrung out?

[372653] 8.11.12. For at once the livid skin, the protruding eyes, and, in the buried face, traces no less of wrath than of grief, were the proof. The earth indeed was found wet with the falling gore, because after the deed the brigands themselves had turned the dead man's face to the pavement, prone, as though an overboiling flux of blood had emptied him. But, the man at once seized who had been the kindler, instigator, and standard-bearer of that very faction, and the other accomplices oppressed and separately examined, the terror of torments dragged the truth of the crime from unwilling breasts.

[373251] 8.11.13. And would that, while he imprudently, trusting, consulted vain things, he had not deserved to meet this end! For whoever shall have presumed to pry into the forbidden, the secret, the prohibited, I fear that he will swerve from the rules of catholic faith, and be made worthy to have adverse things answered concerning his state, while he seeks the unlawful. Vengeance indeed followed the dead man, but these things rather profit those who are to live. For as often as a murderer is punished, it is not a remedy but a solace to be avenged.

[373801] 8.11.14. Love has impelled me to go on rather far, whose anguish I could not breathe out in silence. You meanwhile, if there is anything there worthy to be known, indicate it quickly, writing at least for this, that the reading may lighten my mind, heavy with sadness. For there was much grief, and rightly, to my confused breast, when I committed these things to the page alone. For nothing else at this time does it please me to write, speak, or revolve by hand, speech, or counsel. Farewell.

[374297] 8.12.1. Does the city of Bazas so much possess you—a city set not on turf but on dust—does the Syrtic field and the wandering soil and the sands flying in the wrangling winds so much possess you for themselves, that you, demanded by great prayers, parted by small spaces, awaited for many days, neither powers, nor friendships, nor oysters fattened in their preserves can draw to Bordeaux? Or do the uncertainties of the roads hold you in suspense in the wintry seasons; and, because the Bigerric whirlwind is wont to confuse the tokens of the shifting causeways, do you fear a kind of pedestrian shipwreck on an earthly journey?

[374928] 8.12.2. Where, we ask, has Calpe, lately subdued by your steps, so quickly departed from your mind? Where the tents fixed in the western bounds of the Gaditanians? Where that same limit of wandering for my Trygetius which once was Hercules'? Do you so much differ from your very self, that you have wholly yielded to the laws of sloth—you, in whose roaming through the secrets of fabled regions the work of toil failed sooner than the intent of fatigue?

[375383] 8.12.3. And after these things you tread so sluggishly the harbour of Alingo, as if you had now to set out to the Danube frontier against the raiding Massagetae, or as if even now the pools of the Nile's water, feared by the native crocodiles, were to be crossed by your ship. And since you are not so retarded even by the interposition of twelve miles, what, do we suppose, would you have done with the army of Marcus Cato in the Leptitan Syrtis?

[375832] 8.12.4. But however you tremble at the mere names of the winter months, so mild is the face of the sky, so warm, so clear, and it has breezes rather than winds, so that the season cannot retain you more strenuously than the mildness can invite you. But if you spurn the summoning letter, I believe you will not resist even verses—coaxing impellers and, as far as I suspect, strenuous executors of my desire, whose camp will be moved against you after two days.

[376294] 8.12.5. Behold, my Leontius, easily first of the Aquitanians, behold Paulinus, now but little inferior to his father, to the place I named above, through the ebbing currents of the Garonne, will come to meet you not only with a fleet but even with the river. Here, in measured rowing-chant, the rowers among the benches, the steersmen among the stern-ornaments, will sing your praises. Here a couch built up with cushions, here a board strewn with two-coloured counters, here frequent dice, about to rebound from the ivoried steps of the towers, await you; here, lest the rolling bilge-water wet your dangling foot, the curved bellies of the firwood timbers will be platformed with a woven texture; here, by the lattice bent over the awnings, you will avoid the treachery of a wintry calm.

[377085] 8.12.6. What more can be spent upon your delicate idleness than that you find you have arrived, when you scarce feel that you are coming? Why do you mutter? Why do you delay? The very creeping snails, with their native houses, seem to me about to outstrip your arrival. There is besides for you a most copious larder, abundantly stuffed with heaped-up dainties, if only there be a spirit equal to the spending in airing them out.

[377516] 8.12.7. Why many words? Come either to be fed or to feed; nay, what is more pleasing, to do both; come with your inland equipment to war down and subjugate these gluttons of the Médoc furniture. Here let the Adour fish insult over the Garonne mullets; here let the throng of cheap crabs yield to the supplies of the Labourd lobsters.

[377851] 8.12.8. You, however, though you are to fight against the rest in this kind of battle, if you think anything is to be conceded to my judgement (for it is not unjust to trust one who has experience), will make our senator, my host, exempt from this conflict; whose feast and roof, if you enter under them, you would deem the dishes of Cleopatra and lavish quarters. For although both he himself and his homeland contend over this pursuit, it was long ago a settled opinion that he surpasses the rest of the citizens, though that town too surpasses the rest of the cities. Farewell.

[378433] 8.13.1. We rejoice, most blessed Bishop, that many kinds of virtues are heaped up in you by the supernal gift; since you are said to act the nobleman without pride, the powerful man without envy, the religious man without superstition, the lettered man without ostentation, the grave man without ineptitude, the witty man without effort, the steadfast man without harshness, the affable man without seeking popularity.

[378853] 8.13.2. Besides, to these goods fame heaps this most excellent thing, that it asserts you to transcend all these so many graces by the topmost height of your charity—fame, I say, which, when it sings of your praises, says much and keeps back more. For to those set farther off it can assign the design of your actions, not their number; by the relation of which, kindled, I of my own accord first run forward, as becomes one far inferior, to discharge my duties; nor do I fear to be charged with garrulity at any time, who could hitherto be blamed for taciturnity.

[379419] 8.13.3. I commend Promotus, the bearer of this letter, indeed already known to you before, but lately made, by your prayers, our fellow-tribesman; who, though by race a Jew, has nonetheless chosen rather to be reckoned an Israelite by faith than by blood, and, aspiring to the citizenship of that heavenly city, and disdaining the killing letter for the quickening spirit, contemplating alike the rewards set before the just here, and foreseeing here that, unless he made his desertion to Christ from circumcision, he would through eternal ages suffer everlasting torments, chose that his homeland should be reckoned to him Jerusalem rather than Hierosolyma.

[380079] 8.13.4. These things known, let the spiritual Sara receive into her maternal arms the now truer son of Abraham as he draws near; for he ceased to belong to Hagar the handmaid when he exchanged the servitude of legal observance for the liberty of grace. For the rest, what cause of coming hither he himself had, he will be able more profitably to explain by present narration; but to us, for the reasons I have written above, he is held most dear—which I therefore signify, because he commends each man most effectively who has laid open the pure causes of a just commendation. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[380700] 8.14.1. Long since, venerable Bishop, though your face has not yet been beheld by sight, yet your conduct has been inspected. For the praise of holy merits, when diffused, is not content to be bound within final spaces. Hence it is that, because a measure is not set to a good conscience, neither is a term found to a good repute.

[381032] 8.14.2. Deem what I say false, unless a competent witness has come to my profession—a head once conspicuous enough in that monastery of Lérins, a fellow-monk of the Lupi and the Maximi, and aspiring to follow in the woodland glades of parsimony the Memphitic and Palestinian archimandrites. This is the bishop Antiolus, by whose account I anxiously studied to learn who was your father, and who and of what sort you brothers are, by what prerogative of character you both discharge the highest pontificate; and I remember rejoicing that I have learned it.

[381589] 8.14.3. To which father once—namely, having you—scarce would the house of Aaron, the ancient bishop, deservedly be compared; whom, though the right hand of his law-giving brother first lost in the midst of the eremite people by the oil of sanctification, calling his sons to the duties of a like office, yet the felicity of that man over Ithamar and Eleazar was discoloured by Nadab and Abihu, smitten with the thunderbolts; whose souls, however slain, we believe to be absolved, yet we know their persons to have been punished.

[382119] 8.14.4. But you, about to touch the page of the altar, offer nothing, as I hear, of strange fire, but, with the accompanying victims of charity and chastity, burn the most fragrant incense in the censers of the heart. To this, as often as you bind the yoke of the law upon the necks of the proud by the bonds of preaching, then you spiritually immolate bulls to God; as often as you drive those polluted by the stench of a luxuriant conscience to the sweet odour of chastity by the goads of correction, Christ reckons that you have offered him the violence of he-goats.

[382690] 8.14.5. As often as, at your exhortation, in any pricked man the soul, penally recalling its faults, sighs, who would doubt that you have, by a mystic sacrifice, offered up the pairs of turtle-doves or the two young pigeons, which assign the double substance of each of our men as much by number as by groaning? As often as anyone, at your warning, shall have scorched his fat body and the seething suet of his swollen belly, to be boiled down by the frequent fire of fasts, it is doubtful to none that you then consecrate the fine flour fried in a certain frying-pan of continence.

[383274] 8.14.6. As often as you persuade someone who sets aside the figments of a faithless mind to answer to sound doctrine, to believe the faith, to hold the way, to hope for life, who would doubt that, in the amendment of this converted man—who is now free from heresy, free from hypocrisy, free from schism—you consecrate the most purified bread of the show-bread with the unleavened cakes of sincerity and truth?

[383685] 8.14.7. Lastly, who would not know that whatever in the days of the law was figuratively immolated in bodies, all that you, in the time of grace, manifestly offer in characters? And therefore I render abundant thanks to God, that according to the quality of your page I easily recognize that the aforesaid bishop, when he said great things of you, kept silent about greater; wherefore no one would doubt that you, who are good when judging, and better when reading, are best when seen.

[384172] 8.14.8. Megethius the cleric, the bearer of your eloquence, his business prospering as he wished, since he brought the gifts of your letter, carries back my compliances; whom we have at least helped by our wish, because by the deed perhaps we cannot. Through him I earnestly beseech that you both, brothers, may irrigate our thirst frequently with lettered letters—you the more frequently. But if the difficulty of the intervening journey resists our wishes, at least sometimes supplicate for your suppliants; and it is the greater thing if you deign to grant us salvation by rare intercessions rather than dignity by frequent addresses. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[384854] 8.15.1. While you wish the holy Anianus—the greatest and most consummate bishop, equal to Lupus and not unequal to Germanus—to be celebrated with the highest praises, and desire that the character, merits, and virtues of so great a man be fixed in the hearts of the faithful—to whom even this is given for glory, not without justice, that he died with you as his successor—you had demanded of me that I should promise you to make known to posterity, with my pen, the war of Attila, in which, namely, were contained the siege, the assault, the breaking in but not the plundering of the city of Orléans, and that famous prophecy of the bishop heard from heaven.

[385515] 8.15.2. I had begun to write; but, the burden of the undertaken work perceived, it irked me to have begun. On account of this I have trusted to no ears what I had first, by my own censure, condemned. It will be granted, as I hope, to your prayer and to the merits of the highest bishop, that on whatever occasion, and indeed a swift one, we may serve his heralding. For the rest, you, a just creditor, will laudably have indulged this to the imprudence of a rash debtor, that what seems to me insoluble may seem to you too irreclaimable. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[386097] 8.16.1. I had promised Petronius, an illustrious man, that I would despatch the present little work in a few letters; whose ears I have not spared, while I spare yours; for I preferred that the labour of correction should regard him, the honour of publication you, and that this volume should come into your hands at another's risk, by my compliance. The promise is fulfilled; for if your skill should inspect the marks of the headings collected onto the parchments, already, unless I am mistaken, a copious copy knocks at you; already one comes to the margins of the rollers; already it is time, as the satirist says, for our Orestes to be finished even upon the back.

[386768] 8.16.2. Here I have not, in the manner of the old study, summoned a feigned Terpsichore, nor, beside the gushing of the Aganippic fount, have I drawn my pen through dewy banks and mossy pebbles. And would that here nothing soft, nothing greedy, nothing borrowed from the crossroads were found! For to a ripe reader, such as you are yourself, not so much a boneless, tender, nerveless diction pleases, as one a little old-fashioned, brawny, and as it were masculine. But let these things be reserved for better men; it suffices me, if you quickly forgive that we are slow.

[387341] 8.16.3. Besides, if the illustrious man had demanded that something more amply be written in addition, we should have fallen into great delays. For through our little cupboards and chests there remained nothing worthy of being brought forth. Whence learn that, though we have not yet begun to be silent, we have certainly begun to wish for silence, from a twofold cause: that, if we please, the few may incite the pleasure of those about to read; if we are refused, the many may not excite distaste; since in this style there is not urbane wit, but rustic simplicity.

[387910] 8.16.4. For whence to us that grim and most ancient kind of speaking? Whence those Salian or Sibylline words, or those fetched from the Sabines all the way from Cures, which, the masters for the most part keeping silence, some fetial or flamen or aged riddler of legal questions would more readily lay open? We have composed our little works in a speech dry, slender, and certainly for the most part common, of which on this side the honour is rare, that the use is frequent; on this side the grace is difficult, that the invention is easy.

[388452] 8.16.5. Indeed I profess boldly that, as here there is nothing keen, nothing eloquent, so there is nothing set down that is not finished, not according to a model. But why these things with more words? My diction—which suffices me—pleases my friends, in whom, however, I embrace either case: whether they do not deceive me by their examination, or are deceived by their charity. And God, for what remains, I ask, in time to come, that those who follow may either be deceived likewise or pass judgement. Farewell.

[388966] 9.1.1. You require, my lord son, that, the boundary of the earlier letters broken through, our pen run forward into further matter, not content to be enclosed by the privilege of the number aforesaid. You add also causes by which this ninth book should grow upon the eight earlier volumes: namely, that Gaius Secundus, whose course you pronounce us to follow in this work, bounds his epistolary work with like headings.

[389387] 9.1.2. What you bid is not unworthy of approval; although this very thing which you piously enjoin proves arduous and not opportune for whatever little praise has now once been won: first, because there is a late conjoining of the present increase to a little work already published; next, because, before any judges whatever, unless I am mistaken, it is most unseemly that, for one matter, a single beginning and three epilogues should be found.

[389835] 9.1.3. Likewise too I know not how it can be made pardonable that our garrulity will not endure to be restrained even after the term has been announced—unless because perhaps the measure which can be set to pages cannot itself be set to friendships. Wherefore it befits you to be in a kind of watchtower, as it were, for guarding my reputation, and to make manifest to the curious the reason of this deed, and what all the best men think on this point, to lay open to me by a most frequent reply.

[390333] 9.1.4. Moreover, if, when I am compelled to chatter, you yourself persist in keeping silent, it is not over-unjust that you too should be punished in turn by the retaliation of our silence. So do you first, you above all, forgive the task you impose and the service. But we, if any copy fall into our hands, will quickly add it to the margins of the eighth book.

[390697] 9.1.5. Although your Apollinaris, who has zeal in all other things, in this at least is most negligent, since he is held by very little reading, whether compelled or willing—yet, as far as it seems to me, I would not refuse to be joined to those fathers to whom, by their zeal, wish, and fear, it is laboriously, though with difficulty, persuaded that something praiseworthy is enough in their sons, and with more difficulty enough. Farewell.

[391141] 9.2.1. The bishop Albisus and the deacon Proculus—on this account to be pronounced our masters of conduct, because they deserve to be your disciples—have brought letters, with whose sacrosanct address you have gifted me; which letters, however, impose on me very much honour, more burden. Whence too I rejoice at their blessing in such a way that I am confounded by their injunction, since, wholly disturbed, I do not even in part obey. For you bid things as diverse as they are excessive, and decree that a work be unfolded which is as hard for my extremity to complete as it is imprudent to begin.

[391742] 9.2.2. But if I measure well the amplitude of the proven piety in you, you have laboured more that the affection of your heart, rather than the effect of our work, should be made public. For when Jerome the translator, Augustine the dialectician, Origen the allegorist bring forth for you, in a wholesome harvest of doctrine, the heavy ears of spiritual meanings—shall now, forsooth, the dry stubble of a fasting tongue crackle for you from my part? In this manner you would also rightly join the hoarse geese to the songs of swans, and the chattering whispers of base sparrows to the measured plaints of nightingales.

[392362] 9.2.3. What of this—that it would even thus be done arrogantly and unseemly, if I should undertake the weight of the enjoined task, a new cleric, an old sinner, of light knowledge, heavy conscience—namely so that, if I sent anything written anywhere, my person would not even then be absent from the laughter of the judges, when it had been absent from their sight? Do not, I pray, my Lord Bishop, demand too much that my modesty, suckling somehow as it is, be disfigured by the rashness of beginning this work; for so great is the envy of detractors that the matter you send would more swiftly obtain disgrace when begun than approval when finished. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[393057] 9.3.1. Your eloquence keeps its custom, as does your piety; and on this account we greatly esteem your speech, because you write eloquently; your affection, because you write willingly. For the rest, at present, pardon first asked and obtained, I think it most cautious and most wholesome—especially through these cities which, much segregated by their situation, are cut off, while the routes are suspect through the movements of the nations—to renounce a more frequent pen, and, the assiduity of mutual converse being deferred for a while, to undertake rather the care of keeping silence. Which, among persons bound by intervening affection, although it is most harsh and most bitter, is yet not brought about by causes of any sort, but by very many sure and necessary ones, each of which proceeds from a different origin.

[393883] 9.3.2. Of these this will be numbered first in the reckoning: that no courier passes the guards of the public causeways uninterrogated; who, though there is no danger, inasmuch as he is free of crime, is yet wont to suffer very much difficulty, while a wakeful searcher tracks out every secret of the bearers. And if perchance their answer should waver ever so little from the questions, what is not found written is believed to be commanded by word of mouth; and through this the one who is sent generally suffers injury, the one who sends, odium—and more in this time, in which the treaties of kingdoms long ago established between rivals are again rendered doubtful through discordant conditions.

[394584] 9.3.3. Besides this, my very mind lies wounded by domestic losses on this side and that; for, by the image of duty or, what is truer, the necessity, driven from my native soil, here relegated, I am broken by various anguishes in every direction, because I suffer here the inconveniences of a stranger, there the losses of an outlaw. Wherefore to pay you now letters a little more polished is either unseasonably asked of me or impudently undertaken by me—letters which, whether pleasant in their jesting or cultivated in their style, it belongs to the happy to exchange. Moreover, a pleasant speech, when the mind is in mourning, is a kind of barbarism of conduct.

[395250] 9.3.4. Nay rather, endow a soul ill-conscious of itself, and trembling hourly at the recollected debts of a penal life, with those most frequent and most powerful supports of your prayers—you who are skilled in the prayers of the islands, which you have transferred from the wrestling-school of the eremite congregation and from the senate of the Lérins cell-dwellers into the city too, over whose church's holy things you keep watch—in nothing changed from an abbot by being a priest, since under the pretext of a new dignity you have not relaxed the rigour of the old discipline. By these prayers, then, as I said above, most efficacious, obtain that the Lord be our portion, and that, enrolled in the troops of our fellow-tribesmen the deacons, we may not remain earthly, we for whom no earth remains, and that we may begin to be exiles, as from the gains of the world, so too from its faults.

[396148] 9.3.5. The third cause, or even the greatest, why I have forborne to write to you, is that I immensely fear that tropological and figured kind of composing in you—most eminent and many ways polished with words—which the letter we received from you shows: although long ago I, a hoarse applauder, have heard your sermons, now sudden, now, when reason demanded it, laboriously elaborated—then especially when, at the weekly festivals of the dedicated church of Lyon, at the request of your sacrosanct colleagues, you were entreated to preach. Where, while you discoursed of something midway between the spiritual and the forensic rules—since you are most learned in both disciplines—we surrounded you, our minds alike erect and our ears bent, here doing too little for our desire, because you had satisfied our judgement.

[396969] 9.3.6. For these causes I have tempered my pen and will temper it, speaking briefly that I may obey, about to be silent long that I may learn. For the rest, it is your part, my Lord Bishop, to bend yourself sufficiently to works that will live, of wholesome and singular doctrine; for whoever listens to you teaching and disputing learns to do praiseworthy things more than to speak. But now, for what remains, grant with pardon a page that plays the rustic and complies with you, in which, on my own authority, if it be compared with your letters, there is a most infant style. But whither, stupid that I am, do I allege these things? For to deprecate ineptitudes overmuch is itself most inept—in which, if you, the unmixed arbiter, unloose the matter to the full, you will laugh at very many things, blame more. But this too I embrace, if, for the charity in which you abound, you are not everywhere most continent of judging—that is, if your opinion should annul anything upon these pages. For then I shall the more surely rejoice that you have approved the rest, if I learn that you have crossed out some. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[398123] 9.4.1. Our traveller and courier wears the tracks of his accustomed journey, often retracing the space of road and of regions that separates our towns. Wherefore it befits us too to follow the duties of a diligence once proposed, which we ought to redouble, with a certain intentness of mind, both with the other travellers and especially when Amantius runs between, lest perchance he himself should seem to demand letters from custom more than we to dictate them from love, my Lord Bishop; and therefore remember more those of your own, among whom we presume to be reckoned, and who, as we are raised by your prosperities, so are cast down by your adversities.

[398786] 9.4.2. For that you have lately, by the necessity of certain brothers, endured many anguishes, has come, by a tearful report, to us who weep. But you, flower of priests, gem of bishops, strong in knowledge, stronger in conscience, spurn the threats and waves of the world's storm-clouds, since you yourself have frequently taught that one comes to the promised banquets of the patriarchs, or to the nectar of the heavenly cups, through the goblets of earthly bitternesses.

[399260] 9.4.3. Willy-nilly, whoever attains the kingdom of the despised Mediator follows his example. However much the affliction of the present life may pour out for us the bowls of anxieties, we endure small things, if we recall what He drank at the gibbet who invites us to heaven. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[399581] 9.5.1. Although we dwell, perchance, in a seat a little more separated than our common mind could wish, yet our diligence would not, as far as it concerns the discharge of duty, be hindered by the obstacle of the intervening journey, were it not that, divided by kingdoms, we are recalled, by the law of our different lots, from a more frequent exchange of speech; which lots now at least—because, after the pact of peace entered into, they will be allied with faithful minds—our letters will begin to pass frequently, since they cease to be suspect. Accordingly, my Lord Bishop, join with your sacrosanct brothers prayers that will alike supplicate Christ, that, deigning to prosper what we do, and tempering the disputes of our dominion and checking arms, He may endow them with innocence, us with quiet, and all with security. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[400455] 9.6.1. Your holiness availed before Christ, by the effect of its intercession, on behalf of our most beloved one (why should I speak the name, the person? you will recognize all)—of whose youthful looseness you often used now to complain openly before witnesses called in, now to groan in silence. So lately, the company of a most shameful handmaid being broken off, to whom, bound by obscene habit, he had wholly given himself over, he by a sudden correction of himself took counsel for his patrimony, his posterity, his fame.

[400984] 9.6.2. For, emptied through the losses of his estate, as soon as he began to understand and reconsider how much of his little goods, from grandfather and father, the costliness of the domestic Charybdis had licked away, though coming to his senses late, yet at last, as it were, he bit the bridle and shook free his neck, and, fixing in his ears, as they tell, the wax of Ulysses, fled, deaf against the vices, from the blandishments of the harlot shipwreck, and—as was fitting—the praiseworthy man took to wife, untouched, a girl as supreme in character and birth as she was foremost in fortune.

[401582] 9.6.3. This indeed would be glory, if he had so left his pleasures as not even to be joined to a wife; but, even if it chance to migrate from error to good character, it is the lot of few to begin with the greatest things, and for those who have long indulged themselves in everything, straightway to cut off everything and all at once.

[401920] 9.6.4. Wherefore it is your part to obtain as soon as possible, by diligent prayer, the hope of children for the wedded pair; the consequence will be that, one or another son being born (and I have said too much), he may henceforth abstain from things lawful, who presumed upon things unlawful. For the spouses themselves, although wedded but lately, conduct themselves with such character, with such modesty, that truly you would recognize, if you saw them but once, that there is very much that distinguishes that most honourable wedded love from the figments and allurements of concubinage. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[402558] 9.7.1. A certain man, going from Auvergne to Belgica (the person is known to me, the cause unknown; nor does it matter), after he had come to Reims, wheedled out of your scribe or bookseller—won over, be it by a price, be it by a favour—a most copious draft of your declamations, willy-nilly. He, returning to us and exceedingly boastful, since so many volumes had been obtained, whatever he had brought (though we were ready to buy it), yet, as a citizen (nor was it unjust), pressed upon us as a gift. It was at once my care, and that of those who study, since we deservedly wished to read, to hold very much, to transcribe all.

[403190] 9.7.2. By the assent of all it was pronounced that few like things can now be composed. For there is one rare, or none, to whom, as he meditates, there stands by abundantly an equal arrangement through the causes, a placing through the letters, a composing through the syllables; to this, opportunity in examples, trustworthiness in testimonies, propriety in epithets, urbanity in figures, force in arguments, weight in meanings, a river in words, a thunderbolt in clausulae.

[403667] 9.7.3. The structure, indeed, strong and firm, and knit by the cuttings of most witty conjunctions with indissoluble caesuras, yet nonetheless slippery and light and in all ways well-rounded, and such as fittingly speeds the reader's tongue unimpeded, lest, suffering rough junctures, it stammer as it is rolled through the vault of the palate; in fine, wholly liquid throughout and ductile, as when a finger, with no driven nail, glides over crystalline or onyx surfaces, since no tenacious fracture, caught by chinky obstacles, holds it back.

[404213] 9.7.4. Why more? There exists at present no oration of any living man which your skill could not pass and outstrip, not without labour. Whence too I almost suspect, my Lord Bishop, that on account of your overflowing and ineffable eloquence (pardon be granted to the saying) you are proud. But although you shine with a good thing, as of conscience so of a most well-ordered diction, you should nonetheless by no means flee from us, who praise things well written, even if we do not write things to be praised.

[404725] 9.7.5. Wherefore cease henceforth to decline our judgements, which threaten nothing biting, nothing reproachful. Otherwise, if you delay to make our sterility fruitful with eloquent colloquies, we shall lie in wait for the markets of pilferers, and the cunning hand of housebreakers shall, of its own accord, plunder your writing-cases, we conniving and abetting; and you will then begin in vain to be moved, despoiled by theft, if now, when asked, you are not moved by duty. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[405245] 9.8.1. Although we did not expect, yet did desire, your letters, the old courier delivered them—found fit, to whom the duty may rightly be entrusted again, since he delivered the first so well. Therefore, gifted with a second address, or rather a blessing, I too in turn pay back another "Hail," combining compliances equalled in number, not in merits.

[405599] 9.8.2. And since, my Lord Bishop, we now live with minds joined but regions disjoined, and are forbidden by the situation of our separated dwelling to enjoy the mutual sight of one another, pray that, by a longed-for and religious departure, the anguishes and burden of the present life discharged, when the holy day of judgement shines forth with the resurrection, we may be joined to your throngs, to serve them—even under the occasion of a Gibeonite servitude; because, according to the heavenly promises, which pledged that the sons of God should be gathered from the nations, if pardon console us who are guilty, while glory awaits you who are blessed, we shall be divided, though by the difference of our deeds, yet not by the distance of our places. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[406400] 9.9.1. You have complained, most sacred man, that we both keep silence too long; I recognize the zeal of your part herein, but I do not recognize the guilt of ours. For, long ago bidden to chatter, I did not keep silence, with letters running on ahead—which, however, to be perused, when they had come to Riez, you, who were then at Apt, most aptly were absent for. And that was greatly votive and most longed-for by me, that the enjoined letter should neither be denied as written to friendship nor be subjected, when read, to censure.

[406938] 9.9.2. Let us pass these things over. You bid a copious page be sent again; to obey, the wishes are at hand for one hastening, the causes are absent; for a salutation, unless the matter actively brings some business, is succinct; and he who extends it with unnecessary words, turned aside from the rule of the Sallustian track, strays—Sallust, who blames Catiline for having had eloquence enough, wisdom too little. Whence, "Hail" said, we straightway say "Farewell." Pray for us.

[407420] 9.9.3. But it is well, it is well, that, as I was about now and now to fold up my little paper, a matter chanced to occur, in the upbraiding of which, if either my joy or my anger should restrain itself longer, I shall judge myself worthy of the affront received. You have come, master, into my hands (nor do I only exult, but truly I insult), you have come—and indeed such as for a long time now our desires awaited. I doubt indeed whether even unwilling, but certainly like one unwilling, since by your providing—or, if you altogether deny this, your acquiescing—I have been unsaluted by your books, and these, what is much more injurious, when they passed by the Arvernian territory, grazing not only my walls but even my flanks.

[408154] 9.9.4. Or did you fear that we would envy your sayings? But by God's indulgence we are addicted to no vice less; to whom, if it lay subject from my part as to others, despair of attaining would even so take away the rivalry of contending. Or did you dread my eyebrow, as of a difficult and rigid applauder? And what neck of skill is there so great in anyone, or what dropsy, that it should not pursue your lukewarm things too with the most fervent praises?

[408612] 9.9.5. Or did you take care to have me disdained and neglected for this reason—that you despised my youth? Which I little believe. Or that I am unlearned? Which I bear the more—yet so that one who knows not how to speak does know how to hear; for even those who have been present at the circus games do not refuse to pass judgement on the chariots. Or did we by any chance fall out, so that we were thought likely to disparage those little books which you had published? But, God presiding, that our friendships are slight, not even an enemy can feign.

[409166] 9.9.6. To what end these things? you ask. Behold, now I lay it open—both what I rejoice to have tracked out, and at what I am angry that you concealed. I have read your volumes, which the bishop and monk Riochatus, twice a pilgrim of this world, carries back for you to your Britons—he being now, for the present, fortunate rather, who does not grow old, and who, not about to fail the living, will after his burial become, through the very things he wrote, a survivor of himself. So this same venerable man, while he tarried at our town, until the storm of the stirred-up nations should rage itself out—whose huge whirlwind had then bristled up on this side and that—so unfolded the rest of your gifts that he most urbanely covered over the more excellent things he carried, dissembling, by your flowers, the lighting up of my thorns.

[410003] 9.9.7. But after two months or more, when likewise some of the travellers had betrayed that he had quickly set out from us, secretly carrying treasures of mystic wealth in closed wrappers, I, having pursued him as he departed with swift horses, which could easily outstrip the spaces of the previous day's journey, leapt with a kiss upon the throat of the seized brigand—with human jest, with the gesture of a beast, as when a tigress, robbed, leaps over with flying foot to shake off any of her whelps from the neck of the Parthian ravisher.

[410547] 9.9.8. Why many words? I embrace the knees of the captured guest, I halt the beasts of burden, I bind the reins, I loose the baggage, I find the sought volume, I bring it forth, I read it through, I excerpt the greatest chapters, breaking them off from the great. And the leaping nimbleness of the scribes granted a certain abridgement to one dictating in haste, who caught with signs what they did not hold with letters. With what tears indeed we were wet, drenched mutually in turn by weeping, then when we were separated from an embrace often repeated, it is long to have told, nor does it matter; for what suffices for a triumphal joy, I returned home laden with spoils of charity and possessed of a spiritual prize.

[411269] 9.9.9. You ask now what I judge of my spoils; I would not yet betray it, that you might hang the longer in expectation; for I should avenge myself more, if I kept silent what I felt. But now neither do you yourself pride yourself in vain, inasmuch as you understand that there is in you a power of pleading so to compass, that for your reader, whether reluctant or willing, the force of pleasure strikes out the necessity of heralding. Accordingly, receive what we, even having suffered injury, judge concerning your writings.

[411797] 9.9.10. We read a work most laborious, manifold, keen, sublime, digested by headings, heaped up with examples, bipartite under the scheme of a dialogue, quadripartite under the theme of the causes. You had written very many things ardently, more pompously; these things simply, not rustically; those wittily, not craftily; weighty matters maturely, profound ones carefully, doubtful ones steadfastly, argumentative ones in the manner of disputation, some severely, some blandly, all morally, choicely, powerfully, most eloquently.

[412329] 9.9.11. And so, following you through so many kinds of narration over the whole broadest field of your composition, I easily perceived nothing in the eloquence of others, nothing in their talents, equally polished. That I feel these things true you sufficiently approve, since not even when offended do I judge otherwise. In fine, the oration of an absent man, as far as we suppose, can grow no more, unless perchance the author, speaking face to face, add somewhat to these things—voice, hand, motion, modesty, the artist . . .

[412859] 9.9.12. So, endowed with these gifts of mind and of letters, you have yoked to yourself, my Lord Bishop, a wife fair—but one marrying with Deuteronomy attesting; whom you, still a young man, having descried among the hostile bands, and there, in the battle-line of the opposing party, fallen in love with, repulsed by no resisting warriors, with the conquering arm of desire you carried off—Philosophy, namely, who, violently rescued from the number of the sacrilegious arts, her hair of superfluous religion shaved, and her eyebrow of secular knowledge cut off, and the wrinkles of her most ancient garments lopped away (that is, the windings of grim dialectic which veil false morals and unlawful things), now cleansed, has joined her limbs to yours in a mystic embrace.

[413633] 9.9.13. She, from your earliest years long your handmaid, she your inseparable companion at your side, whether exercising you in the urban wrestling-schools or wont to mortify you in the hidden solitudes, she, the consort of the Athenaeum, she of the monastery, with you renounces the worldly, with you proclaims the heavenly disciplines. Whoever shall provoke you, joined in this marriage, will feel that the Academy of Plato serves in the church of Christ, and that you philosophize more nobly:

[414131] 9.9.14. first, that you assert the ineffable Wisdom of God the Father, with the eternity of the Holy Spirit; then, besides, that you neither feed your hair nor glory in the cloak or club as in sophistic insignia, nor affect pride from the distinction of dress, pomp in elegance, ostentation in squalor; nor do you greatly emulate this—that through the Areopagite gymnasia or the prytanea there be painted, with bent neck Speusippus, Aratus with bowed, Zeno with contracted brow, Epicurus with distended skin, Diogenes with flowing beard, Socrates with falling locks, Aristotle with arm thrust out, Xenocrates with leg drawn up, Heraclitus with weeping eyes shut, Democritus with laughter and open lips, Chrysippus with fingers constricted on account of the marks of numbers, Euclid with them spread out on account of the spaces of measures, Cleanthes with them gnawed on account of both.

[415020] 9.9.15. Nay rather, whoever shall have contended will find the Stoics, Cynics, Peripatetics, those heresiarchs, shaken by their own arms, by their own engines too. For their followers, if they shall have resisted the Christian dogma and meaning, soon, you being their master, bound by their own home-bred entanglements, will headlong be netted in their own snares, the hooked syllogisms of your proposition catching the voluble tongue of the prevaricators; while you rather knot the slippery questions with categorical coils, in the manner of keen physicians, who, when reason compels, trust for a remedy against poisons even from the serpent itself.

[415672] 9.9.16. But this, in these times, is under the contemplation only of your conscience or the power of your doctrine; for who would follow your footsteps with an equal step, to whom alone it is given to speak better than you have learned, to live better than you speak? Wherefore deservedly all good men, and that above all others in your age, will celebrate you as most blessed, whose life has so doubly grown illustrious by your sayings and your deeds, that—since indeed the right hand has now numbered your years—proclaimed by your own age, to be longed for by another, praiseworthy by either deed, you may depart, about to leave yourself to strangers, your own things to those nearest. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[416404] 9.10.1. He has delivered to you my letters whom it would have been fitting to offer me yours; for our brother Caelestius, lately returned to you from Béziers, drew out of me a certain bond of cession concerning the status of our Iniuriosus. Which indeed I wrote, broken no less by your modesty than by your wish; for it was fitting that we, of our own accord, should run to meet your bashfulness as it were with certain feet of compliance.

[416845] 9.10.2. Wherefore, I too willing, possess the thing granted, but liberally (for, as I suspect, you yourself sought nothing more of this kind of solace); whom by these letters, no less commendatory than restitutory, I now, already appeased, introduce; yet so that he attend you, obey you, follow you, and so that, if he remain with you, he be judged the servant of neither of us; if perchance he depart, he be sought as a fugitive by both. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[417328] 9.11.1. On account of a little book which you thought sent not to you more than through you, I have received a letter of yours written not to me more than against me. To the reproaches I reply for the equity of the cause, not for the equality of eloquence—although who or how great am I now, that I should presume to plead, you charging an innocent man? Wherefore I at once, in the very beginning, supplicate that this fault, however small it is, be forgiven me, confessing the error of diffidence only, not of pride.

[417847] 9.11.2. For though the rigour of your censure, in letters as in character, is on both sides to be trembled at by me, I confess nonetheless that, in the unbarring of the very volume and work, that charity which you allege was to me more of a burden; nor do I conjecture this beside what is just, since this force is naturally inborn in the minds of mortals, that, if anything be done amiss, friends indulge it the less, the more they love.

[418287] 9.11.3. I had written a book, as you pronounce, full and laden with a varied congeries of causes, times, and persons: I should have seemed to do a most impudent thing, if all of it had pleased me so much that I trusted none of it would displease you. Here too, whatever the outcome of the judgement should be, I saw that the account of piety would by no means stand whole on my side, if at least the volume had not been previously brought to you, even if it should not seem offered—under this moderation, of course, that, if perchance I should please, you might not be judged to have been passed over by arrogance; if otherwise, not to have been sought out by importunity.

[418961] 9.11.4. Nor indeed did I believe I should deprecate, with much labour, the corrupted causes of blushing. Likewise I had known that you knew this—that authors, in publishing their works, are befitted by modesty rather than by boldness, and that the boldness of a reciter wrings points from grim censors more slowly than his trepidation does. Otherwise, if there is anyone who, with the prerogative of confidence, publishes abroad the work of a theme before unheard, he begins to owe public expectation more in return, though he has paid much. Besides, whatever you shall have decreed concerning the tenor of this reply, I have preferred to confess the deed simply rather than to deny it craftily.

[419658] 9.11.5. Another would have said: "I preferred no one to you, I gave no special letters to anyone; he whom you suspected was preferred departed content with the form of a single letter, and that indeed bringing nothing about the present matter: you, complaining that you were passed over, wearied with three most loquacious pages, are stirred rather to nausea, while you frequently linger over the empty words of an insipid reading. Add that even in this, which perhaps you did not note, the account of your reverence and merits was kept—that, just as you among the chairs of the other bishops, so your heading is first in the book. His name sounds scarcely once only, and on a page assigned to himself; yours, besides those allotted to you, frequently lights up others'."

[420431] 9.11.6. Join to these that, if anything there pleases even casually, you read it through by my counsel, he at some time by your benefit—he who, pressed in vain by envy of my little gift, has not yet, as I suspect, come to the faculty of reading, when you yourself have long ago come to the abundance of transcribing. I say this, as though he were not going to deem the membranes autograph, if at least he should receive even a copy of what you had earlier run through; for in the things which you have handled, neither rarity of punctuation nor frequency of barbarisms will be blamed. Indeed, in the end, openly the very property seems transmitted even to you, to whom the use has been transmitted without the prescription of a fixed time, and who can use the aforesaid little book so long that your memory shall enclose it no more than your little cabinet.

[421290] 9.11.7. These things, and more than these, perhaps someone would say; but I pass over all, and prefer to pray for pardon rather than to deprecate guilt, if this is believed to be such. The negligence too of the present letters I now neither excuse: first, because, even if I wish, I can write little more elegantly; next, because, the work of the little book finished, my mind, about at last to keep holiday, now disdains to polish what it dissembles to make public.

[421758] 9.11.8. But yet, since I yield to you sufficiently—and that deservedly (for what is like?)—in all things, since in another kind of virtues you, now for fifty years, have, as often as you have made the attempt, been preferred not only to bishops of your own age but even to the ancient ones, I wish you to know that, although you should shake the stars with your complaints and implore the ashes and embers of our forefathers in testimony of wounded charity, I will not draw back my foot from your conflict, if there is to be a contest about mutual love; because, as in other things, so it is most foul of all to be surpassed in affection—which sure profession, willy-nilly, is repaid to those reproaches of yours (which surpass, indeed, all the honeys of blandishments) not beyond what is just.

[422554] 9.11.9. Behold, you have a letter almost as garrulous as you were demanding; although they are all, if any anywhere are, most loquacious. For into the audacity of discoursing whom would you not yourself compel? You who—of all men of letters (for of myself I am silent), though they affect to be hidden, so draw forth their talents, as the sun's ray is wont to draw water hidden in the bowels of the earth through the absorbing atoms. By the sting of which light not only the subtle sand or the diggable earth is penetrated, but, if by the pressure of a rocky mountain the vein of hidden springs be concealed, the nature of heavenly secrets, more violent, opens the arcanum of the liquid element. So, holy man, if you have perceived any of the studious to be either quiet or modest, or lurking in the obscure recess of an unknown fame, these the clarity of your eloquence, by an artful conversation, while it compels, also makes public.

[423491] 9.11.10. But whither a little more than is the custom? Let us return to the cause, upon whose superfluous babbling, since I obey, I pray that you, appeased, impart to me, confessing my errors, the elements of pardon by your indulgence—although, by whatever holy joy and communion is yours, you would rejoice the more copiously, if the defence of my fault rather than satisfaction were borne to you written. Deign to be mindful of me, my Lord Bishop.

[423942] 9.12.1. A page set out from you came into our hands, which draws much resemblance to the Spanish salt cut in the Tarraconensian ridges. For, to one perusing it, it is bright and salty, nor yet on this very account less honeyed—but speech sweet, and keen in its propositions: for so it delights by its eloquence what it troubles by its command, since, measuring too little what order I follow, it asks of us now new poems. First, from the very outset of my religious profession, I renounced this exercise chiefly, because, of course, it could be accommodated to lightness, if the levity of verses had occupied me, whom the gravity of actions had begun to regard.

[424605] 9.12.2. Then, besides, it is agreed that every work, if it rest in a long interval, is recovered with difficulty. For who would not know that the greatest grace comes to all craftsmen or arts by use, and that, when accustomed pursuits are not frequented, arms in bodies, talents in arts grow black with rust? Whence too is that—that the bow, when seized late or seldom, rebels the more against the hand, the ox against the yoke, the horse against the bridle. Besides, the modesty that is the companion of our sloth inclines my opinion to this—that I am as much ashamed to compose a new poem, after I have run through three Olympiads in silence, as I am loth.

[425265] 9.12.3. Here likewise it is a sin that even things difficult to do be denied to you, whose affection it the less befits to be cheated, the more steadfastly it fears no rebuff. We shall therefore hold to a certain middle course; and as I shall now compose no new epigrams, so I shall send you letters, if any shall be lying stuffed with verse—namely, before the necessity of my present office—asking that you be not so far a prevaricator of justice as to suppose that I shall never refrain from writing of this kind. For I should be no less increased by your suffrage, if perchance you should deign to deem me now modest rather than witty. Farewell.

[425915] 9.13.1. Your opinion of my verses is indeed, I confess, so applaudable of old, so favourable, that you think me to be compared with all the most choice of poets, certainly to be preferred to very many. I would believe you, did you not, as much as you are wise, so also much love me. Hence it is that your charity can lie about my praises, and cannot deceive.

[426275] 9.13.2. Besides this, you ask that I send you some Asclepiads, formed on the Horatian anvil, on which you may exercise yourself by reciting them over your drink. I obey what is enjoined, although, if ever, now most of all I am pressed and occupied by the prosaic kind of speaking. In short, you will prove that, among us, the studies of metres for the most part grow cold; for it is not easy to do well one and the same thing both, and seldom. Long ago we played at smooth hendecasyllables, the thumb worn down upon the reeds, which you might sing more nimbly for choriambics, the foot shaken out; but you wish that our track henceforth run along the causeway of the Calabrian path, where Flaccus turned his lyric horses to the Pindaric melody with quill-mighty reins, while the string is struck in Glyconic metre, and also in Alcaic or Pherecratean joined to Lesbian or anapaestic, blooming through the eclogues of varied song with the many-coloured violets of words. That, grant pardon, is hard for the ancient bards to fashion, hard for me too, that a mouth sounding diverse epigrams should in no way stumble, because of frequent letters, which a masculine diction forbids to grow wanton in song and luxuriant measures. That scarcely Leo, king of the Castalian choir, scarcely Lampridius, who follows him, could do, declaiming under the weight of a twin style before his Bordeaux disciples. Does this befit me and you? Spare your jests, I pray; I beg, let care preserve to the end the modesty promised to the orator's work, than which nothing is worse, if it should be at once rigid in its first parts, soft in its last.

[427900] 9.13.3. Nay rather, as often as you shall be cheered by the feast of a more sumptuous table, give yourself to religious narratives, which I more approve; let frequent conversation serve to bring these forth, anxious hearing to learn them again. Certainly, if to these most wholesome diversions, as one still young, you are too tepidly bent, borrow at least from the Platonist of Madaura the formulas of convivial questions, and, that you may be rendered more instructed, solve these set before you, propose these to be solved, and exercise yourself in these studies even while you are at leisure.

[428498] 9.13.4. But since mention of banquets has once fallen in, and you so diligently demand of me a poem composed for another cause and person, that you can no longer have me as a hesitator over publishing it, receive willingly what, in the times of Augustus Majorian—when at the request of a certain comrade we had come together to dinner—I poured out, suddenly, upon a book of Peter, the master of letters, suddenly brought forth, my fellow-companions too, while the king of the feast wove delays about the ordering of the fish-sauce, composing equal verses—Domnulus, Severianus, and Lampridius (I have said this boastfully; nay, better ones); whom the emperor, summoned from all the cities into one city, the inviter into one dinner, had by chance drawn together.

[429261] 9.13.5. The only delay was while we apportion the kinds of metres by lot. For it pleased us, for the charity of the company, that, although the same matter of writing existed for all, yet the epigrams of each should not be brought forth in one kind, lest any of us, who had spoken more meagrely than the rest, should be bitten first by modesty, afterward by envy; for it is more quickly recognized, in any reciter, whether he sings in the metre in which the rest sing, and writes too with the same talent. But you will then more opportunely praise the things appended, when you have wholly indulged in leisure. For it is not just that you begin, as a censor, to discuss with severity what a friend could not dictate at leisure. Come, youth assembled, the place, the hour, the table, the cause bid that you exalt to the stars, with your studies, this volume, which you learn both by ear and by mouth. Peter is to be read by you, an author sufficiently instructed in either discipline. Let us therefore celebrate, brothers, the holy festival of letters. Let a genial furnishing pass the falling day with feast, cups, and dances. Bring the ruddy embroidery on fine linen and the ruddy purples, which the Meliboean wave dyes, the cauldron re-boiling them, that with unmixed colour it may enrich the thirsty fleece; let the foreign furniture give the woven mountain-ranges of Ctesiphon and Niphates and the swift beasts on the spreading cloth, whose fury the well-feigned wound sharpens with scarlet, and, as from a piercing dart, bloodless gore comes forth; where, grim and bent back through art, his face turned upward, the Parthian goes by horse and returns by spear, fleeing and routing the images of beasts. Let the table bear linens fairer than snow, and be covered with laurels and ivy and green vine-shoots; let capacious baskets bring cytisus, crocus, asters, cassia, privet, marigolds, and let them paint the side-board and the couches with fragrant garlands. Let a hand anointed with the juice of balsam tame the bristling hair, and let the smoke, rich with the Arabs' harvest, seek the high roofs; and likewise, as night comes on, let a numerous lamp be raised upon the high parts of the vault, amid the gleaming panels; and the lanterns, knowing not oil and gluey fats, with swelling belly pour forth the balsam-juice. Let the bearers, bending their heads under the embossed metal, bear on laden shoulders the prouder feasts. Let bowls, cups, basins ally Falernian with nard, and let the sewn rose crown the tripods and the goblets. It is pleasant to go among the garlands fanning the alabaster vases; it is pleasant too, with wandering whirl, to give broken limbs to the dance, or to feign the trembling Bacchantes with foot, dress, and voice. Let twin-harboured Corinth send back its harp-girls, learned in stage and palaestra, to the warm workshops, whose singing fingers, the tongue sounding alike, weary, in the place of a plectrum, the living strings by their stroke. Give too the piped bronzes, dear to the naked Satyrs; give the hoarse flute-players, through whose throats of the palate, to be blown again with rattling cheeks, the pipe's breath groans; give things sung under the comic sock, give things spoken under the tragic buskin, give whatever the advocates, give whatever the poets too clamour in varied action: Peter surpasses both these and those. We hold the work brought forth, which, weaving with art the double metre, ran the rough way and the labyrinthine paths; but, labouring in all things and approved by all, he snatches the palm hence and thence, and is borne through learned mouths. Far from here let us drive both Hippocrene and the Aganippic founts and tuneful Apollo with the attendant Muses, and Minerva, as though the patroness of singing; remove things feigned in speech: one God bestows these things. The power of the diadem stood amazed at the man speaking, the toga, the soldier, the equestrian order, and the people of Romulus; and still the forums, temples, fields, and camps revolve their "Bravo," above these the Po gives a roar for its foster-child, and the love of the Ligurian cities. A like favour echoes through the cities of the Rhône, and the fierceness of the Iberians will imitate the Gauls. Nor, delaying on this axle, will it swiftly make for the fields, but be borne off by the east wind and the north and the south and the west winds.

[433660] 9.13.6. Behold, while I ask what you sing, I myself have sung. For such trifles, gnawed by mice in the lowest depth of my writing-case, I bring forth into the light after about twenty years—such as Ulysses, absent for an equal time, could have found when he returned home. Accordingly I ask that you willingly forgive the present sportive things; but this I enjoin neither bashfully nor impudently, that what I myself pronounced concerning the whole book of my friend, this you, as though solicited by the necessity of the example, may feel concerning mine. Farewell.

[434229] 9.14.1. I am doubly tormented, that each of us is held by his bed; for nothing is harder than when friends, though present, are divided by the common share of a sickness; since, if it happen that they do not even lie in one chamber, there are no words, no solaces, no exchange in turn of mutual entreaty: so to each there is a huge grief, and that more on account of the other; for you can little, though yourself sick, fear for yourself when one you love is in peril.

[434699] 9.14.2. But God, most loving son, has shaken out for me, fearing for you, a most violent scruple, because you begin to recover your former strength. For you are said now to wish to rise, and—what I more desire—now to be able; you at least consult me in such a way, and, with an almost premature solicitude, you now exercise me, as though wholly vigorous, with the little questions of letters, desiring more to hear, though still sick, Socrates disputing about morals than Hippocrates about bodies; wholly worthy that Rome should cherish you with applauding arms, and at whose reciting the wedge-shaped benches of the resounding Athenaeum should be shaken.

[435356] 9.14.3. Which without doubt you would attain, if the condition of peace and place permitted that you be there educated, mingled in the company of the senatorial youth. Of which glory and fame alike I judge you capable from the quality of your oration, in which, as you most becomingly recited it lately—the things, indeed, which you had written extempore—the benevolent admired, the proud marvelled, the skilled lingered. But lest we impudently press your modesty of our own accord with excessive praises, we write the heraldings of you more justly concerning you than to you. Let us rather bring in this, whence is the cause of our discourse.

[436001] 9.14.4. So you ask, through your post-boy, which verses I call recurrent, that I may quickly explain, but under an example. These, of course, are recurrent which, the metre standing and the letters not moved from their place, are read back from the end to the top just as from the beginning to the end. So is that ancient one: "Roma tibi subito motibus ibit amor." And that: "sole medere pede, ede perede melos."

[436415] 9.14.5. Likewise those are held for recurrent which, the law of the feet kept, even if not through single letters, yet through single words, are folded back—as is one distich of mine (such as indeed I think I have read many of many men's), which I played about a little stream, which, fed by the sudden falling of storms, and having overpassed the public causeway with a rough flood, had inundated the fields beneath the road; though about soon to lay aside its insane abundance, since indeed, swollen with the appendages of the rains, no weights of an upper perennial vein were inflating it.

[437009] 9.14.6. So there (for I had come as a traveller), while I seek the bank rather than the ford, having jested with such an epigram, I went over the back of the turbulent torrent with at least these feet: "Praecipiti modo quod decurrit tramite flumen / tempore consumptum iam cito deficiet." This, if you run it back, is read thus: "Deficiet cito iam consumptum tempore flumen / tramite decurrit quod modo praecipiti." There you have verses, whose plan you may marvel at syllable by syllable; for the rest, the pomp which they do not have they will not teach. I suspect I have sufficiently shown what you thought ought to be inquired.

[437642] 9.14.7. You yourself do something like, if you restore things set before you and, on the other side, unfold by repeating what you expound; for there hangs over you the votive return of a most celebrated theme—namely, the praise to be delivered, which you meditate, of Julius Caesar—a matter so grand that, if any of the students should be the most copious, he ought in it to guard against nothing more than saying anything too little. For if the things which are written about the titles of the unconquered dictator in the Paduan volumes be omitted, who, by speaking, would equal the works of Suetonius, who the history of Juventius Martialis, or who, lastly, the journal of Balbus?

[438326] 9.14.8. But these things we reserve for your tablets. It is rather our office to set the benches for the hearers, to prepare the ears for the roars about to thunder, and, while you tell the virtues of others, for us to tell yours. Nor would you fear that I shall summon any Catonian judges, who cover now their envy, now their ignorance, under the veil of an assumed severity. Although pardon is owed to the unskilled; for the rest, whoever is so bad that he understands things well written and yet does not praise them—him the good understand and yet do not praise.

[438894] 9.14.9. Accordingly I absolve your cares from this fear: all will hear with favour, all with warmth, and we shall enjoy together the joys which your face will refresh. For very many will praise your eloquence, very many your talent, all your modesty; for it will be borne to no less praise that a young man—or, what is fairer, almost still a boy—brings back from the wrestling-school of a public examination the suffrages of his character as much as of his letters. Farewell.