WORK: Letters  (slug: sidonius-apollinaris-letters-727be6)

CHAPTER: 01-letters



[439371] 9.15.1. You prove (nor do I deprecate it) that I have done wrong; I have done wrong, since I have not yet joined to my work any letter under your name. But yet you write that what I erred in will be pardonable, if I send something for you too to sing from the example—because, of course, I sent to my Tonantius letters in double metre, to be of use for a like cause; besides this you complain that my page, if it be loosed into sport, is frequented by hendecasyllables alone. On which matter, the trochaic garrulity suspended, you ask for some little senarii besides. I serve what is enjoined; only do you receive it placidly, whether you prefer to call this very thing an ode or an eclogue. For a metre long unfrequented is woven the more harshly. You bid, friend, that through our volumes the fierce iamb resound in more incited measures, as the trochee hitherto; and that the spondee add its slow pairs and fourfold times, that the wing-footed trimeter may have a little delay grafted in, and that swiftest foot resound, mingled in, well named of old from the Pyrrhic art, to be placed somewhere in the last position; and the anapaest, about to give a base to the verse besides, now in the first part, now in the last, though it itself be pronounced more absolutely, when the third following long cleaves to a twin and short syllable. Which a common poet scarce avails to temper, such as you yourself see Sollius to be; for me the quill goes astray, nor through the hollow mouth does the wandering tongue fittingly unfold the bent epos; but Leo would have prepared this more aptly, Leo, or one who has followed his tracks in Latin song, since first among the Attic is he, the survivor of his father, of the Consentii, who in faith, voice, metres, at the streams of Pegasus, is said to have sung an all-formed song, and as often as he set Greek words to verse, to have held the lofty stars, joined to Pindar, and, victor, gone over the two-peaked mountain, second to none among the Delphic caves. But if either of the bards should fit a Latin song to the poetic lyre, without the Doric, you, Flaccus, would draw forth the Venusine quills ineptly, and, the home-bred swan of Iapygian Aufidus, when Atax thunders with its own swans, would, conquered, groan with your white and tuneful neck. Nor are these the only skilled hearts, though to the skilled these be more skilled: Severianus the rhetor would have composed these more loftily, the African and crafty Domnulus more elegantly, and the scholar Peter, under rounder Muses, more keenly—nor would the epistolary style, everywhere, forbid the man to compose astounding things. This could always have done it more effectively, Proculus, sprung from the soil and race of Liguria, to sound on melodic strokes, polishing all his witty poems so that he might challenge Venetian Mantua in favour, and, himself too equal to Homeric glory, follow the wheels of Maro with matching art. But I, justly despicable in heart and mouth, what should I chatter among these at your asking, proving the impudence of loquacity and the wishes of a mind destitute of letters? But what shall I deny, not terrified by shame? Love knows not to fear: thence I obeyed.

[442567] 9.15.2. Forgive one returning to disused things, and one who, for having fulfilled what you had bidden, awaits nothing more than the indulgence of my rarity. For the rest, if you bid me like things hereafter, that I may be made more compliant, you will so take care, in turn for a poem, either to dictate what I may sing or to dance what I may laugh at. Farewell.

[442932] 9.16.1. If you recall, my lord son, you had enjoined this upon me, that this ninth little book, dedicated particularly to you, should be joined to the other eight which I wrote to Constantius—a man of singular talent, of saving counsel, certainly in public discussions excelling the other eloquent men, whether he decree diverse or like things, by the gifts of a more excellent eloquence. The pledge is fulfilled, not indeed exactly, but at least promptly.

[443390] 9.16.2. For when, the dioceses being traversed by chance, I came home, if any draft lying carelessly about was contained in rotten and mouldering little papers, a hasty translator, I copied it out swiftly and forcibly, retarded by nothing in the winter season, but that I should at once complete what was bidden, although the unfreezable page hindered the copyist by its frost, and the drop, harder than the pen, which you would have judged, to the impelling fingers, not to flow but to break; even so, however, I took care to discharge my duty before the Favonius should wed, with its warm blast and its natal rains, our twelfth month, which you call the month of Numa.

[444062] 9.16.3. It remains that, with you as arbiter, we be not required to render back things altogether most discrepant—maturity and speed. For as often as any book is bidden to be written quickly, the author looks for honour not so much from his merit as from his compliance. For the rest, since you pronounce that the iambics I lately sent to Gelasius, a man kind enough, pleased you, through these I will gift you too with the home-bred children of the town of Mytilene. Now through the alternating sea of speaking my skiff has driven its bold course, nor has it feared, in the twofold flood, to turn the helm. It has loosed the yard-arms, gathered the high sails, the hand sets down the little oar, and, the benches joined to the shore, with a leap it seeks the sand to be kissed. Though the muttering chorus of the envious betray with canine snarl their rage, it says nothing openly, indeed, and fears the public votes. They beat the stern, shake the keel, fan the rounded gunwales of the sides; about the mast fly the hisses of a sinister tongue. But we, the prow set straight by attendant art, fearing in nothing the swelling storms, stand in harbour, having gained the leaf of a twofold crown, Which the people of Quirinus granted me, or which the purple-bearing senate bestowed, which the consort order of the skilled in judgements gave, When Nerva Trajan saw a perpetual statue set up with my titles, fixed among the authors of either library; And which afterward—seen, as it were, near—after twice five years' time I received, taking up the honour which alone once governs at once the rights of fathers and of people. Besides the heroic, I have woven many jests on many patches; the elegiac I have frequently rolled out, set under six feet, with double colon. Now wont to ride through eleven syllables, I have played the swift, and in the Sapphic metre often sung, in the quick iamb rarely. Nor can I recall how much once I wrote in the first heat of youth; whence would that the greater part could be silenced and hidden! For, the goal of old age nearer, the more we are joined to our last years, the more it shames us now to recall if our age has played anything light. Shuddering at which, I have transferred every kind of care to the cultivation of letters, lest, being guilty by a too wanton song, I be guilty by my act; And lest I rot, dissolved by pleasant sayings, if I join figure and trappings to my pages, lest the reputation of a poet stain the rigour of a cleric. In short, to any epigram hereafter I shall not be borne prone, and by tender metre or grave I shall be compelled hence to bring forth no song quickly: Unless perchance I tell the inquisitions of the persecutors, and the martyrs who, deserving heaven, have purchased, by the price of death, the rewards of life. Of whom let a hymn first chant for me that one who held the chair of Toulouse, hurled down from the highest step of the Capitol; Whom, denying Jupiter and Minerva and confessing the good things of Christ's cross, the raging mob bound to the flank of an unyoked bull, That, the ox driven down a steep, it might scatter his torn corpse in its course, the crags stained with the warm pulp of his loosened brain. After Saturninus I would have the quills sing those whom I have proved my remaining patrons, who through anxious labours helped me in my hardships, Each of whom now pious words cannot, by name, contain in verse; yet whom the strings cannot sound, our hearts shall sound.

[447536] 9.16.4. Let us return at the end to the oratorical style, about to finish the present matter in the order once proposed, lest, if we close a prose work with musical epilogues, according to the rules of Flaccus—where the wine-jar began to be fashioned—a pitcher should rather seem to have come out. Farewell.