WORK: Geography  (slug: strabo-geography-21ef7e)

CHAPTER: 11



[110073] Ceos once contained four cities. Two remain, Iulis and Carthae, to which the inhabitants of the others were transferred; those of Poaeëssa to Carthae, and those of Coressia to Iulis. Simonides the lyric poet, and Bacchylides his nephew, and after their times Erasistratus the physician, and Ariston the Peripatetic philosopher, the imitator of Bion, the Borysthenite, were natives of this city.

[110469] There was an ancient law among these people, mentioned by Menander. Phanias, that is a good law of the Ceans; who cannot live comfortably (or well), let him not live miserably (or ill). For the law, it seems, ordained that those above sixty years old should be compelled to drink hemlock, in order that there might be sufficient food for the rest. It is said that once when they were besieged by the Athenians, a decree was passed to the effect that the oldest persons, fixing the age, should be put to death, and that the besiegers retired in consequence.

[111027] The city lies on a mountain, at a distance from the sea of about 25 stadia. Its arsenal is the place on which Coressia was built, which does not contain the population even of a village. Near the Coressian territory and Poeëessa is a temple of Apollo Sminthius. But between the temple and the ruins of Poeëessa is the temple of Minerva Nedusia, built by Nestor, on his return from Troy. The river Elixus runs around the territory of Coressia.

[111471] After Ceos are Naxos and Andros, considerable islands, and Paros, the birth-place of the poet Archilochus. Thasos was founded by Parians, and Parium, a city in the Propontis. In this last place there is said to be an altar worthy of notice, each of whose sides is a stadium in length. In Paros is obtained the Parian marble, the best adapted for statuary work.

[111833] Here also is Syros, (the first syllable is long,) where Pherecydes the son of Babys was born. The Athenian Pherecydes is younger than the latter person. The poet seems to have mentioned this island under the name of Syria; above Ortygia is an island called Syria.

[112098] Myconus is an island beneath which, according to the mythologists, lie the last of the giants, destroyed by Hercules; whence the proverb, all under one Myconus, applied to persons who collect under one title things that are disjoined by nature. Some also call bald persons Miconians, because baldness is frequent among the inhabitants of the island.

[112449] Seriphos is the island where is laid the scene of the fable of Dictys, who drew to land in his net the chest in which were enclosed Perseus and his mother Danaë, who were thrown into the sea by order of Acrisius, the father of Danaë. There it is said Perseus was brought up, and to this island he brought the head of the Gorgon; he exhibited it to the Seriphians, and turned them all into stone. This he did to avenge the wrongs of his mother, because their king Polydectes, with the assistance of his subjects, desired to make her his wife by force. Seriphus abounds so much with rocks, that they say in jest that it was the work of the Gorgon.

[113096] Tenos has a small city, but there is, in a grove beyond it, a large temple of Neptune worthy of notice. It contains large banqueting rooms, a proof of the great multitudes that repair thither from the neighbouring places to celebrate a feast, and to perform a common sacrifice in honour of Neptune.

[113396] To the Sporades belongs Amorgos, the birth-place of Simonides, the Iambic poet; Lebinthus also, and Leria (Leros). Phocylides refers to Leria in these lines; the Lerians are bad, not some, but all, except Procles; but Procies is a Lerian; for the Lerians are reputed to have bad dispositions.

[113690] Near these islands are Patmos, and the Corassia, islands, situated to the west of Icaria, as the latter is with respect to Samos.

[113821] Icaria has no inhabitants, but it has pastures, of which the Samians avail themselves. Notwithstanding its condition it is famous, and gives the name of Icarian to the sea in front of it, in which are situated Samos, Cos, and the islands just mentioned, the Corassiae, Patmos, and Leros [in Samos is the mountain the Cerceteus, more celebrated than the Ampelus, which overhangs the city of the Samians]. Continuous to the Icarian sea, towards the south, is the Carpathian sea, and the Aegyptian sea to this; to the west are the Cretan and African seas.

[114375] In the Carpathian sea, between Cos, Rhodes, and Crete, are situated many of the Sporades, as Astypalaea, Telos, Chalcia, and those mentioned by Homer in the Catalogue. They who occupied Nisyrus, Crapathus, Casus, and Cos,

[114598] The city of Eurypylus, and the Calydnae islands.

[114648] Except Cos, and Rhodes, of which we shall speak hereafter, we place the rest among the Sporades, and we mention them here although they do not lie near Europe, but Asia, because the course of my work induces me to include the Sporades in the description of Crete and of the Cyclades.

[114933] We shall traverse in the description of Asia the considerable islands adjacent to that country, as Cyprus, Rhodes, Cos, and those situated on the succeeding line of coast, Samos, Chios, Lesbos, and Tenedos. At present we are to describe the remaining islands of the Sporades, which deserve mention.

[115233] Astypalaea lies far out at sea, and contains a city.

[115287] Telos, which is long, high, and narrow, in circumference about 140 stadia, with a shelter for vessels, extends along the Cnidian territory.

[115428] Chalcia is distant from Telos 80, from Carpathus 400 stadia, and about double this number from Astypalaea. It has a settlement of the same name, a temple of Apollo, and a harbour.

[115609] Nisyrus lies to the north of Telos, at the distance of about 60 stadia, which is its distance also from Cos. It is round, lofty, and rocky, and has abundance of mill-stone, whence the neighbouring people are well supplied with stones for grinding. It contains a city of the same name, a harbour, hot springs, and a temple of Neptune. Its circumference is 80 stadia. Near it are small islands, called the islands of the Nisyrians. Nisyrus is said to be a fragment broken off from Cos; a story is also told of Neptune, that when pursuing Polybotes, one of the giants, he broke off with his trident a piece of the island Cos, and hurled it at him, and that the missile became the island Nisyrus, with the giant lying beneath it. But some say that the giant lies beneath Cos.

[116382] Carpathus, which the poet calls Crapathus, is lofty, having a circumference of 200 stadia. It contained four cities, and its name was famous, which it imparted to the surrounding sea. One of the cities was called Nisyrus, after the name of the island Nisyrus. It lies opposite Leuce Acte in Africa, which is distant about 1000 stadia from Alexandria, and about 4000 from Carpathus.

[116765] Casus is distant from Carpathus 70, and from the promontory Salmonium in Crete 250 stadia. It is 80 stadia in circumference. It contains a city of the same name; and many islands, called the islands of the Casii, lie about it.

[116993] They say that the poet calls the Sporades, Calydnae, one of which is Calymna. But it is probable that as the islands, which are near and dependent, have their names from the Nisyrii and Casii, so those that lie around Calymna had their name from that island, which was then perhaps called Calydna. Some say that the Calydnoe islands are two, Leros and Calymna, and that the poet means these. But the Scepsian says, that the name of the island was used in the plural number, Calymnae, like Athenae, Thebae, and that the words of the poet must be understood according to the figure hyperbaton, or inversion, for he does not say, the islands Calydnae, but, they who occupied the islands Nisyrus, Crapathus, Casus, and Cos, the city of Eurypylus, and Calydnae.

[117751] All the honey of the islands is, for the most part, excellent, and rivals that of Attica; but the honey of these islands surpasses it, particularly that of Calymna.