WORK: Geography  (slug: strabo-geography-21ef7e)

CHAPTER: 10



[108901] But the Phthiotic Halus lies under the extremity of the mountain Othrys, which lies to the north of Phthiotis, and borders upon the mountain Typhrestus and the Dolopians, and thence stretches along to the country near the Maliae Gulf. Halus, either masculine or feminine, for it is used in both genders, is distant from Itonus about 60 stadia. Athamas founded Halus; it was destroyed, but subsequently [restored by the Pharsalii]. It is situated above the Crocian plain, and the river Amphrysus flows by its walls. Below the Crocian plain lies Thebae Phthiotides; Halus likewise, which is in Achaia, is called Phthiotis; this, as well as the foot of Mount Othrys, approaches close to the Malienses. As Phylace too, which was under the command of Protesilaus, so Halus also belongs to Phthiotis, which adjoins to the Malienses. Halus is distant from Thebes about 100 stadia, and lies in the middle between Pharsalus and Thebae Phthiotides. Philip, however, took it from the latter, and assigned it to the Pharsalii. Thus it happens, as we have said before, that boundaries and the distribution of nations and places are in a state of continual change. Thus Sophocles also called Phthiotis, Trachinia, Artemidorus places Halus on the coast beyond the Maliac Gulf, but as belonging to Phthiotis. For proceeding thence in the direction of the Peneius, he places Pteleum after Antron, then Halus at the distance of 110 stadia from Pteleum. I have already spoken of Trachin, and described the nature of the place. The poet mentions it by name.

[110440] As Homer frequently mentions the Spercheius as a river of the country, having its source in the Typhrestus, a Dryopian mountain, formerly called [Tymphrestus], and emptying itself near Thermopylae, between Trachin and Lamia, he might imply that whatever parts of the Maliac Gulf were either within or without the Pylae, were subject to Achilles.

[110787] The Spercheius is distant about 30 stadia from Lamia, which lies above a plain, extending to the Maliac Gulf. That the Spercheius is a river of the country [subject to Achilles], appears from the words of Achilles, who says, that he had devoted his hair to the Spercheius; and from the circumstance, that Menesthius, one of his commanders, was said to be the son of Spercheius and the sister of Achilles.

[111193] It is probable that all the people under the command of Achilles and Patroclus, and who had accompanied Peleus in his banishment from Aegina, had the name of Myrmidons, but all the Phthiotae were called Achaecans.

[111408] They reckon in the Phthiotic district, which was subject to Achilles, beginning from the Malienses, a considerable number of towns, and among them Thebae Phthiotides, Echinus, Lamia, near which the war was carried on between the Macedonians and Antipater, against the Athenians. In this war Leosthenes, the Athenian general, was killed, [and Leonnatus,] one of the companions of Alexander the king. Besides the above-mentioned towns, we must add [Narthac]ium, Erineus, Coroneia, of the same name as the town in Boeotia, Melitaea, Thaumaci, Proerna, Pharsalus, Eretria, of the same name as the Euboic town, Paracheloïtae, of the same name as those in Aetolia; for here also, near Lamia, is a river Achelous, on the banks of which live the Paracheloïtae.

[112162] This district, lying to the north, extended to the northwestern territory of the Asclepiadae, and to the territory of Eurypylus and Protesilaus, inclining to the east; on the south it adjoined the Oetaean territory, which was divided into fourteen demi, and contained Heracleia and Dryopis, which was once a community of four cities, (a Tetrapolis,) like Doris, and accounted the capital of the Dryopes in Peloponnesus. To the Oetaean district belong also the Acyphas, Parasopias, $Oeneiadae, and Anticyra, of the same name as the town among the Locri Hesperii. I do not mean that these divisions always continued the same, for they underwent various changes. The most remarkable, however, are worthy of notice.

[112875] The poet with sufficient clearness describes the situation of the Dolopes, as at the extremity of Phthia, and says that both they and the Phthiotae were under the command of the same chief, Peleus; I lived, he says, at the farthest part of Phthia, king of the Dolopes.

[113145] Peleus, however, had conferred on him the authority.

[113199] This region is close to Pindus, and the places about it, most of which belong to the Thessalians. For in consequence of the renown and ascendency of the Thessalians and Macedonians, those Epeirotae, who bordered nearest upon them, became, some voluntarily, others by force, incorporated among the Macedonians and Thessalians. In this manner the Athamanes, Aethices, and Talares were joined to the Thessalians, and the Orestae, Pelagones, and Elimiotae to the Macedonians.

[113672] Pindus is a large mountain, having on the north Macedonia, on the west Perrhaebi, settlers from another country, on the south Dolopes, [and on the east Hestiaeotis] which belongs to Thessaly. Close upon Pindus dwelt Talares, a tribe of Molotti, detached from the Molotti about Mount Tomarus, and Aethices, among whom the poet says the Centaurs took refuge when expelled by Peirithous. They are at present, it is said, extinct. But this extinction is to be understood in two senses; either the inhabitants have been exterminated, and the country deserted, or the name of the nation exists no longer, or the community does not preserve its ancient form. Whenever the community, which continues, is insignificant, we do not think it worth while to record either its existence or its change of name. But when it has any just pretensions to notice, it is necessary to remark the change which it has undergone.

[114578] It remains for us to describe the tract of sea-coast subject to Achilles: we begin from Thermopylae, for we have spoken of the coast of Locris, and of the interior.

[114744] Thermopylae is separated from the Cenaeum by a strait 70 stadia across. Coasting beyond the Pylae, it is at a distance from the Spercheius of about 10, (60?) and thence to Phalara of 20 stadia. Above Phalara, 50 stadia from the sea, lies the city of the [Lamians]. Then coasting along the shore 100 stadia, we find above it, Echinus. At the distance of 20 stadia from the following tract of coast, in the interior, is Larisa Cremaste, which has the name also of Larisa Pelasgia.

[115224] Then follows a small island, Myonnesus; next Antron; which was subject to Protesilaus. Thus much concerning the territory subject to Achilles.

[115368] As the poet, in naming the chiefs, and cities under their rule, has divided the country into numerous well-known parts, and has given an accurate account of the whole circuit of Thessaly, we shall follow him, as before, in completing the description of this region.

[115635] Next to the people under the command of Achilles, he enumerates those under the command of Protesilaus. They were situated, next, along the sea-coast which was subject to Achilles, as far as Antron. The boundary of the country under the command of Protesilaus, is determined by its being situated without the Maliac Gulf, yet still in Phthiotis, though not within Phthiotis subject to Achilles.

[116031] Phylacē is near Thebae Phthiotides, which was subject to Protesilaus, as were also Halus, Larisa Cremaste, and Demetrium, all of which lie to the east of Mount Othrys.

[116200] The Demetrium he speaks of as an enclosure sacred to Ceres, and calls it Pyrasus. Pyrasus was a city with a good harbour, having at the distance of 2 stadia from it a grove, and a temple consecrated to Ceres. It is distant from Thebae 20 stadia. The latter is situated above Pyrasus. Above Thebae in the inland parts is the Crocian plain at the extremity of the mountain Othrys. Through this plain flows the river Amphrysus. Above it is the Itonus, where is the temple of the Itonian Minerva, from which that in Boeotia has its name, also the river Cuarius. [Of this river and] of Arnē we have spoken in our account of Boeotia.

[116829] These places are in Thessaliotis, one of the four divisions of all Thessaly, in which were the possessions of Eurypylus. Phyllus, where is a temple of the Phyllaean Apollo, Ichnae, where the Ichnaean Themis is worshipped, Cierus, and [all the places as far as] Athamania, are included in Thessaliotis.

[117132] At Antron, in the strait near Euboea, is a sunk rock, called the Ass of Antron. Next are Pteleum and Halus; next the temple of Ceres, and Pyrasus in ruins; above these, Thebae; then Pyrrha, a promontory, and two small islands near, one of which is called Pyrrha, the other Deucalion. Somewhere here ends the territory of Phthiotis.

[117465] The poet next mentions the people under Eumelus, and the continuous tract of coast which now belongs to Magnesia, and the Pelasgiotis.

[117601] Pherae is the termination of the Pelasgic plains towards Magnesia, which plains extend as far as Pelion, a distance of 160 stadia. Pagasae is the naval arsenal of Pherae, from which it is distant 90 stadia, and 20 from Iolcus. Iolcus has been razed from ancient times. It was from this place that Pelias despatched Jason and the ship Argo. Pagasae had its name, according to mythologists, from the building of the ship Argo at this place. Others, with more probability, suppose that the name of the place was derived from the springs, (πηγαί,) which are very numerous and copious. Near it is Aphetae, (so named) as the starting-place from which the Argonauts set off. Iolcus is situated 7 stadia from Demetrias, overlooking the sea. Demetrias was founded by Demetrius Poliorcetes, who called it after his own name. It is situated between Nelia and Pagasae on the sea. He collected there the inhabitants of the neighbouring small cities, Nelia, Pagasae, Ormenium, and besides these, Rhizus, Sepias, Olizon, Boebe, and Iolcus, which are at present villages belonging to Demetrias. For a long time it was a station for vessels, and a royal seat of the Macedonian kings. It had the command of Tempe, and of both the mountains Pelion and Ossa. At present its extent of power is diminished, yet it still surpasses all the cities in Magnesia.

[118938] The lake Boebeis is near Pherae, and approaches close to the extremities of Pelion and Magnesia. Boebe is a small place situated on the lake.

[119081] As civil dissensions and usurpations reduced the flourishing condition of Iolcus, formerly so powerful, so they affected Pherae in the same manner, which was raised to prosperity, and was destroyed by tyrants.

[119292] Near Demetrias flows the Anaurus. The continuous line of coast is called also Iolcus. Here was held the Pylaic (Peliac?) assembly and festival.

[119437] Artemidorus places the Gulf of Pagasae farther from Demetrias, near the places subject to Philoctetes. In the gulf he says is the island Cicynethus, and a small town of the same name.

[119622] The poet next enumerates the cities subject to Philoctetes.

[119683] Methone is not the Thracian Methone razed by Philip. We have already noticed the change of name these places and others in the Peloponnesus have undergone. Other places enumerated as subject to Philoctetes, are Thaumacia, Olizon, and Meliboea, all along the shore next adjacent.

[119963] In front of the Magnetes lie clusters of islands; the most celebrated are Sciathus, Peparethus, Icus, Halonnesus, and Scyrus, which contain cities of the same name. Scyrus however is the most famous of any for the friendship which subsisted between Lycomedes and Achilles, and for the birth and education of Neoptolemus, the son of Achilles. In after times, when Philip became powerful, perceiving that the Athenians were masters of the sea, and sovereigns both of these and other islands, he made those islands which lay near his own country more celebrated than any of the rest. For as his object in waging war was the sovereignty of Greece, he attacked those places first which were near him; and as he attached to Macedonia many parts of Magnesia itself, of Thrace, and of the rest of the surrounding country, so also he seized upon the islands in front of Magnesia, and made the possession of islands which were before entirely unknown, a subject of warlike contention, and brought them into notice.

[120969] Scyrus however is particularly celebrated in ancient histories. It is also highly reputed for the excellence of its goats, and the quarries of variegated marble, such as the Carystian, the Deucallian, (Docimaean?) the Synnadic, and the Hierapolitic kinds. For there may be seen at Rome columns, consisting of a single stone, and large slabs of variegated marble, (from Scyrus,) with which the city is embellished both at the public charge and at the expense of individuals, which has caused works of white marble to be little esteemed.

[121506] The poet having proceeded so far along the Magnesian coast, returns to Upper Thessaly, for beginning from Dolopia and Pindus he goes through the region extending along Phthiotis to Lower Thessaly. They who occupy Tricca and rocky Ithome.

[121745] These places belong to Histiaeotis, which was formerly called Doris. When it was in the possession of the Perrhaebi, who destroyed Histiaeotis in Euboea, and had removed the inhabitants by force to the continent, they gave the country the name of Histiaeotis, on account of the great numbers of Histiaeans among the settlers. This country and Dolopia are called Upper Thessaly, which is in a straight line with Upper Macedonia, as Lower Thessaly is in a straight line with Lower Macedonia.

[122236] Tricca, where there is a very ancient and famous temple of Aesculapius, borders upon the Dolopes, and the parts about Pindus.

[122363] Ithome, which has the same name as the Messenian Ithome, ought not, they say, to be pronounced in this manner, but should be pronounced without the first syllable, Thome, for this was its former name. At present, it is changed to [Thumaeum]. It is a spot strong by nature, and in reality rocky. It lies between four strong-holds, which form a square, Tricca, Metropolis, Pelinnaeum, and Gomphi. Ithome belongs to the district of the Metropolitae. Metropolis was formed at first out of three small obscure cities, and afterwards more were included, and among these Ithome. Callimachus says in his Iambics, among the Venuses, (for the goddess bears several titles,) Venus Castnietis surpasses all others in wisdom, for she alone accepts the sacrifice of swine. Certainly Callimachus, if any person could be said to possess information, was well informed, and it was his object, as he himself says, all his life to relate these fables. Later writers, however, have proved that there was not one Venus only, but several, who accepted that sacrifice, from among whom the goddess worshipped at Metropolis came, and that this [foreign] rite was delivered down by one of the cities which contributed to form that settlement. Pharcadon also is situated in the Hestioeotis. The Peneius and the Curalius flow through it. The Curalius, after flowing beside the temple of the Itonian Minerva, empties itself into the Peneius.

[123777] The Peneius itself rises in Mount Pindus, as I have before said. It leaves Tricca, Pelinnaeum, and Pharcadon on the left hand, and takes its course beside Atrax and Larisa. After having received the rivers of the Thessaliotis it flows onwards through Tempe, and it empties itself into the sea.

[124072] Historians speak of Oechalia, the city of Eurytus, as existing in these parts, in Euboea also, and in Arcadia; but some give it one name, others another, as I have said in the description of Peloponnesus.

[124278] They inquire particularly, which of these was the city taken by Hercules, and which was the city intended by the author of the poem, The Capture of Oechalia?

[124437] The places, however, were subject to the Asclepiadae.

[124492] The poet next mentions the country which was under the dominion of Eurypylus; They who possessed Ormenium and the spring Hypereia,

[124624] And they who occupied Asterium and the white peaks of Titanus.

[124688] Ormenium is now called Orminium. It is a village situated below Pelion, near the Pagasitic Gulf, but was one of the cities which contributed to form the settlement of Demetrias, as I have before said.

[124890] The lake Boebeis must be near, because both Boebe and Ormenium belonged to the cities lying around Demetrias.

[125001] Ormenium is distant by land 27 stadia from Demetrias. The site of Iolcus, which is on the road, is distant 7 stadia from Demetrias, and the remaining 20 from Ormenium.

[125170] Demetrius of Scepsis says, that Phoenix came from Ormenium, and that he fled thence from his father Amyntor, the son of Ormenus, to Phthia, to king Peleus. For this place was founded by Ormenus, the son of Cercaphus, the son of Aeolus. The sons of Ormenus were Amyntor and Eumaemon; the son of the former was Phoenix, and of the latter, Eurypylus. The succession to his possessions was preserved secure for Eurypylus, after the departure of Phoenix from his home, and we ought to write the verse of the poet in this manner: as when I first left Ormenium, abounding with flocks, instead of left Hellas, abounding with beautiful women.

[125805] But Crates makes Phoenix a Phocaean, conjecturing this from the helmet of Meges, which Ulysses wore on the night expedition; of which helmet the poet says, Autolycus brought it away from Eleon, out of the house of Amyntor, the son of Ormenus, having broken through the thick walls.

[126088] Now Eleon was a small city on Parnassus, and by Amyntor, the son of Ormenus, he could not mean any other person than the father of Phoenix, and that Autolycus, who lived on Parnassus, was in the habit of digging through the houses of his neighbours, which is the common practice of every housebreaker, and not of persons living at a distance. But Demetrius the Scepsian says, that there is no such place on Parnassus as Eleon, but Neon, which was built after the Trojan war, and that digging through houses was not confined to robbers of the neighbourhood. Other things might be advanced, but I am unwilling to insist long on this subject. Others write the words from Heleon;

[126765] but this is a Tanagrian town; and the words Then far away I fled through Hellas and came to Phthia, would make this passage absurd.

[126898] Hypereia is a spring in the middle of the city of the Pheraei [subject to Eumelus]. It would therefore be absurd [to assign it to Eurypylus].

[127041] Titanus had its name from the accident of its colour, for the soil of the country near Arne and [Aphe]tae is white, and Asterium is not far from these places.

[127201] Continuous with this portion of Thessaly are the people subject to Polypoetes. They who possessed Argissa; those who inhabited Gyrtone,

[127338] Orthe, Elone, and the white city Oloosson.

[127382] This country was formerly inhabited by Perrhoebi, who possessed the part towards the sea and the Peneius, as far as its mouth and the city Gyrton, belonging to the district Perrhaebis. Afterwards the Lapithae, Ixion and his son Peirithous, having reduced the Perrhaebi, got possession of these places. Peirithous took possession also of Pelion, having expelled by force the Centaurs, a savage tribe, who inhabited it. These he drove from Pelion to the neighbourhood of the Aethices, but he delivered up the plains to the Lapithae. The Perrhaebi kept possession of some of these parts, those, namely, towards Olympus, and in some places they lived intermixed altogether with the Lapithae.

[128071] Argissa, the present Argura, is situated upon the banks of the Peneius. Atrax lies above it at the distance of 40 stadia, close to the river. The intermediate country along the side of the river was occupied by Perrhaebi.

[128294] Some call Orthe the citadel of the Phalannaei. Phalanna is a Perrhaebic city on the Peneius, near Tempe.

[128400] The Perrhaebi, oppressed by the Lapithae, retreated in great numbers to the mountainous country about Pindus, and to the Athamanes and Dolopes; but the Larisaei became masters of the country and of the Perrhaebi who remained there. The Larisaei lived near the Peneius, but in the neighbourhood of the Perrhaebi. They occupied the most fertile portion of the plains, except some of the very deep valleys near the lake Nessonis, into which the river, when it overflowed, usually carried away a portion of the arable ground belonging to the Larisae, who afterwards remedied this by making embankments.

[129000] These people were in possession of Perrhaebia, and levied imposts until Philip became master of the country.

[129110] Larisa is a place situated on Ossa, and there is Larisa Cremaste, by some called Pelasgia. In Crete also is a city Larisa, the inhabitants of which were embodied with those of Hierapytna; and from this place the plain below is called the Larisian plain. In Peloponnesus the citadel of the Argives is called Larisa, and there is a river Larisus, which separates Eleia from Dyme. Theopompus mentions a city Larisa, situated on the immediate confines of this country. In Asia is Larisa Phriconis near Cume, and another Larisa near Hamaxitus, in the Troad. There is also an Ephesian Larisa, and a Larisa in Syria. At 50 stadia from Mitylene are the Larisaen rocks, on the road to Methymne. There is a Larisa in Attica; and a village of this name at the distance of 30 stadia from Tralleis, situated above the city, on the road to the plain of the Cayster, passing by Mesogis towards the temple of Mater Isodroma. This Larisa has a similar position, and possesses similar advantages to those of Larisa Cremaste; for it has abundance of water and vineyards. Perhaps Jupiter had the appellation of Larisaeus from this place. There is also on the left side of the Pontus (Euxine) a village called Larisa, near the extremities of Mount Haemus, between Naulochus [and Odessus].

[130379] Oloosson, called the White, from its chalky soil, Elone, and Gonnus are Perrhaebic cities. The name of Elone was changed to that of Leimone. It is now in ruins. Both lie at the foot of Olympus, not very far from the river Eurotas, which the poet calls Titaresius.

[130644] The poet speaks both of this river and of the Perrhaebi in the subsequent verses, when he says, Guneus brought from Cyphus two and twenty vessels. His followers were Enienes and Peraebi, firm in battle. They dwelt near the wintry Dodona, and tilled the fields about the lovely Titaresius.

[130934] He mentions therefore these places as belonging to the Perrhaebi, which comprised a part of the Hestiaeotis. They were in part Perrhaebic towns, which were subject to Polypcetes. He assigned them however to the Lapithae, because these people and the Perrhaebi lived intermixed together, and the Lapithae occupied the plains. The country, which belonged to the Perrhaebi, was, for the most part, subject to the Lapithae, but the Perrhaebi possessed the more mountainous tracts towards Olympus and Tempe, such as Cyphus, Dodonē, and the country about the river Titaresius. This river rises in the mountain Titarius, which is part of Olympus. It flows into the plain near Tempe belonging to Perrhaebia, and somewhere there enters the Peneius.

[131675] The water of the Peneius is clear, that of the Titaresius is unctuous; a property arising from some matter, which prevents the streams mingling with each other, but runs over the surface like oil.

[131873] Because the Perrhaebi and Lapithae lived intermingled together, Simonides calls all those people Pelasgiotae, who occupy the eastern parts about Gyrton and the mouths of the Peneius, Ossa, Pelion, and the country about Demetrias, and the places in the plain, Larisa, Crannon, Scotussa, Mopsium, Atrax, and the parts near the lakes Nessonis and Boebeis. The poet mentions a few only of these places, either because they were not inhabited at all, or badly inhabited on account of the inundations which had happened at various times. For the poet does not mention even the lake Nessonis, but the Boebeis only, which is much smaller, for its water remained constant, and this alone remains, while the former probably was at one time filled irregularly to excess, and at another contained no water.

[132669] We have mentioned Scotussa in our accounts of Dodona, and of the oracle, in Thessaly, when we observed that it was near Scotussa. Near Scotussa is a tract called Cynoscephalae. It was here that the Romans with their allies the Aetolians, and their general Titus Quintius, defeated in a great battle Philip, son of Demetrius, king of Macedon.

[133012] Something of the same kind has happened in the territory of Magnetis. For Homer having enumerated many places of this country, calls none of them Magnetes, but those only whom he indicates in terms obscure, and not easily understood; They who dwelt about Peneius and Pelion with waving woods.

[133306] Now about the Peneius and Pelion dwell those (already mentioned by Homer) who occupied Gyrton, and Ormenium, and many other nations. At a still greater distance from Pelion, according to later writers, were Magnetes, beginning from the people, that were subject to Eumelus. These writers, on account of the continual removals from one settle ment to another, alterations in the forms of government, and intermixture of races, seem to confound both names and nations, which sometimes perplexes persons in these times, as is first to be observed in the instances of Crannon and Gyrton.

[133891] Formerly they called the Gyrtonians Phlegyae, from Phlegyas, the brother of Ixion; and the Crannonii, Ephyri, so that there is a doubt, when the poet says, These two from Thrace appeared with breastplates armed against Ephyri, or haughty Phlegyae, what people he meant.

[134162] The same is the case with the Perrhaebi and Aenianes, for Homer joins them together, as if they dwelt near each other; and it is said by later writers, that, for a long period, the settlement of the Aenianes was in the Dotian plain. Now this plain is near Perrhaebia, which we have just mentioned, Ossa, and the lake Boebeis: it is situated about the middle of Thessaly, but enclosed by itself within hills. Hesiod speaks of it in this manner; Or, as a pure virgin, who dwells on the sacred heights of the Twin hills, comes to the Dotian plain, in front of Amyrus, abounding with vines, to bathe her feet in the lake Boebias. The greater part of the Aenianes were expelled by the Lapithae, and took refuge in Oeta, where they established their power, having deprived the Dorians and the Malienses of some portions of country, extending as far as Heracleia and Echinus. Some of them however remained about Cyphus, a Perrhaebic mountain, where is a settlement of the same name. As to the Perrhaebi, some of them collected about the western parts of Olympus and settled there, on the borders of the Macedonians. But a large body took shelter among the mountains near Athamania, and Pindus. But at present few, if any, traces of them are to be found.

[135410] The Magnetes, who are mentioned last in the Thessalian catalogue of the poet, must be understood to be those situated within Tempe, extending from the Peneius and Ossa to Pelion, and bordering upon the Pieriotae in Macedonia, who occupy the country on the other side the Peneius as far as the sea.

[135709] Homolium, or Homolē, (for both words are in use,) must be assigned to the Magnetes. I have said in the description of Macedonia, that Homolium is near Ossa at the beginning of the course which the Peneius takes through Tempe.

[135936] If we are to extend their possessions as far as the sea-coast, which is very near Homolium, there is reason for assigning to them Rhizus, and Erymnae, which lies on the sea-coast in the tract subject to Philoctetes and Eumelus. Let this however remain unsettled. For the order in which the places as far as the Peneius follow one another, is not clearly expressed, and as the places are not of any note, we need not consider that uncertainty as very important. The coast of Sepias, however, is mentioned by tragic writers, and was chaunted in songs on account of the destruction of the Persian fleet. It consists of a chain of rocks.

[136571] Between Sepias and Casthanaea, a village situated below Pelion, is the sea-shore, where the fleet of 5erxes was lying, when an east wind began to blow violently; some of the vessels were forced on shore, and immediately went to pieces; others were driven on Hipnus, a rocky spot near Pelion, others were lost at Meliboea, others at Casthanaea.

[136916] The whole of the coasting voyage along Pelion, to the extent of about 80 stadia, is among rocks. That along Ossa is of the same kind and to the same extent.

[137074] Between them is a bay of more than 200 stadia in extent, upon which is situated Meliboea.

[137165] The whole voyage from Demetrias, including the winding of the bays, to the Peneius is more than 1000 stadia, from the Spercheius 800 stadia more, and from the Euripus 2350 stadia.

[137346] Hieronymus assigns a circuit of 3000 stadia to the plain country in Thessaly and Magnesia, and says, that it was inhabited by Pelasgi, but that these people were driven into Italy by Lapithae, and that the present Pelasgic plain is that in which are situated Larisa, Gyrton, Pherae, Mopsium, Boebeis, Ossa, Homole, Pelion, and Magnetis. Mopsium has not its name from Mopsus, the son of Manto the daughter of Teiresias, but from Mopsus, one of the Lapithae, who sailed with the Argonauts. Mopsopus, from whom Attica is called Mopsopia, is a different person.

[137905] This then is the account of the several parts of Thessaly.

[137965] In general we say, that it was formerly called Pyrrhaea, from Pyrrha, the wife of Deucalion; Haemonia, from Haemon; and Thettalia, from Thettalus, the son of Haemon. But some writers, after dividing it into two portions, say, that Deucalion obtained by lot the southern part, and called it Pandora, from his mother; that the other fell to the share of Haemon, from whom it was called Haemonia; that the name of one part was changed to Hellas, from Hellen, the son of Deucalion, and of the other to Thettalia, from Thettalus, the son of Haemon. But, according to some writers, it was the descendants of Antiphus and Pheidippus, sons of Thettalus, descended from Hercules, who invaded the country from Ephyra in Thesprotia, and called it after the name of Thettalus their progenitor. It has been already said that once it had the name of Nessonis, as well as the lake, from Nesson, the son of Thettalus.