WORK: Geography  (slug: strabo-geography-21ef7e)

CHAPTER: 09



[110280] Epidaurus was a distinguished city, remarkable particularly on account of the fame of Aesculapius, who was supposed to cure every kind of disease, and whose temple is crowded constantly with sick persons, and its walls covered with votive tablets, which are hung upon the walls, and contain accounts of the cures, in the same manner as is practised at Cos, and at Tricca. The city lies in the recess of the Saronic Gulf, with a coasting navigation of 15 stadia, and its aspect is towards the point of summer sun-rise. It is surrounded with lofty mountains, which extend to the coast, so that it is strongly fortified by nature on all sides.

[110922] Between Troezen and Epidaurus, there was a fortress Methana, and a peninsula of the same name. In some copies of Thucydides Methone is the common reading, a place of the same name with the Macedonian city, at the siege of which Philip lost an eye. Hence Demetrius of Scepsis is of opinion, that some persons were led into error by the name, and supposed that it was Methone near Troezen. It was against this town, it is said, that the persons sent by Agamemnon to levy sailors, uttered the imprecation, that they might never cease to build walls, but it was not these people; but the Macedonians, according to Theopompus, who refused the levy of men; besides, it is not probable that those, who were in the neighbourhood of Agamemnon, would disobey his orders.

[111684] Aegina is a place in the territory of Epidaurus. There is in front of this continent, an island, of which the poet means to speak in the lines before cited. Wherefore some write, and the island Aegina, instead of and they who occupied Aegina, making a distinction between the places of the same name.

[111986] It is unnecessary to remark, that this island is among the most celebrated. It was the country of Aeacus and his descendants. It was this island which once possessed so much power at sea, and formerly disputed the superiority with the Athenians in the sea-fight at Salamis during the Persian war. The circuit of the island is said to be about 180 stadia. It has a city of the same name on the south-west. Around it are Attica, and Megara, and the parts of Peloponnesus as far as Epidaurus. It is distant from each about 100 stadia. The eastern and southern sides are washed by the Myrtoan and Cretan seas. Many small islands surround it on the side towards the continent, but Belbina is situated on the side towards the open sea. The land has soil at a certain depth, but it is stony at the surface, particularly the plain country, whence the whole has a bare appearance, but yields large crops of barley. It is said that the Aeginetae were called Myrmidones, not as the fable accounts for the name, when the ants were metamorphosed into men, at the time of a great famine, by the prayer of Aeacus; but because by digging, like ants, they threw up the earth upon the rocks, and were thus made able to cultivate the ground, and because they lived in excavations under-ground, abstaining from the use of bricks and sparing of the soil for this purpose.

[113338] Its ancient name was Oenone, which is the name of two of the demi in Attica, one near Eleuthera; to inhabit the plains close to Oenone, (Oenoe,) and Eleutherae;

[113500] and another, one of the cities of the Tetrapolis near Marathon, to which the proverb is applied, Oenone (Oenoe?) and its torrent.

[113631] Its inhabitants were in succession Argives, Cretans, Epidauri ans, and Dorians. At last the Athenians divided the island by lot among settlers of their own. The Lacedaemonians, however, deprived the Athenians of it, and restored it to the ancient inhabitants.

[113892] The Aeginetae sent out colonists to Cydonia in Crete, and to the Ombrici. According to Ephorus, silver was first struck as money by Pheidon. The island became a mart, the inhabitants, on account of the fertility of its soil, employing themselves at sea as traders; whence goods of a small kind had the name of Aegina wares.

[114217] The poet frequently speaks of places in succession as they are situated; they who inhabited Hyria, and Aulis;

[114328] and they who occupied Argos, and Tiryns,

[114370] Hermione, and Asine,

[114392] Troezen, and Eiones.

[114414] At other times he does not observe any order; Schoenus, and Scolus,

[114483] Thespeia, and Graea.

[114505] He also mentions together places on the continent and islands; they who held Ithaca, and inhabited Crocyleia, for Crocyleia is in Acarnania. Thus he here joins with Aegina Mases, which belongs to the continent of Argolis.

[114728] Homer does not mention Thyreae, but other writers speak of it as well known. It was the occasion of a contest between the three hundred Argives against the same number of Lacedaemonians; the latter were conquerors by means of a stratagem of Othryadas. Thucydides places Thyreae in Cynuria, on the confines of Argia and Laconia.

[115057] Hysiae also is a celebrated place in Argolica; and Cenchreae, which lies on the road from Tegea to Argos, over the mountain Parthenius, and the Creopolus. But Homer was not acquainted with either of these places, [nor with the Lyrceium, nor Orneae, and yet they are villages in the Argian territory; the former of the same name as the mountain there; the latter of the same name as the Orneae, situated between Corinth and Sicyon].

[115490] Among the cities of the Peloponnesus, the most celebrated were, and are at this time, Argos and Sparta, and as their renown is spread everywhere, it is not necessary to describe them at length, for if we did so, we should seem to repeat what is said by all writers.

[115757] Anciently, Argos was the most celebrated, but afterwards the Lacedaemonians obtained the superiority, and continued to maintain their independence, except during some short interval, when they experienced a reverse of fortune.

[115985] The Argives did not admit Pyrrhus within the city. He fell before the walls, an old woman having let a tile drop from a house upon his head.

[116127] They were, however, under the sway of other kings. When they belonged to the Achaean league they were subjected, together with the other members of that confederacy, to the power of the Romans. The city subsists at present, and is second in rank to Sparta.

[116385] We shall next speak of those places which are said, in the Catalogue of the Ships, to be under the government of Mycenae and Agamemnon: the lines are these:

[116543] Those who inhabited Mycenae, a well-built city, and the wealthy Corinth, and Cleonae well built, and Orneiae, and the lovely Araethyrea, and Sicyon, where Adrastus first reigned, and they who inhabited Hyperesia, and the lofty Gonoessa and Pellene, and Aegium, and the whole range of the coast, and those who lived near the spacious Helice.

[116885] Mycenae exists no longer. It was founded by Perseus. Sthenelus succeeded Perseus; and Eurystheus, Sthenelus. These same persons were kings of Argos also. It is said that Eurystheus, having engaged, with the assistance of the Athenians, in an expedition to Marathon against the descendants of Hercules and Iolaus, fell in battle, and that the remainder of his body was buried at Gargettus, but his head apart from it at Tricorythus (Corinth?), Iolaus having severed it from the body near the fountain Macaria, close to the chariot-road. The spot itself has the name of Eurystheus’-head.

[117472] Mycenae then passed into the possession of the Pelopidae who had left the Pisatis, then into that of the Heracleidaae, who were also masters of Argos. But after the sea-fight at Salamis, the Argives, together with the Cleonaei, and the Tegetae, invaded Mycenae, and razed it, and divided the territory among themselves. The tragic writers, on account of the proximity of the two cities, speak of them as one, and use the name of one for the other. Euripides in the same play calls the same city in one place Mycenae, and in another Argos, as in the Iphigeneia, and in the Orestes.

[118054] Cleonae is a town situated upon the road leading from Argos to Corinth, on an eminence, which is surrounded on all sides by dwellings, and well fortified, whence, in my opinion, Cleonae was properly described as well built. There also, between Cleonae and Phlius, is Nemea, and the grove where it was the custom of the Argives to celebrate the Nemean games: here is the scene of the fable of the Nemean Lion, and here also the village Bembina. Cleonae is distant from Argos 120 stadia, and 80 from Corinth. And we have ourselves beheld the city from the Acrocorinthus.

[118624] Corinth is said to be opulent from its mart. It is situated upon the isthmus. It commands two harbours, one near Asia, the other near Italy, and facilitates, by reason of so short a distance between them, an exchange of commodities on each side.

[118871] As the Sicilian strait, so formerly these seas were of difficult navigation, and particularly the sea above Maleae, on account of the prevalence of contrary winds; whence the common proverb, When you double Maleae forget your home.

[119104] It was a desirable thing for the merchants coming from Asia, and from Italy, to discharge their lading at Corinth without being obliged to double Cape Maleae. For goods exported from Peloponnesus, or imported by land, a toll was paid to those who had the keys of the country. This continued afterterwards for ever. In after-times they enjoyed even additional advantages, for the Isthmian games, which were celebrated there, brought thither great multitudes of people. The Bacchiadae, a rich and numerous family, and of illustrious descent, were their rulers, governed the state for nearly two hundred years, and peaceably enjoyed the profits of the mart. Their power was destroyed by Cypselus, who became king himself, and his descendants continued to exist for three generations. A proof of the wealth of this family is the offering which Cypselus dedicated at Olympia, a statue of Jupiter of beaten gold.

[120012] Demaratus, one of those who had been tyrant at Corinth, flying from the seditions which prevailed there, carried with him from his home to Tyrrhenia so much wealth, that he became sovereign of the city which had received him, and his son became even king of the Romans.

[120283] The temple of Venus at Corinth was so rich, that it had more than a thousand women consecrated to the service of the goddess, courtesans, whom both men and women had dedicated as offerings to the goddess. The city was frequented and enriched by the multitudes who resorted thither on account of these women. Masters of ships freely squandered all their money, and hence the proverb, It is not in every man’s power to go to Corinth.

[120716] The answer is related of a courtesan to a woman who was reproaching her with disliking work, and not employing herself in spinning; Although I am what you see, yet, in this short time, I have already finished three distaffs.

[120942] The position of the city as it is described by Hieronymus, and Eudoxus, and others, and from our own observation, since its restoration by the Romans, is as follows.

[121109] That which is called the Acrocorinthus is a lofty mountain, perpendicular, and about three stadia and a half in height. There is an ascent of 30 stadia, and it terminates in a sharp point. The steepest part is towards the north. Below it lies the city in a plain of the form of a trapezium, at the very foot of the Acrocorinthus. The compass of the city itself was 40 stadia, and all that part which was not protected by the mountain was fortified by a wall. Even the mountain itself, the Acrocorinthus, was comprehended within this wall, wherever it would admit of fortification. As I ascended it, the ruins of the circuit of the foundation were apparent, which gave a circumference of about 85 stadia. The other sides of the mountain are less steep; hence, however, it stretches onwards, and is visible everywhere. The summit has upon it a small temple of Venus, and below it is the fountain Peirene, which has no efflux, but is continually full of water, which is transparent, and fit for drinking. They say, that from the compression of this, and of some other small under-ground veins, originates that spring at the foot of the mountain, which runs into the city, and furnishes the inhabitants with a sufficient supply of water. There is a large number of wells in the city, and it is said in the Acrocorinthus also, but this I did not see. When Euripides says, I come from the Acrocorinthus, well-watered on all sides, the sacred hill and habitation of Venus, the epithet well-watered on all sides, must be understood to refer to depth; pure springs and under-ground rills are dispersed through the mountain; or we must suppose, that, anciently, the Peirene overflowed, and irrigated the mountain. There, it is said, Pegasus was taken by Bellerophon, while drinking; this was a winged horse, which sprung from the neck of Medusa when the head of the Gorgon was severed from the body. This was the horse, it is said, which caused the Hippocrene, or Horse’s Fountain, to spring up in Helicon by striking the rock with its hoof.

[123142] Below Peirene is the Sisypheium, which preserves a large portion of the ruins of a temple, or palace, built of white marble. From the summit towards the north are seen Parnassus and Helicon, lofty mountains covered with snow; then the Crissaean Gulf, lying below both, and surrounded by Phocis, Boeotia, Megaris, by the Corinthian district opposite to Phocis, and by Sicyonia on the west. * * * *

[123540] Above all these are situated the Oneia mountains, as they are called, extending as far as Boeotia and Cithaeron, from the Sceironides rocks, where the road leads along them to Attica.

[123725] Lechaeum is the commencement of the coast on one side; and on the other, Cenchreae, a village with a harbour, distant from the city about 70 stadia. The latter serves for the trade with Asia, and Lechaeum for that with Italy.

[123952] Lechaeum is situated below the city, and is not well inhabited. There are long walls of about 12 stadia in length, stretching on each side of the road towards Lechaeum. The sea-shore, extending hence to Pagae in Megaris, is washed by the Corinthian Gulf. It is curved, and forms the Diolcus, or the passage along which vessels are drawn over the Isthmus to the opposite coast at Schoenus near Cenchreae.

[124357] Between Lechaeum and Pagae, anciently, there was the oracle of the Acraean Juno, and Olmiae, the promontory that forms the gulf, on which are situated Oenoe, and Page; the former is a fortress of the Megarians; and Oenoe is a fortress of the Corinthians.

[124613] Next to Cenchreae is Schoenus, where is the narrow part of the Diolcus, then Crommyonia. In front of this coast lies the Saronic Gulf, and the Eleusiniac, which is almost the same, and continuous with the Hermionic. Upon the Isthmus is the temple of the Isthmian Neptune, shaded above with a grove of pine trees, where the Corinthians celebrated the Isthmian games.

[124980] Crommyon is a village of the Corinthian district, and formerly belonging to that of Megaris, where is laid the scene of the fable of the Crommyonian sow, which, it is said, was the dam of the Calydonian boar, and, according to tradition, the: destruction of this sow was one of the labours of Theseus.

[125283] Tenea is a village of the Corinthian territory, where there was a temple of Apollo Teneates. It is said that Archias, who equipped a colony for Syracuse, was accompanied by a great number of settlers from this place; and that this settlement afterwards flourished more than any others, and at length had an independent form of government of its own. When they revolted from the Corinthians, they attached themselves to the Romans, and continued to subsist when Corinth was destroyed.

[125768] An answer of an oracle is circulated, which was returned to an Asiatic, who inquired whether it was better to migrate to Corinth; Corinth is prosperous, but I would belong to Tenea;

[125951] which last word was perverted by some through ignorance, and altered to Tegea. Here, it is said, Polybus brought up Oedipus.

[126077] There seems to be some affinity between the Tenedii and these people, through Tennus, the son of Cycnus, according to Aristotle; the similarity, too, of the divine honours paid by both to Apollo affords no slight proof of this relationship.

[126319] The Corinthians, when subject to Philip, espoused his party very zealously, and individually conducted themselves so contemptuously towards the Romans, that persons ventured to throw down filth upon their ambassadors, when passing by their houses. They were immediately punished for these and other offences and insults. A large army was sent out under the commaud of Lucius Mummius, who razed the city. The rest of the country, as far as Macedonia, was subjected to the Romans under different generals. The Sicyonii, however, had the largest part of the Corinthian territory.

[126897] Polybius relates with regret what occurred at the capture of the city, and speaks of the indifference the soldiers showed for works of art, and the sacred offerings of the temples. He says, that he was present, and saw pictures thrown upon the ground, and soldiers playing at dice upon them. Among others, he specifies by name the picture of Bacchus by Aristeides, (to which it is said the proverb was applied, Nothing to the Bacchus,) and Hercules tortured in the robe, the gift of Deïaneira. This I have not myself seen, but I have seen the picture of the Bacchus suspended in the Demetreium at Rome, a very beautiful piece of art, which, together with the temple, was lately consumed by fire. The greatest number and the finest of the other offerings in Rome were brought from Corinth. Some of them were in the possession of the cities in the neighbourhood of Rome. For Mummius being more brave and generous than an admirer of the arts, presented them without hesitation to those who asked for them. Lucullus, having built the temple of Good Fortune, and a portico, requested of Mummius the use of some statues, under the pretext of ornamenting the temple with them at the time of its dedication, and promised to restore them. He did not, however, restore, but presented them as sacred offerings, and told Mummius to take them away if he pleased. Mummius did not resent this conduct, not caring about the statues, but obtained more honour than Lucullus, who presented them as sacred offerings.

[128395] Corinth remained a long time deserted, till at length it was restored on account of its natural advantages by divus Caesar, who sent colonists thither, who consisted, for the most part, of the descendants of free-men.

[128614] On moving the ruins, and digging open the sepulchres, an abundance of works in pottery with figures on them, and many in brass, were found. The workmanship was admired, and all the sepulchres were examined with the greatest care. Thus was obtained a large quantity of things, which were disposed of at a great price, and Rome filled with Necro-Corinthia, by which name were distinguished the articles taken out of the sepulchres, and particularly the pottery. At first these latter were held in as much esteem as the works of the Corinthian artists in brass, but this desire to have them did not continue, not only because the supply failed, but because the greatest part of them were not well executed.

[129319] The city of Corinth was large and opulent at all periods, and produced a great number of statesmen and artists. For here in particular, and at Sicyon, flourished painting, and modelling, and every art of this kind.

[129535] The soil was not very fertile; its surface was uneven and rugged, whence all writers describe Corinth as full of brows of hills, and apply the proverb, Corinth rises with brows of hills, and sinks into hollows.

[129747] Orneae has the same name as the river which flows beside it. At present it is deserted; formerly, it was well inhabited, and contained a temple of Priapus, held in veneration. It is from this place that Euphronius, (Euphorius?) the author of a poem, the Priapeia, applies the epithet Orneates to the god.

[130053] It was situated above the plain of the Sicyonians, but the Argives were masters of the country.

[130150] Araethyrea is now called Phliasia. It had a city of the same name as the country near the mountain Celossa. They afterwards removed thence and built a city at the distance of 30 stadia, which they called Phlius. Part of the mountain Celossa is the Carneates, whence the Asopus takes its rise, which flows by Sicyon, and forms the Asopian district, which is a part of Sicyonia. There is also an Asopus, which flows by Thebes, and Plataea, and Tanagra. There is another also in Heracleia Trachinia, which flows beside a village, called Parasopii, and a fourth at Paros.

[130719] Phlius is situated in the middle of a circle formed by Sicyonia, Argeia, Cleonae, and Stymphalus. At Phlius and at Sicyon the temple of Dia, a name given to Hebe, is held in veneration.

[130906] Sicyon was formerly called Mecone, and at a still earlier period, Aegiali. It was rebuilt high up in the country about 20, others say, about 12, stadia from the sea, upon an eminences naturally strong, which is sacred to Ceres. The buildings anciently consisted of a naval arsenal and a harbour.

[131203] Sicyonia is separated by the river Nemea from the Corinthian territory. It was formerly governed for a very long period by tyrants, but they were always persons of mild and moderate disposition. Of these, the most illustrious was Aratus, who made the city free, and was the chief of the Achaeans, who voluntarily conferred upon him that power; he extended the confederacy by annexing to it his own country, and the other neighbouring cities.

[131646] Hyperesia, and the cities next in order in the Catalogue of the poet, and Aegialus, [or the sea-coast,] as far as Dyme, and the borders of the Eleian territory, belong to the Achaeans.

[131832] THE Ionians, who were descendants of the Athenians, were, anciently, masters of this country. It was formerly called Aegialeia, and the inhabitants Aegialeans, but in later times, Ionia, from the former people, as Attica had the name of Ionia, from Ion the son of 7uthus.

[132105] It is said, that Hellen was the son of Deucalion, and that he governed the country about Phthia between the Peneins and Asopus, and transmitted to his eldest son these dominions, sending the others out of their native country to seek a settlement each of them for himself. Dorus, one of them, settled the Dorians about Parnassus, and when he left them, they bore his name. 7uthus, another, married the daughter of Erechtheus, and was the founder of the Tetrapolis of Attica, which consisted of Oenoe, Marathon, Probalinthus, and Tricorythus.

[132648] Achaeus, one of the sons of 7uthus, having committed an accidental murder, fled to Lacedaemon, and occasioned the inhabitants to take the name of Achaeans.

[132805] Ion, the other son, having vanquished the Thracian army with their leader Eumolpus, obtained so much renown, that the Athenians intrusted him with the government of their state. It was he who first distributed the mass of the people into four tribes, and these again into four classes according to their occupations, husbandmen, artificers, priests, and the fourth, military guards; after having made many more regulations of this kind, he left to the country his own name. It happened at that time that the country had such an abundance of inhabitants, that the Athenians sent out a colony of Ionians to Peloponnesus, and the tract of country which they occupied was called Ionia after their own name, instead of Aegialeia, and the inhabitants Ionians instead of Aegialeans, who were distributed among twelve cities.

[133624] After the return of the Heracleidae, these Ionians, being expelled by the Achaeans, returned to Athens, whence, in conjunction with the Codridae, (descendants of Codrus,) they sent cut the Ionian colonists to Asia. They founded twelve cities on the sea-coast of Caria and Lydia, having distributed themselves over the country into as many parts as they occupied in Peloponnesus.

[134004] The Achaeans were Phthiotae by descent, and were settled at Lacedaemon, but when the Heracleidae became masters of the country, having recovered their power under Tisamenus, the son of Orestes, they attacked the Ionians, as I said before, and defeated them. They drove the Ionians out of the country, and took possession of the territory, but retained the same partition of it which they found existing there. They became so powerful, that, although the Heracleidae, from whom they had revolted, occupied the rest of Peloponnesus, yet they defended themselves against them all, and called their own country Achaea.

[134620] From Tisamenus to Ogyges they continued to be governed by kings. Afterwards they established a democracy, and acquired so great renown for their political wisdom, that the Italian Greeks, after their dissensions with the Pythagoreans, adopted most of the laws and institutions of the Achaeans. After the battle of Leuctra the Thebans committed the disputes of the cities among each other to the arbitration of the Achaeans. At a later period their community was dissolved by the Macedonians, but they recovered by degrees their former power. At the time of the expedition of Pyrrhus into Italy they began with the union of four cities, among which were Patrae and Dyme. They then had an accession of the twelve cities, with the exception of Olenus and Helice; the former refused to join the league; the other was swallowed up by the waves.

[135461] For the sea was raised to a great height by an earthquake, and overwhelmed both Helice and the temple of the Heliconian Neptune, whom the Ionians still hold in great veneration, and offer sacrifices to his honour. They celebrate at that spot the Panionian festival. According to the conjecture of some persons, Homer refers to these sacrifices in these lines, But he breathed out his soul, and bellowed, as a bull

[135876] Bellows when he is dragged round the altar of the Heliconian king.

[135944] It is conjectured that the age of the poet is later than the migration of the Ionian colony, because he mentions the Panionian sacrifices, which the Ionians perform in honour of the Heliconian Neptune in the territory of Priene; for the Prienians themselves are said to have come from Helice; a young man also of Priene is appointed to preside as king at these sacrifices, and to superintend the celebration of the sacred rites. A still stronger proof is adduced from what is said by the poet respecting the bull, for the Ionians suppose, that sacrifice is performed with favourable omens, when the bull bellows at the instant that he is wounded at the altar.

[136605] Others deny this, and transfer to Helice the proofs alleged of the bull and the sacrifice, asserting that these things were done there by established custom, and that the poet drew his comparison from the festival celebrated there. Helice was overwhelmed by the waves two years before the battle of Leuctra. Eratosthenes says, that he himself saw the place, and the ferrymen told him that there formerly stood in the strait a brazen statue of Neptune, holding in his hand a hippocampus, an animal which is dangerous to fishermen.

[137136] According to Heracleides, the inundation took place in his time, and during the night. The city was at the distance of 12 stadia from the sea, which overwhelmed the whole intermediate country as well as the city. Two thousand men were sent by the Achaeans to collect the dead bodies, but in vain. The territory was divided among the bordering people. This calamity happened in consequence of the anger of Neptune, for the Ionians, who were driven from Helice, sent particularly to request the people of Helice to give them the image of Neptune, or if they were unwilling to give that, to furnish them with the model of the temple. On their refusal, the Ionians sent to the Achaean body, who decreed, that they should comply with the request, but they would not obey even this injunction. The disaster occurred in the following winter, and after this the Achaeans gave the Ionians the model of the temple.

[138042] Hesiod mentions another Helice in Thessaly.

[138087] The Achaeans, during a period of five and twenty years, elected, annually, a common secretary, and two military chiefs. Their common assembly of the council met at one place, called Arnarium, (Homarium, or Amarium,) where these persons, and, before their time, the Ionians, consulted on public affairs. They afterwards resolved to elect one military chief. When Aratus held this post, he took the Acrocorinthus from Antigonus, and annexed the city as well as his own country to the Achaean league. He admitted the Megareans also into the body, and, having destroyed the tyrannical governments in each state, he made them members, after they were restored to liberty, of the Achaean league. * * * * * He freed, in a short time, Peloponnesus from the existing tyrannies; thus Argos, Hermion, Phlius, and Megalopolis, the largest of the Arcadian cities, were added to the Achaean body, when they attained their greatest increase of numbers. It was at this time that the Romans, having expelled the Carthaginians from Sicily, undertook an expedition against the Galatae, who were settled about the Po. The Achaeans remained firmly united until Philopoemen had the military command, but their union was gradually dissolved, after the Romans had obtained possession of the whole of Greece. The Romans did not treat each state in the same manner, but permitted some to retain their own form of government, and dissolved that of others. * * * * * [He then assigns reasons for expatiating on the subject of the Achaeans, namely, their attainment of such a degree of power as to be superior to the Lacedaemonians, and because they were not as well known as they deserved to be from their importance.]

[139779] The order of the places which the Achaeans inhabited, according to the distribution into twelve parts, is as follows. Next to Sicyon is Pellene; Aegeira, the second; the third, Aegae, with a temple of Neptune; Bura, the fourth; then Helice, where the Ionians took refuge after their defeat by the Achaeans, and from which place they were at last banished; after Helice are Aegium, Rhypes, Patrae, and Phara; then Olenus, beside which runs the large river [Peirus?]; then Dyme, and Tritsaeis. The Ionians dwelt in villages, but the Achaeans founded cities, to some of which they afterwards united others transferred from other quarters, as Aegae to Aegeira, (the inhabitants, however, were called Aegaei,) and Olenus to Dyme.

[140505] Traces of the ancient settlement of the Olenii are to be seen between Patrae and Dyme: there also is the famous temple of Aesculapius, distant from Dyme 40, and from Patrae 80 stadia.

[140690] In Euboea there is a place of the same name with the Aegae here, and there is a town of the name of Olenus in Aetolia, of which there remain only vestiges.

[140847] The poet does not mention the Olenus in Achaia, nor many other people living near Aegialus, but speaks in general terms; along the whole of Aegialus, and about the spacious Helice.

[141029] But he mentions the Aetolian Olenus in these words; those who occupied Pleuron and Olenus.

[141121] He mentions both the places of the name of Aegae; the Achaean Aegae in these terms, who bring presents to Helice, and to Aegae.

[141250] But when he says, Aegae, where his palace is in the depths of the sea,

[141322] There Neptune stopped his coursers, it is better to understand Aegae in Euboea; whence it is probable the Aegaean Sea had its name. On this sea, according to story, Neptune made his preparations for the Trojan war.

[141538] Close to the Achaen Aegae flows the river Crathis, augmented by the waters of two rivers, and deriving its name from the mixture of their streams. To this circumstance the river Crathis in Italy owes its name.

[141749] Each of these twelve portions contained seven or eight demi, so great was the population of the country.

[141855] Pellene, situated at the distance of 60 stadia from the sea, is a strong fortress. There is also a village of the name of Pellene, whence they bring the Pellenian mantles, which are offered as prizes at the public games. It lies between Aegium and Pellene. But Pellana, a different place from these, belongs to the Lacedaemonians, and is situated towards the territory of Megalopolitis.

[142243] Aegeira is situated upon a hill. Bura is at the distance from the sea-coast of about 40 stadia. It was swallowed up by an earthquake. It is said, that from the fountain Sybaris which is there, the river Sybaris in Italy had its name.

[142478] Aega (for this is the name by which Aegae is called) is not now inhabited, but the Aegienses occupy the territory. Aegium, however, is well inhabited. It was here, it is said, that Jupiter was suckled by a goat, as Aratus also says, the sacred goat, which is said to have applied its teats to the lips of Jupiter.

[142793] He adds, that, the priests call it the Olenian goat of Jupiter, and indicates the place because it was near Olenus. There also is Ceryneia, situated upon a lofty rock. This place, and Helice, belong to the Aegienses, and the Aenarium, [Homarium,] the grove of Jupiter, where the Achaeans held their convention, when they were to deliberate upon their common affairs.

[143161] The river Selinus flows through the city of the Aegienses. It has the same name as that which was beside Artemisium at Ephesus, and that in Elis, which has its course along the spot, that 7enophon says he purchased in compliance with the injunction of an oracle, in honour of Artemis. There is also another Selinus in the country of the Hyblaei Megarenses, whom the Carthaginians expelled.

[143552] Of the remaining Achaean cities, or portions, Rhypes is not inhabited, but the territory called Rhypis was occupied by Aegienses and Pharians. Aeschylus also says somewhere, the sacred Bura, and Rhypes struck with lightning.

[143778] Myscellus, the founder of Croton, was a native of Rhypes. Leuctrum, belonging to the district Rhypis, was a demus of Rhypes. Between these was Patrae, a considerable city, and in the intervening country, at the distance of 40 stadia from Patrae, are Rhium, and opposite to it, Antirrhium. Not long since the Romans, after the victory at Actium, stationed there a large portion of their army, and at present it is very well peopled, since it is a colony of the Romans. It has also a tolerably good shelter for vessels. Next is Dyme, a city without a harbour, the most westerly of all the cities, whence also it has its name. It was formerly called Stratos. It is separated from Eleia at Buprasium by the river Larisus, which rises in a mountain, called by some persons Scollis, but by Homer, the Olenian rock.

[144588] Antimachus having called Dyme Cauconis, some writers suppose that the latter word is used as an epithet derived from the Caucones, who extended as far as this quarter, as I have said before. Others think that it is derived from a river Caucon, in the same way as Thebes has the appellation of Dircaean, and Asopian; and as Argos is called Inachian, and Troy, Simuntis.

[144958] A little before our time, Dyme had received a colony consisting of a mixed body of people, a remnant of the piratical bands, whose haunts Pompey had destroyed. Some he settled at Soli in Cilicia, and others in other places, and some in this spot.

[145206] Phara borders upon the Dymaean territory. The inhabitants of this Phara are called Pharenses; those of the Messenian Phara, Pharatae. In the territory of Phara there is a fountain Dirce, of the same name as that at Thebes.

[145430] Olenus is deserted. It lies between Patrae and Dyme. The territory is occupied by the Dymaei. Next is Araxus, the promontory of the Eleian district, distant from the isthmus 1000 stadia.

[145618] ARCADIA is situated in the middle of Peloponnesus, and contains the greatest portion of the mountainous tract in that country. Its largest mountain is Cyllene. Its perpendicular height, according to some writers, is 20, according to others, about 15 stadia.

[145877] The Arcadian nations, as the Azanes, and Parrhasii, and other similar tribes, seem to be the most ancient people of Greece.

[146002] In consequence of the complete devastation of this country, it is unnecessary to give a long description of it. The cities, although formerly celebrated, have been destroyed by continual wars; and the husbandmen abandoned the country at the time that most of the cities were united in that called Megalopolis (the Great City). At present Megalopolis itself has undergone the fate expressed by the comic poet; the great city is a great desert.

[146446] There are rich pastures for cattle, and particularly for horses and asses, which are used as stallions. The race of Arcadian horses, as well as the Argolic and Epidaurian, is preferred before all others. The uninhabited tracts of country in Aetolia and Acarnania are not less adapted to the breeding of horses than Thessaly.

[146772] Mantinea owes its fame to Epaminondas, who conquered the Lacedaemonians there in a second battle, in which he lost his life.

[146898] This city, together with Orchomenus, Heraea, Cleitor, Pheneus, Stymphalus, Maenalus, Methydrium, Caphyeis, and Cynaetha, either exist no longer, or traces and signs only of their existence are visible. There are still some remains of Tegea, and the temple of the Alaean Minerva remains. The latter is yet held in some little veneration, as well as the temple of the Lycaean Jupiter on the Lycaean mountain. But the places mentioned by the poet, as Rhipe, and Stratia, and the windy Enispe, are difficult to discover, and if discovered, would be of no use from the deserted condition of the country.

[147498] The mountains of note, besides Cyllene, are Pholoë, Lycaeum, Maenalus, and the Parthenium, as it is called, which extends from the territory of Tegea to that of Argos.

[147667] We have spoken of the extraordinary circumstances relative to the Alpheius, Eurotas, and the Erasinus, which issues out of the lake Stymphalis, and now flows into the Argive country.

[147851] Formerly, the Erasinus had no efflux, for the Berethra, which the Arcadians call Zerethra, had no outlet, so that the city of the Stymphalii, which at that time was situated upon the lake, is now at the distance of 50 stadia.

[148078] The contrary was the case with the Ladon, which was at one time prevented running in a continuous stream by the obstruction of its sources. For the Berethra near Pheneum, through which it now passes, fell in in consequence of an earthquake, which stopped the waters of the river, and affected far down the veins which supplied its source. This is the account of some writers.

[148455] Eratosthenes says, that about the Pheneus, the river called Anias forms a lake, and then sinks under-ground into certain openings, which they call Zerethra. When these are obstructed, the water sometimes overflows into the plains, and when they are again open the water escapes in a body from the plains, and is discharged into the Ladon and the Alpheius, so that it happened once at Olympia, that the land about the temple was inundated, but the lake was partly emptied. The Erasinus also, he says, which flows by Stymphalus, sinks into the ground under the mountain (Chaon?), and reappears in the Argive territory. It was this that induced Iphicrates, when besieging Stymphalus, and making no progress, to attempt to obstruct the descent of the river into the ground by means of a large quantity of sponges, but desisted in consequence of some portentous signs in the heavens.

[149335] Near the Pheneus there is also the water of the Styx, as it is called, a dripping spring of poisonous water, which was esteemed to be sacred.

[149478] So much then respecting Arcadia.

[149512] Polybius having said, that from Maleae towards the north as far as the Danube the distance is about 10,000 stadia, is corrected by Artemidorus, and not without reason; for, according to the latter, from Maleae to Aegium the distance is 1400 stadia, from hence to Cirrha is a distance by sea of 200 stadia; hence by Heraclea to Thaumaci a journey of 500 stadia; thence to Larisa and the river Peneus, 340 stadia; then through Tempe to the mouth of the Peneus, 240 stadia; then to Thessalonica, 660 stadia; then to the Danube, through Idomene, and Stobi, and Dardanii, it is 3200 stadia. According to Artemidorus, therefore, the distance from the Danube to Maleae would be 6500. The cause of this difference is that he does not give the measurement by the shortest road, but by some accidental route pursued by a general of an army.

[150344] It is not, perhaps, out of place to add the founders mentioned by Ephorus, who settled colonies in Peloponnesus after the return of the Heracleidae; as Aletes, the founder of Corinth; Phalces, of Sicyon; Tisamenus, of cities in Achaea; Oxylus, of Elis, Cresphontes, of Messene; Eurysthenes and Procles, of Lacedaemon; Temenus and Cissus, of Argos; and Agraeus and Deiphontes, of the towns about Acte.