WORK: De Anima  (slug: tertullian-de-anima-d01878)

CHAPTER: 01-de-anima



[109310] 30. But what shall we answer to the rest? First, if the living are from the dead, as the dead are from the living, then one and altogether the same number of all men would have stuck fast forever — that number, namely, which had first entered upon life. For the living are prior to the dead, then the dead out of the living, and again the living out of the dead. And while this is always out of the same, so always there would be just as many as are out of the same. For neither would more or fewer have gone out than had returned. But we find, even in the Commentaries on Human Antiquities, that the human race has gradually grown beyond measure, while the Aborigines, or wanderers, or exiles, or any glory-seekers occupy lands — as the Scythians occupied the Parthian lands, as the Temenidae the Peloponnese, as the Athenians Asia, as the Phrygians Italy and the Phoenicians Africa — while there are also solemn migrations, which they call colonies, by counsel of unburdening the population, vomiting forth swarms of a nation into other territories. For the Aborigines now both remain in their own seats and have lent out their stock elsewhere in greater measure. Certainly the very world is plain to see, more cultivated by the day and better furnished than of old. All places are now traversed, all are known, all are busy with commerce; most charming farms have blotted out the once notorious wildernesses, fields have tamed the woods, flocks have put to flight the wild beasts, the sands are sown, the rocks are planted, the marshes are drained, there are as many cities as there were once cottages. No longer do the islands fright, nor the crags terrify; everywhere a house, everywhere a people, everywhere a commonwealth, everywhere life. The greatest testimony of human frequency: we are burdensome to the world, the elements scarcely suffice us, our necessities are sharper, and complaints are on the lips of all, while now nature does not sustain us. In truth, pestilence and famine and wars and the engulfings of cities are to be reckoned as a remedy, like a pruning of the human race grown overgrown. And yet, when axes of this kind cut down the greatest force of mortals at one stroke, the world has never once, after a thousand years, been frightened at its restitution, bringing the living back out of the dead. For an equal force of loss and of restitution would have made this too perceptible, if the living were made out of the dead. But why a thousand years after, and not at once the living out of the dead — since, if what was paid out were not at once made up, it would be endangered to be wholly consumed, the defect forestalling the restitution, because this furlough of life would not pay back the equivalent of the millennial period, being far shorter and therefore more easily extinguished before being rekindled? Therefore that which in this way would have perished, if the living were made out of the dead — when it has not perished — it will not be credible that the living are made out of the dead.

[112342] 31. Now indeed, if the living are from the dead, then assuredly single ones from single ones. The souls of single bodies, therefore, ought to have returned, as single, into single bodies. Moreover, if even two and three and five at a time are resumed in one womb, the living will not be from the dead, since they are not single from single. And in this way too the form of the first origin is marked, since even now several souls are brought forth from one. Likewise, since souls depart at various ages, why do they return at one age? For all are imbued from infancy. But what kind of thing is it that an old man, deceased, should return an infant? If the soul decreases without, retrograding in age, how much more was it fit that it should return more advanced after a thousand years? Or at least coeval with its own death, so as to recover again the age it had left. But even if the same souls were always rolled round, although not the same forms of bodies too, yet they ought at least to carry back with them the former properties of talents and studies and affections, since otherwise they would rashly be held the same, lacking those things by which the same would be proved. ‘How do you know,’ you say, ‘whether it does not indeed happen so, secretly, but the condition of the millennial age destroys the faculty of recognizing, because they return unknown to you?’ But I know it does not happen so, since you set Pythagoras-Euphorbus against me. For behold, it is sufficiently established that Euphorbus was a military and warlike soul, even from the very glory of the consecrated shields; but Pythagoras so inactive and unwarlike that, shunning the battles of Greece then, he preferred the quiet of Italy, devoted to geometry and astrology and music, a stranger to the study and affection of Euphorbus. But Pyrrhus too occupied himself in catching fishes; Pythagoras, on the contrary, not even in eating them, abstaining as from living creatures. Aethalides, moreover, and Hermotimus had even thrust the bean into the common foods; but Pythagoras handed it down to his disciples that one was not even to pass through a bean-field. How then are the same souls recovered, which will be proved the same neither by talents nor by institutions nor now by foods? Now then, out of so great a census of Greece, four souls only are reckoned. But why at all of the census of Greece alone, and not out of every nation, and out of every age and dignity, and lastly out of every sex — since transmigrations and transincorporations come about daily — why does Pythagoras alone recognize himself as one and then another, and not I too? Or if it is the privilege of philosophers, and assuredly of Greeks — as though Scythians and Indians too did not philosophize — why does Epicurus remember himself as no one before, Chrysippus as no one, Zeno as no one, not even Plato himself, whom perhaps we would have believed Nestor on account of the honey of his eloquence?

[115301] 32. But indeed Empedocles, who had raved himself a god, therefore, I suppose, disdaining to remember himself any hero, says, ‘I was a bush and a fish.’ Why not rather a pumpkin too, so insipid, and a chameleon, so puffed up? Plainly, as a fish, that he might not rot in some more decent burial, he chose rather to be roasted by hurling himself into Aetna. And thereupon let metempsychosis have ended in him, like a summer supper after the roast. Accordingly here too we must needs contend against a yet more portentous presumption, which revolves beasts out of men and men out of beasts. Let the bushes look to it. I shall be allowed to be brief too, lest I be compelled to laugh more than to teach. We say that the human soul can in no way be transferred into beasts, even if, according to the philosophers, it were reckoned from elemental substances. For whether the soul be fire, or water, or blood, or breath, or air, or light, we ought to reconsider the animals contrary to each of the several species: to fire, those that are cold, the snakes, lizards, salamanders, and whatever is produced from the rival element, namely from water; likewise contrary to water, those that are dry and juiceless — in short, locusts, little butterflies, chameleons rejoice in dryness; likewise contrary to blood, those that lack its purple — snails, little worms, and the greater census of fishes; but contrary to breath, those that do not seem to breathe, lacking lungs and arteries — gnats, ants, moths, and this kind of little creatures; likewise contrary to air, those living things which, ever living underground and underwater, lack the drawing-in of it (you would know the things rather than the names); likewise contrary to light, those that are wholly blind, or have eyes only for the darkness — moles, bats, owls. These things, that I may teach from substances apparent and manifest. But if I were to hold the atoms of Epicurus, and to see the numbers of Pythagoras, and to come upon the Ideas of Plato, and to seize the entelechies of Aristotle, I should perhaps find, even for these species, animals which I might oppose by the name of contrariety. For I contend that, out of whatever substance above-named the human soul might have consisted, it could not have been reformed into animals so contrary to each several substance, and confer upon them a census from its own transference — by which it would rather have to be excluded and rejected than admitted and received under the name of this first contrariety, which makes a diversity of substantial state, and then the rest too, by the consequent order of each nature. For the human soul has been allotted other seats, and ways of feeding, and equipment, and senses, and affections, and modes of intercourse, and offspring; likewise talents, then works, joys, weariness, vices, desires, pleasures, states of health, medicines; and lastly its own ways of life too and exits of death. How then will that soul which clung to the earth, fearless of no height, of no depth, weary even at climbing stairs, suffocated even by plunging into pools, afterwards insult the air in an eagle, or afterwards leap into the sea in an eel? How likewise, brought up on liberal and dainty and well-tended foods, will it chew — I do not say chaff, but thorns and the wild bitternesses of leaves, and the beasts of dunghills, and even the venoms of worms — if it pass into a goat, or into a quail, or even into carrion, even into human flesh, mindful surely of itself in a bear or a lion? So you will reduce the rest too to incongruity, that we may not delay over pleading each. Whatever measure the human soul itself has, whatever its size, what will it do in animals far larger or far smaller? For of necessity both every body is filled by a soul, and every soul covered by a body. How then will the soul of a man fill an elephant? How likewise will it be covered in a gnat? If it is so far extended or contracted, it will surely be endangered. And therefore I add: if it is in no way capable of such a transference into animals not corresponding to it either in the measures of their bodies or in the other laws of its own nature — will it then be changed according to the qualities of the kinds and their life contrary to human life, itself too made contrary to the human by change? But in fact, if it admits of change, losing what it was, it will not be what it was; and if it will not be what it was, metempsychosis is dissolved — not to be ascribed, namely, to that soul which, if it will be changed, will not be. For it would be called metempsychosis of whatever soul would suffer it while remaining in its own state. Therefore, if it can neither be changed, lest it be not itself, nor remain in its state, since it does not admit contraries — I still seek some cause worthy of belief for a transference of this kind. For even though certain men are equated to beasts according to the qualities of their characters and talents and affections — since God too says, ‘Man, when he was in honour, was likened to the irrational beasts’ — yet kites are not therefore made out of the rapacious, and dogs out of the filthy, and panthers out of the cruel, or sheep out of the honest, and swallows out of the chattering, and doves out of the chaste, as though the same substance of soul everywhere repeated its nature in the properties of animals. But substance is one thing, and the nature of substance another; since substance is proper to each thing, but nature can be common. Take an example. Stone is a substance, iron is a substance; the hardness of stone and iron is the nature of the substance. The hardness they share; in substance they disagree. The softness of wool, the softness of feather — let their natural properties pair them off, their substantial ones do not pair them. So too, if a savage or an honest man be called a beast, yet it is not the same soul. For then too the likeness of nature is noted when the unlikeness of substance is observed. For the very fact that you judge a man like a beast, you confess the soul not the same, by saying ‘like,’ not ‘the very same.’ So the divine pronouncement too is wise, equating man to the cattle in nature, not in substance. For neither would God have marked man in this way, if He knew him a beast in substance.

[121608] 33. Even when this dogma is claimed under the name of judgment — that human souls are allotted kinds of animals according to their life and merits, some to be slaughtered in the slaughterhouses, some to be broken in for servile uses, some to be wearied in labours, some to be fouled among the unclean; and accordingly to be honoured and loved and tended and sought after in the fairest and most upright and most useful and daintiest — here too I will say: if they are changed, the very souls that will have earned will not be requited, and the principle of judgment will be voided, if the sense of merits be lacking. But the sense of merits will be lacking, if the state of the souls be turned; and the state of the souls is turned, if they have not persevered the same. Equally, if they will persevere unto judgment — which even the Egyptian Mercury knew, saying that the soul, departed from the body, is not refunded into the soul of the universe, but remains determinate, ‘that it may render an account,’ he says, ‘to the Father of the things it did in the body’ — I wish, assuredly, to review the justice, the gravity, the majesty, the dignity of the divine judgment, whether human censure does not preside at a more sublime height, fuller of the honour of both sentences, of punishments and of rewards, severer in avenging and more liberal in bestowing. What do you think the soul of a murderer will become? Some beast, I suppose, destined for the butchery and the meat-market, that it may likewise be slaughtered, because it too slaughtered; likewise be flayed, because it too despoiled; likewise be set out for food, because it too cast to the beasts those whom it butchered in woods and pathless places. If it shall be so judged, will not that soul bring back more solace than punishment, in that it finds its funeral among the most precious cooks, in that it is buried with the spices of an Apicius and a Lurco, in that it is brought in on Ciceronian tables, in that it is borne out on the most splendid platters of the Sullae, in that it suffers a banquet for its obsequies, in that it is devoured by its equals rather than by kites and wolves — so that, entombed in a man's body and returned to its own kind, it might seem to have risen again, exulting against human judgments, if it had experienced them? For human judgments rend the assassin with various and exquisite and now unnaturally trained beasts, and indeed while living — nay, while not easily dying, the end being delayed of set purpose, to the fullness of the penalty. But even if the soul has fled before the final sword, lest the body too should escape the iron, nonetheless, the throat and belly being run through and the ribs transfixed, requital is exacted for its own crime. Thence it is given to the fire, that even its burial may be a punishment. Otherwise, in short, it is not permitted. Nor yet is so much care taken of the pyre that other beasts may find the remains; certainly neither are the bones spared, nor are the ashes indulged with being left to lie bare. So great among men is the vengeance for murder as is the very nature that is avenged. Who would not prefer the justice of the age, which the apostle too testifies is not armed with the sword in vain, which is religiously stern in the cause of man? If we consider too the wages of the other crimes — the gibbets and the burnings alive and the sacks and the hooks and the crags — for whom would it not be expedient to suffer the sentence of Pythagoras and Empedocles? For even those who are to be punished with labours and servitudes, and are to be re-embodied surely into asses and mules, how they will congratulate themselves on the mills and the water-wheels, if they remember the mines and the workhouses and the public works and the very prisons, idle though these may be! Likewise, of those who, having behaved uprightly, have commended their life to the Judge, I seek rewards, but rather find punishments. Doubtless it is a great reward to the good, to be restored into animals of whatever kind. Homer remembered that he had been a peacock, when Ennius dreamed it; but I will not believe the poets even when they are awake. Even if the peacock is most beautiful, and most adorned with whatever colour it will — yet its feathers are silent, its voice displeases, and the poets would rather do nothing else than sing. Homer therefore was condemned into a peacock, not honoured. He will rejoice more in the world's remuneration, accounted the father of the liberal disciplines, so that he prefers the ornaments of his fame to those of a tail. Come now: granting that the poets pass into peacocks or into swans — if there is a comely voice even to swans — what animal will you put upon a just man, an Aeacus? What beast upon a chaste woman, a Dido? What bird will patience, what beast will sanctity, what fish will innocence be allotted? All things are the servants of man, all subjected, all his chattels. If he is to be any of these, he is diminished there, he to whom, for the merits of his life, images, statues and inscriptions, public honours, privileges are repaid; for whom the senate, for whom the people offer sacrifice with their votes. O divine judgments after death, more lying than human ones! contemptible as to penalties, despicable as to favours, which neither the worst will fear nor the best desire, to which the wicked rather than the holy will hasten — those, that they may the sooner escape the justice of the age, these, that they may the later attain it! Well do you philosophers teach, profitably do you persuade, that the punishments or rewards after death are lighter; whereas, if any judgment awaits souls, it ought to be believed heavier in the requital of life than in its administration, since nothing is fuller than what is final, and nothing fuller than what is more divine. God therefore will judge more fully, because more finally, by an eternal sentence both of punishment and of refreshment, the souls returning not into beasts, but into their own bodies. And this once, and on that day which the Father alone knows, that by a suspended expectation the solicitude of faith may be proved, ever watching for the day while ever ignorant of it, fearing daily what it daily hopes.

[127872] 34. No opinion of this kind of madness, indeed, has to this day broken forth under a heretical name, refashioning human souls into beasts. But we have necessarily brought in and excluded this species too, as cohering with the foregoing, so that just as Euphorbus was beaten back in Pythagoras, so Homer might be beaten back in the peacock; and thus, this metempsychosis or metensomatosis also being repelled, that other might again be cut down which furnished something to the heretics. For Simon of Samaria too, in the Acts of the Apostles, the would-be purchaser of the Holy Spirit — after, being condemned by him, he had wept in vain over his destruction together with his money — turned to the assault of the truth, as if by way of solace for his revenge; and, supported also by the powers of his art, for the deceptions of some virtue, he redeemed with that same money a certain Helen of Tyre out of a place of public lust, a worthy wage for himself in place of the Holy Spirit. And he feigns himself indeed the supreme Father, but her his first conception, by which he had conceived to found angels and archangels; that she, possessed of this design, leapt forth from the Father and bounded down into the lower regions, and there, forestalling the Father's design, brought forth the angelic powers, ignorant of the Father, the artificer of this world; that by these, out of an equal mind, she was thence detained, lest, if she departed, they should seem the offspring of another, and was therefore consigned to every contumely, so that, cheapened, she might nowhere be free to depart; that she fell down even to human form, to be coerced as it were by the chains of the flesh. So, rolled through many ages in one and another womanly habit, she was even that Helen so destructive to Priam, and afterwards to the eyes of Stesichorus, whom she had both blinded for the abuse of his song and afterwards given back their light for the satisfaction of his praise; and so, migrating from bodies into bodies, in a last disgrace, under the title of prostitution she stood for hire, a viler Helen. This, then, is the lost sheep, to whom the supreme Father descended — Simon, namely; and, having first recovered and carried her back, on his shoulders or his thighs I know not, thereafter looked to the salvation of men, as by way of vengeance for those to be freed from those angelic powers — for whose deceiving he too, equally configured, and falsely pretending to be a man among men, played in Judaea the Son, but in Samaria the Father. O Helen, toiling between the poets and the heretics, infamous now for adultery, now for stuprum! — except that it is more gloriously that she is rescued out of Troy than out of a brothel: from Troy by a thousand ships, from the brothel perhaps not by a thousand denarii. Blush, Simon, slower in seeking, more inconstant in drawing back. But Menelaus at once pursues the lost one, at once demands back the snatched one, wrings her out by a ten years' war, not lurking, not deceiving, not given to caviling. I fear that he was rather the Father, who laboured about the recovery of Helen both more vigilantly and more boldly and longer.

[131042] 35. But not for you alone did metempsychosis frame this fable. From it Carpocrates too uses it, alike a magus, alike a fornicator, save that he has less of a Helen. Why not, when he asserted that souls are re-embodied for the establishing of an utter overthrow of divine and human discipline? For he holds that this life is made firm to no one unless all the things that arraign it have been wiped out, since a thing is held evil not by nature but by opinion; and so metempsychosis necessarily impends, if in this very first journey of life satisfaction is not made for all things forbidden. To wit, crimes are assigned to life. For the rest, the soul has to be recalled as often as it has discharged anything too little, a debtor for its faults, until it pays the last farthing, thrust again and again into the prison of the body. For to this he adapts that whole allegory of the Lord, which shines forth with certain interpretations, and is first to be understood simply. For the heathen man too is our adversary, walking in the same way of common life. For the rest, we should have to go out of the world, if we might not converse with such. He bids you, then, show goodness of mind toward him. ‘For love your enemies,’ He says, ‘and pray for those who curse you,’ lest, provoked by injury through some dealing of business, he drag you off to his judge, and you, handed over into custody, be tortured to the payment of the whole debt. Then, if the mention of the adversary is transferred to the devil, you are warned, by the attendant observance, to enter into concord with him too, which is reckoned from the covenant of the faith; for you have agreed to renounce both him and his pomp and his angels. It is agreed between you on this point. This will be the friendship of the observance of the pledge, that you take nothing of his afterwards from those things which you have abjured, which you have rendered back to him — lest he charge you before God the Judge as a defrauder, as a transgressor of the pact, even as we read of him elsewhere as the accuser of the saints and the informer concerning his very name; and the judge deliver you to the angel of execution, and he consign you to the infernal prison, whence you shall not be dismissed until even the smallest fault be expended by the delay of the resurrection. What is fitter than these senses? What is truer than these interpretations? For the rest, with Carpocrates, if the soul is the debtor of all crimes, who is to be understood as its enemy and adversary? The better mind, I believe, which has driven it into some act of innocence, to be forced again and again into the body, until it be found guilty in nothing of a good life. This is to recognize the good tree from its evil fruits — that is, to acknowledge the doctrine of truth from the worst precepts. I suspect that heretics of this kind seize upon the example of Elias too, as represented thus in John, so that the Lord's pronouncement should patronize metempsychosis: ‘Elias has already come, and they knew him not’; and elsewhere, ‘And if you will receive it, this is Elias who is to come.’ Did the Jews, then, ask John out of the Pythagorean opinion, ‘Are you Elias?’ — and not out of the divine preaching, ‘And behold, I will send you Elias the Tishbite’? But indeed their metempsychosis is the recall of a soul long since dead and repeated into another body. Elias, however, is to come not from any departure of life, but from a translation; nor to be restored to a body from which he was not removed, but to be given back to the world from which he was translated; not out of any return from exile of life, but out of a supplement of prophecy — the same both himself, and of his own name and of his own person. But how is Elias John? You have the angel's word: ‘And he himself,’ he says, ‘shall go before the people in the power and in the spirit of Elias’ — not in his soul nor in his flesh. For these substances are each man's own. But spirit and power are conferred from without, out of the grace of God; and so they can be transferred into another, by the will of God, as was done formerly with the spirit of Moses.

[135196] 36. Into these questions we digressed thence, I think, whither we must now return. We had laid down that the soul is sown in man himself and out of him, and that there is one seed from the first origin — as of the flesh too unto the whole census of the race — namely on account of the rival opinions of philosophers and heretics, and that drowsy saying of Plato. Now we weave the order of the treatises that follow thereupon. The soul, sown in the womb together with the flesh, is allotted its sex together with it, equally so, in such a way that in the cause of sex neither substance is held responsible. For if, in the seeds of the two substances, their conception admitted any interval, so that either the flesh or the soul were sown first, there would be ground for ascribing the property of sex to one substance by reason of the temporal interval of the seeds, so that either the flesh should engrave its sex upon the soul, or the soul upon the flesh; since Apelles too — not the painter, but the heretic — by setting up souls, male and female, before bodies, as he learned from Philumene, assuredly makes the flesh, as the later, receive its sex from the soul. And those who superinduce the soul upon the flesh after birth, assuredly pre-judge for the soul the male or female sex of the flesh already formed. But the undistinguished seeds of both substances and the united effusion of them undergo the common outcome of the kind, in whatever direction that account of nature, whatever it be, has drawn its lines. Certainly here too the form of the first origin attests itself, since the male is shaped earlier — for Adam was first; the female somewhat later — for Eve was after. So for a long while the flesh is unformed, such as it was plucked from Adam's side; yet it too was already a living creature even then, for I would acknowledge even that portion of Adam to have been a soul. For the rest, the inbreathing of God would have animated it too, had it not been that, as of flesh, so of soul too, there had been a tradux from Adam into the woman.

[137255] 37. But every equipment of sowing, building, fashioning man in the womb is regulated by some power, the minister of the divine will, allotted to set in motion whatever account it does. By estimating this, even Roman superstition feigned a goddess Alemona for nourishing the fetus in the womb, and Nona and Decima from the more anxious months, and Partula, who governs the birth, and Lucina, who brings into the light. But we believe the divine offices to be angels. Therefore the fetus in the womb is a man from the point at which the form is completed. For the law of Moses too then judges the abortion guilty of retribution, when it is already the case of a man, when there is already reckoned to it a status of life and death, when it is already enrolled even under fate, even though, while still living in the mother, it shares most of its lot with the mother. I will say something too of the times of the soul's being born, that I may run through the order. The lawful birth is generally the entrance of the tenth month. Those who reason about numbers both venerate the number ten as thence the parent of the rest, and, in short, as the perfecter of human nativity. But I will rather argue this measure of time toward God, that the ten months should rather inaugurate man by the Decalogue — that we should be born in as great a number of time as we are reborn by the number of the discipline. But also, since at the seventh month the birth is complete, more easily than at the eighth, I shall recognize the honour of the sabbath, so that on the day on which the creation of God was dedicated, in that month the image of God should sometimes be brought forth. It is granted to the birth to hasten, and yet to fall fitly upon the hebdomad, into the auspices of resurrection and of rest and of the kingdom. Therefore the eighth does not create us; for then there will be no marriages. The fellowship of flesh and soul we long since commended, from the joining of their very seeds even to the perfection of the modeling. Likewise now we defend it from birth too, first of all in that they grow together, but by a different account according to the condition of their kinds, the flesh by measure, the soul by talent, the flesh by habit, the soul by sense. But it is to be denied that the soul grows in substance, lest it be also said to decrease in substance, and so be believed even destined to fail; but its power, in which the natural endowments are kept implanted, is gradually brought forth with the flesh, the measure of its substance being preserved, with which it was breathed in from the first origin. Take a certain weight of gold or silver, still a rough mass: its collected habit is small, less for the time being than it will be, yet containing within the line of its measure all that is the nature of gold or silver. Then, when the mass is spread out into a sheet, it is made greater than its beginning, by the expansion of a fixed weight, not by addition, while it is extended, not while it is increased. Even so it is increased, while it is extended; for it may be increased in habit, though it may not in state. Then too the very splendour of the gold or silver is brought out, which had indeed been in the mass too, but more obscure — yet not none. Then too other and other habits accrue, according to the pliancy of the material, in whatever way he who works it shall draw it, conferring nothing on the measure but a shape. So too the increases of the soul are to be reckoned, not substantial, but evocative.

[140784] 38. But although we have established beforehand that all the natural things of the soul are inherent in its very substance, pertaining to sense and intellect, and out of the inborn census of the soul, yet they come forth gradually through the spaces of age, and variously emerge through accidents, according to arts, to institutions, to places, to presiding powers — yet, to make for the now-proposed fellowship of flesh and soul, we say that the animal puberty too concurs with the carnal, and that the one rises up by the access of the senses, and the other by the advancement of the members, equally from about the fourteenth year — not because Asclepiades reckons wisdom from then, nor because the civil laws from this point apportion the management of affairs, but because this too is from the first origin a reasonable thing. For if Adam and Eve, from the knowledge of good and evil, felt the need to cover their shameful parts, then from the moment we feel this very thing, we profess the knowledge of good and evil. From these years, moreover, the sex is both more suffused and more clothed, and concupiscence uses the eyes as its arbiters and communicates its pleasure, and understands what things are, and girds its boundaries, after the likeness of the fig-leaf contagion, with itching, and leads man out of the paradise of integrity — thereafter scabbed even into the other faults, and into transgressions not natural, since now they are not from the institution of nature, but from vice. For the rest, properly natural concupiscence is one only, of foods alone, which God both conferred at the first origin: ‘Of every tree,’ He says, ‘you shall eat’; and measured out anew to the second generation after the flood: ‘Behold, I have given you all things for food, as the green herb of the grass’ — looking not so much to the soul as to the flesh, even though for the soul's sake. For the occasion of the arguer is to be taken away, who, because the soul seems to desire foods, from this too wishes it understood mortal, in that it is sustained by foods, and, in short, grows faint when they are taken away, and lastly perishes when they are withdrawn. But it is not only to be set forth who it is that desires them, but also for whom; and if for itself, then also why, and when, and how far; and that nature desires one thing, necessity another, the property of a thing one thing, the cause another. The soul therefore will desire foods — for itself indeed by reason of necessity, but for the flesh by the nature of property. For surely the flesh is the house of the soul, and the soul the inhabitant of the flesh. The inhabitant, then, will desire, by reason and by necessity of this name, things to profit the house through the whole time of its tenancy — not that it itself is to be underpinned, nor itself to be plastered, nor itself to be shored up, but only to be held together, since it cannot otherwise be held together than by a house upheld. Otherwise it will be permitted to the soul, when the house has fallen down through the failure of its proper supports, to depart unharmed, having its own firm foundations and the nourishments of its own condition — immortality, rationality, sensibility, intellectuality, freedom of will.

[144036] 39. All which things conferred upon the soul at its birth, the same one who envied at the first origin now too overshadows and depraves, so that they may not either be voluntarily provided for or administered as they ought. For to which of men will the evil spirit not cleave, lying in wait for souls from the very gate of birth, since he is invited even by all that superstition of childbirth? So all are born under the midwifery of idolatry, while the very wombs, still bound about with fillets prepared before the idols, profess their offspring to be candidates of the demons; while in childbirth the wail is raised to Lucina and Diana; while throughout the whole hebdomad a table is set out for Juno; while on the last day the Fates of Writing are summoned; while even the first setting of the infant upon the ground is sacred to the goddess Statina. Who, thereafter, does not either vow the whole head of his son to guilt, or take off some lock, or shave it wholly with the razor, or bind it with a sacrifice, or seal it with a sacred rite — for a national, an ancestral, a public or a private devotion? So, then, the demonic spirit found Socrates too while still a boy. So to all men genii are assigned, which is a name of demons. So scarcely any birth is clean — at least among the heathen. Hence the apostle too says that holy children are procreated from a sanctified parent of either sex, as much from the prerogative of the seed as from the discipline of the institution. ‘Otherwise,’ he says, ‘they would be born unclean’ — wishing the children of the faithful to be understood as designated nevertheless for sanctity, and through this for salvation too, that by the pledge of this hope he might patronize the marriages which he had judged worthy of being retained. Otherwise he remembered the Lord's definition: ‘Unless one is born of water and the Spirit, he shall not enter into the kingdom of God’ — that is, he shall not be holy.

[145984] 40. Thus every soul, up to that point, is reckoned in Adam until it is recounted in Christ; so long unclean as it is not recounted; but a sinner, because unclean, taking back its own ignominy onto the flesh too out of fellowship. For although the flesh is a sinner, according to which we are forbidden to walk, whose works of concupiscence against the spirit are condemned, and on whose account men are noted as carnal — yet the flesh is not infamous in its own name. For it neither of itself savours anything nor perceives, so as to persuade or command a fault. Why should it? being a ministry — and a ministry not such as a slave or a lesser friend, who are animate and men, but such as a cup, or some other thing of the kind: a body, not a soul. For the cup too is the ministry of the thirsty; yet unless he who thirsts has applied the cup to himself, the cup will minister nothing. So entirely is there no property of man in the earthy thing; nor is the flesh man, as though another power of the soul and another person, but it is a thing plainly of another substance and another condition, yet assigned to the soul as its furniture, as an instrument in the offices of life. The flesh, therefore, is upbraided in the Scriptures, because without the flesh the soul does nothing in the working of lust, gluttony, drunkenness, cruelty, idolatry, and the other carnal things — not the senses, but the effects. In short, the senses of faults are wont to be imputed to the soul even without the effects: ‘He who has looked to lust has already committed adultery in his heart.’ For the rest, what does the flesh do without the soul in the working of probity, justice, endurance, chastity? Moreover, what kind of thing is it that you should subscribe crimes to that to which you ascribe no proper good documents? But that through which the offence is committed is convened, that the soul, from which the offence proceeds, may be burdened — even in the accusation of the ministry. The graver odium is against the governor when his offices are assailed. He is the more punished who commands, when not even he who obeys is excused.

[148110] 41. The evil of the soul, then, besides that which is built upon it from the access of the evil spirit, comes first from the fault of origin, being in a manner natural. For, as we said, the corruption of nature is another nature, having its own god and father, namely the very author of corruption — yet so that there is also in the soul that good which is principal, that divine and genuine and properly natural good. For that which is from God is not so much extinguished as overshadowed. For it can be overshadowed, because it is not God; it cannot be extinguished, because it is from God. And so, just as light hindered by some obstacle remains, but does not appear, if the density of the obstacle has been so great — so too the good in the soul, oppressed by the evil, according to its quality either is wholly idle, its light being hidden, or, where it is given, shines out, its liberty being found. So there are some men most evil and some best, and yet all souls are nonetheless of one kind. So even in the worst there is something of good, and in the best somewhat of the worst. For God alone is without sin, and the only man without sin is Christ, since Christ is also God. So too the divinity of the soul breaks forth into presages out of its prior good, and the consciousness of God comes forth into testimony: ‘God is good,’ and ‘God sees,’ and ‘I commend it to God.’ For this reason no soul is without crime, because none is without the seed of good. Accordingly, when it comes to the faith, reformed by the second nativity out of water and supernal power, the curtain of its former corruption drawn aside, it beholds its whole light. It is taken up too by the Holy Spirit, as in its former nativity by the profane spirit. The flesh follows the soul now wedded to the spirit, as a dowered chattel, and now no longer the handmaid of the soul, but of the spirit. O blessed wedlock, if it admit no adultery!

[150030] 42. It remains now to treat of death, that the matter may there be set down where the soul itself comes to its consummation — although Epicurus, by a sufficiently vulgar opinion, has denied that death pertains to us. ‘For that which is dissolved,’ he says, ‘lacks sense, and what lacks sense is nothing to us.’ But it is not death itself that is dissolved and lacks sense, but the man who suffers it. Yet he assigned the suffering to that whose is the action. But if it belongs to man to suffer the death that dissolves the body and destroys sense, how absurd it is that so great a force should be said not to pertain to man! Much more forced is Seneca, who says, ‘After death all things are finished, even death itself.’ If this is so, then death too will pertain to itself, if it too is finished — and the more to man, in whom, among all things, by being finished, it too is finished. ‘Death is nothing to us’ — then life too is nothing to us. For if that by which we are dissolved is beyond us, then that too by which we are compacted is outside us. If the removal of sense is nothing to us, neither is the acquisition of sense anything to us. But let him who would do away with the soul do away with death too. By us, as concerning the posthumous life and the further province of the soul, so too death shall be treated of, to which we ourselves pertain, even if it does not pertain to us. In short, not even its mirror, sleep, is foreign matter.

[151482] 43. Of sleep let us dispute first, and afterwards how the soul runs its course after death. Sleep is by no means beyond nature, as it pleases certain philosophers, since they reckon it from those two causes which are held to be outside nature. The Stoics affirm sleep to be a relaxation of the sensual vigour; the Epicureans, a diminution of the animal spirit; Anaxagoras, with Xenophanes, a weariness; Empedocles and Parmenides, a cooling; Strato, a segregation of the implanted spirit; Democritus, a want of spirit; Aristotle, a withering of the heat about the heart. I presume I have never so slept as to recognize any of these. For neither is it to be believed that sleep is weariness, but rather the contrary of weariness, which it takes away, since a man is by sleep more restored than wearied. Moreover, sleep is not always conceived out of weariness, and yet, when it is from weariness, the weariness is then no longer there. But neither will I admit a cooling or any withering of heat, since bodies grow so warm in sleep that the distribution of foods would not easily proceed through sleep — the heat being a quickener, the chill a delayer — if we were cooled by sleep. There is more: that the sweat too is the index of a boiling digestion. In short, we are said to ‘cook’ our food, which is the operation of heat, not of cold. Likewise the immortality of the soul does not allow us to believe in a diminution of the animal spirit, or a want of spirit, or a segregation of the implanted spirit. The soul perishes if it is lessened. It remains, perhaps, that with the Stoics we should determine sleep to be a relaxation of the sensual vigour, since it procures the rest of the body alone, not also of the soul. For the soul, as ever mobile and ever exercised, never sinks into rest, which is foreign to the state of immortality; for nothing immortal admits an end of its work, but sleep is an end of work. In short, to the body, to which mortality belongs, to it alone does rest flatter with an end of its work. Whoever, then, will doubt of the naturalness of sleep has indeed the dialecticians bringing the whole distinction of natural and beyond-natural into doubt, so that he may know that even what he has thought to be apart from nature can be claimed for the nature from which it has been so allotted that it seems to be held apart from her — and that surely either all things are by nature, or there is no nature at all. But among us that may be heard which the contemplation of God suggests, the author of all the things in question. For we believe that, if there is anything by nature, it is some rational work of God. Moreover, reason precedes sleep — sleep so apt, so useful, so necessary, that without it no soul would suffice — the restorer of bodies, the renewer of strength, the prover of health, the pacifier of toils, the physician of labours; to whose lawful enjoyment day gives way, night makes a law, taking away even the colour of things. But if sleep is vital, salutary, helpful, nothing of this kind is not rational, nothing not natural. So too the physicians relegate everything contrary to the vital, salutary, helpful, beyond the natural hinges. For even the maladies that rival sleep — the phrenetic and the cardiac — by judging them beyond nature, they have pre-judged natural sleep to be natural; even in lethargy, by noting it as not natural, they answer with a natural testimony, since sleep, in its own temperament, is natural. For all nature is cut off either by defrauding or by excess; it is preserved by the propriety of measure. Thus that will be natural in state which can be made not natural by deficiency or excess. What, if I should also except eating and drinking from the lots of nature? For in these too there is very much preparation of sleep. Certainly with these man was imbued from the first origin of his nature. If you learn it from God: that fount of the race, Adam, drank in slumber before he thirsted for rest, slept before he laboured, nay, before he even ate, nay, before he even spoke — that men may see that natural sleep, the index, is more principal than all natural things. Thence we are led to recognize that even then he was reviewing an image of death. For if Adam gave a figure of Christ, the sleep of Adam was the death of Christ, who was to sleep into death, so that out of the wound likewise of His side might be figured the true mother of the living, the Church. Therefore sleep too is so salutary, so rational, that it is fashioned even into a pattern of the now public and common death. For God willed — and elsewhere too has wrought nothing in His dispensation without exemplars, by the Platonic paradigm — to deal with us daily, more fully, the lines especially of man's beginning and end, stretching out His hand to faith, to be the more easily aided by images and parables, as of words, so of things too. He sets before you, then, a body struck down by the friendly force of slumber, prostrate by the soft necessity of rest, motionless in its posture, such as it lay before life, and such as it will lie after life, as an attestation of the modeling and of burial, awaiting the soul as not yet conferred, and as already snatched away. But it too so suffers as to seem to act elsewhere, learning, by the dissimulation of its presence, its future absence: about Hermotimus we shall know. And yet meanwhile it dreams. Whence then come dreams? It neither rests nor grows wholly idle, nor consigns the nature of its immortality to the holidays of slumber. It proves itself ever mobile; it journeys by land, by sea; it does business, is set in motion, labours, plays, grieves, rejoices, pursues things lawful and unlawful; it shows that it can do very much even without the body; that it is furnished too with its own members; but that nonetheless it has need again of the body to be set in motion. So, when the body has awakened, restored to its offices, it affirms to you the resurrection of the dead. This will be both the natural reason of sleep and the rational nature of it. Even by the image of death you are initiated into faith, you meditate hope, you learn to die and to live, you learn to be watchful while you sleep.

[157689] 44. As for Hermotimus, his soul, as they say, was wanting in sleep, as though, by the occasion of the man being at leisure, it set out from the body. His wife disclosed this. His enemies, finding him asleep, burned him for dead. His soul, returning too late, imputed to itself, I believe, the homicide. The citizens of Clazomenae console Hermotimus with a temple. The woman does not approach it, on account of the disgrace of a wife. To what purpose this tale? That, since it is easy for the common crowd to suppose sleep to be a secession of the soul, credulity might not be suborned by this argument of Hermotimus too. It had been a case of somewhat heavier slumber, as is the presumption about the nightmare-spirit, or about that lapse of health which Soranus opposes, excluding the nightmare, or some such defect as drove even Epimenides into a fable, drowsy for nearly fifty years. But Suetonius too says that Nero, and Theopompus that Thrasymedes, never dreamed, save that Nero scarcely did, at his last end, after his terrors. What, if Hermotimus too was such that the leisure of a soul doing nothing in sleep was believed a divorce? You would conjecture anything rather than this licence of a soul running away without death, and indeed continually by its very form. For if such a thing were said to happen once, like an eclipse of the sun or moon, so too of the soul, I might fairly be persuaded that it was done divinely; for it is fitting that a man be either admonished or terrified by God, as by a swift lightning-flash, by the stroke of a momentary death — if it were not rather more in keeping to believe it a dream, which ought rather to befall one waking; if it ought not rather be believed a dream.

[159407] 45. Here we are bound to bring forth a Christian opinion concerning dreams too, as concerning the accidents of sleep, but not light tossings of the soul, which we have declared busy and ever exercised out of the perpetuity of its motion, which is the very reason of its divinity and immortality. Therefore, when rest comes to bodies, whose proper solace it is, the soul, idle for any solace foreign to it, does not rest; and if it lacks the work of the corporeal members, it uses its own. Conceive a gladiator without arms, or a charioteer without his car, miming all the bearing and effort of his art: there is fighting, there is striving, but the tossing is empty. Nonetheless those things seem to be done which yet are not seen to be done; for they are done in act, but not done in effect. This force we call ecstasy, an excess of sense, and the likeness of madness. So too in the first origin sleep was dedicated together with ecstasy: ‘And God sent an ecstasy upon Adam, and he slept.’ For sleep came to the body for rest; ecstasy came upon the soul against rest; and thence already a form, mixing sleep with ecstasy, and a nature out of the form. In short, we are both delighted and saddened and terrified in dreams — how feelingly and anxiously and with what suffering — when in no waking matter we should be so moved, namely by empty images; whereas, if we dreamed in possession of ourselves, we should not. In short, good deeds too are gratuitous in dreams, and faults secure; for no more shall we be condemned for a vision of stuprum than crowned for one of martyrdom. ‘And how,’ you say, ‘is the soul mindful of its dreams, which is not permitted to be in possession of itself?’ This will be the property of this madness, that it does not come from the corruption of good health, but from the reason of nature; for it does not put the mind to flight, but draws it aside. It is one thing to shake, another to move; one thing to overturn, another to set in motion. Therefore, that the memory holds out, is the soundness of the mind; that the soundness of the mind, with the memory preserved, is stupefied, is a kind of madness. Therefore we are not said to rave, but to dream; therefore we are also prudent, if ever we are. For our wisdom, though it be overshadowed, is yet not extinguished — save that this too may seem to be idle then, while ecstasy works even this of its own property, that thus it brings before us the images of wisdom, just as also of error.

[161881] 46. Behold, again we are pressed even by the retreatment of these very dreams by which the soul is tossed, to express ourselves. And when shall we come to death? Here too I would say, When God shall have granted; there are no long delays of that which is to come. Epicurus judged dreams wholly vain, freeing the divinity from business, and dissolving the order of things, and scattering all in passivity, as exposed to chance and fortuitous. But if it is so, then there will be also some outcome of truth, since it does not admit that this alone should be exempted from the chance owed to all. Homer divided two gates for dreams, the horn one of truth, the ivory one of falsehood. For one looks through horn, but ivory is opaque. Aristotle, ascribing to dreams a greater part of falsehood, yet acknowledges the true too. The Telmessians void no dreams, but accuse the weakness of the conjecture. But who is so foreign to humanity as not to have felt at some time some faithful vision? Touching upon a few of the more notable ones, I shall impose shame upon Epicurus. Herodotus relates that Astyages, king of the Medes, saw in a dream that the bladder of his daughter Mandane, still a virgin, flowed forth into a deluge of Asia; likewise, a year after her marriage, that out of the same parts a vine arose and overshadowed all Asia. This too Charon of Lampsacus, earlier than Herodotus, hands down. Those who interpreted her son for so great a work did not deceive themselves; since Cyrus both submerged and pressed down Asia. Philip of Macedon, not yet a father, had seen that he had sealed his wife Olympias' nature with a ring; the device was a lion. He had believed her generation closed (because, I suppose, the lion is a father only once); Aristodemus or Aristophon, conjecturing rather that nothing empty is sealed, that a son was portended, and indeed one of the greatest impetus. Those who know Alexander recognize the lion of the ring. Ephorus writes it. But Dionysius' tyranny over Sicily a certain woman of Himera dreamed too. Heraclides has reported it. And to Seleucus the kingdom of Asia, his mother Laodice foresaw, before she had borne him. Euphorion published it. Mithridates too, from a dream, I learn from Strabo, took possession of Pontus; and that Baralis the Illyrian ruled from the Molossians as far as Macedonia, from a dream, I learn from Callisthenes. The Romans too have known dreams of this kind of truth. The reformer of the empire, still a little boy and private in station, and only Julius Octavius, and unknown to himself, Marcus Tullius knew from a dream as both Augustus and the burier of the civil whirlwinds. It is recorded in the commentaries of Vitellius. Nor will this be the only species, the herald of the highest powers, but also of perils and of destructions: as when Caesar, otherwise ill, in the battle of his enemies Brutus and Cassius at Philippi, yet thinking he would bring back a greater danger from the foe, escaped, by a vision shown to Artorius, leaving the tent; as when his daughter foresaw a cross for Polycrates of Samos, from the anointing of the sun and the washing of Jupiter. Honours too and talents are revealed through sleep, remedies too are furnished, thefts too are betrayed, treasures too are conferred. Cicero's dignity, while he was still a little one, his nurse had already beheld. The swan from the bosom of Socrates, soothing men, is the disciple Plato. Leonymus the boxer is healed by Achilles in dreams. When the people of Athens had lost a golden crown from the citadel, the tragedian Sophocles by dreaming found it again. The tragic actor Neoptolemus, near Rhoeteum the burial-place of Troy, warned in dreams by Ajax himself, frees his tomb from ruin, and, when he puts down the rubbish of the stones, returns thence rich with gold. How many commentators and affirmers there are on this matter! Artemon, Antiphon, Strato, Philochorus, Epicharmus, Serapion, Cratippus and Dionysius the Rhodian, Hermippus, the whole literature of the age. The only one I shall perhaps laugh at is he who thought to persuade us that Saturn dreamed before all others; unless Aristotle too lived before all others, forgive me for laughing. For the rest, Epicharmus, with Philochorus the Athenian, even raised dreams to the highest summit among the kinds of divination. For the world too is crowded with oracles of this kind — as of Amphiaraus at Oropus, of Amphilochus at Mallus, of Sarpedon in the Troad, of Trophonius in Boeotia, of Mopsus in Cilicia, of Hermione in Macedonia, of Pasiphae in Laconia. The rest, with their origins and rites and reporters, together with the whole history of dreams thereafter, Hermippus of Berytus will most abundantly exhibit in five volumes. But the Stoics too prefer to hold that God, most provident of human instruction, among other helps of the divining arts and disciplines, implanted dreams too in us, the peculiar solace of a natural oracle. So much as to the faith of dreams, which is to be sealed by us too, but interpreted otherwise. For as to the other oracles too, where no one sleeps, what else shall we pronounce than that their account is demonic — of those spirits which dwelt even then in the very men, or affected their memories, for every scene of their malice — feigning divinity in this kind too, and by the same industry deceiving even through benefits of medicines and admonitions and predictions, that they may the more hurt by helping, while through the things by which they help they lead men away from the inquiry into the true divinity by the insinuation of the false? And surely this power is not shut up, nor circumscribed by the bounds of shrines; it is wandering and flying about and meanwhile free. So that no one will doubt that houses too lie open to demons, and that they beset men with images, not only in shrines but in bedchambers.

[167744] 47. For we define that dreams are for the most part struck in upon us by demons — even though sometimes true and gracious, but, by that industry of which we have spoken, affecting and ensnaring — how much more often vain and frustrating and turbid and mocking and unclean! Nor is it any wonder if the images are theirs whose the realities too are. But from God — who has promised, namely, the grace of the Holy Spirit upon all flesh, and that as His servants and handmaids should prophesy, so should they dream — those will be reckoned which are compared to that very grace: if any be honourable, holy, prophetic, revelatory, edifying, vocatory; whose liberality is wont to distil even upon the profane, since God too levels His rains and His suns equally upon the just and the unjust — seeing that Nebuchadnezzar too dreamed by divine appointment, and nearly the greater number of men learn God out of visions. As, therefore, there is the deigning of God even toward the heathen, so is there the temptation of the evil one toward the saints, from whom he does not desist even by day, so as to creep upon them sleeping as he can, if upon them waking he cannot. The third species will be dreams which the soul seems to bring upon itself out of the intentness of its surrounding circumstances. But since it is not in our choice to dream (for Epicharmus too thinks thus), how will the soul itself be to itself the cause of any vision? Is then this species to be left to the natural form, which preserves to the soul, even in ecstasy, the experiencing of its own things? But those which seem to befall neither from God nor from a demon nor from the soul — beyond opinion and beyond interpretation and beyond the power of narration — these will be set apart for ecstasy properly and its own reason.

[169539] 48. They affirm that more certain and more refined things are dreamed in the last watches of the night, as if then the vigour of souls were emerging, the slumber being now drawn forth. As to the seasons of the year, that the spring is the more quiet, because summer dissolves the souls, and winter in some manner hardens them, and autumn, otherwise a tempter of healths, dilutes them with the most vinous juices of fruits. Likewise, as to the very posture of rest, that if one lie neither supine nor on the right side, nor with the inward parts thrown back, as if the cells were overflowed, the station of the senses may float, or the seat of the mind be choked by a compressed quinsy of the liver. But I should think these things ingeniously estimated rather than firmly proved (although it is Plato who estimated them); and perhaps they proceed by chance. Otherwise dreams will be in our choice, if they can be directed. For as to the fact that now presumption, now superstition, prescribes a discipline for dreams by the distinguishing or denying of foods, it is to be examined. Superstition, as when at the oracles a fast is enjoined upon those about to sleep there, that it may induce a chastity; presumption, as when the Pythagoreans, on this account too, reject the bean, a burdensome and flatulent food. But on the other hand, that fraternity of three with Daniel, content with pulse alone, lest they should be defiled by the royal dishes, redeemed from God, besides the rest of their wisdom, especially the grace of dreams, both of obtaining and of expounding them. As for fasts, I know not whether I alone, for the most part, so dream that I do not perceive that I have dreamed. ‘Then is sobriety nothing,’ you say, ‘to this part?’ Nay, the more to this in proportion as it is to all; if to superstition, much more to religion. For so even the demons demand it of their dreamers, namely for the pandering of divinity, since they know the friend of God — since Daniel too, again, by a station of three weeks grew dry in his diet, but in order to allure God by the offices of humiliation, not in order to build up sense and wisdom for the soul about to dream, as though it would not act in ecstasy. So sobriety will profit not for removing ecstasy, but for commending the very ecstasy, that it may come about in God.

[171865] 49. Those who think infants do not dream, since all the powers of the soul are discharged according to the measure of age in life, let them observe their startings and noddings and smilings in sleep, that from the fact they may grasp that the motions of the dreaming soul easily break out to the surface through the tenderness of the flesh. But also, that the Libyan nation of the Atlantes is said to pass the night in a blind sleep, is assuredly charged to the nature of the soul. For either fame lied to Herodotus, sometimes slanderous against barbarians, or a great force of demons of this kind dominates in that climate. For if Aristotle too notes a certain hero of Sardinia who deprives the sleepers in his fane of their visions, this too will be among the wantonness of demons, as much to take away dreams as to bring them in, so that the mark of Nero too, a late dreamer, and of Thrasymedes proceeded thence. But we deduce dreams from God too. Why then would not the Atlantes dream even from God — or because no nation is now a stranger to God, the Gospel coruscating into all the earth and unto the bounds of the world? Did then either fame lie to Aristotle, or is there still the reckoning of demons — provided that no nature of soul be believed exempt from dreams?

[173141] 50. Enough concerning the mirror of death, that is, sleep; and then concerning the businesses of sleep, that is, dreams. Now to the origin of this digression, that is, to the order of death — since not even this is without questions, although it is the end of all questions. By the public verdict of the whole human race, we pronounce death the debt of nature. This the voice of God stipulated, this everything that is born has promised; that even from this point Epicurus' stupor may not be poured over us, denying that this debt pertains to us, but rather the madness of the heretic Menander the Samaritan may be spat upon, who says that death not only does not pertain to his followers, but does not even reach them. To wit, he is sent as a legate from a supernal and hidden power, that those who shall have put on his baptism may become immortal and incorruptible and at once partakers of the resurrection. We read indeed of very many wonderful kinds of waters: as the wine-bearing vein of the Lyncestae renders men drunken; as the demonic spring of Colophon makes them frantic; as the poisoned water of Nonacris in Arcadia befell Alexander. There was too in Judaea a healing lake before Christ. The poet plainly handed down the Stygian marsh as washing away death. But Thetis too bewailed her son. And although Menander too plunges men into the Styx, one will have to die nonetheless, that one may come to the Styx; for it is said to be among the dead. What and where is that happiness of waters which neither John the Baptist administered nor Christ Himself showed to His disciples? What is this bath of Menander? A comic one, I believe. But why so infrequent, so hidden, where the fewest wash? For I shall make so great a rarity suspect of a most secure and safe sacrament — at which there is not even a law to die for God Himself, when, on the contrary, all nations now go up into the mountain of the Lord and into the house of the God of Jacob, who demands death even through martyrdom, which He exacted even of His own Christ. Nor will anyone grant so much to magic that it should exempt from death, or re-dig life like a vine renewed in age. For this was not permitted even to Medea upon a man, though it was permitted upon a ram. Enoch was translated, and Elias, nor was their delay found — postponed, namely. For the rest, being to die, they are reserved, that they may extinguish the antichrist with their blood. John too died, of whom the hope had been in vain that he would remain until the coming of the Lord. For heresies generally spring up after our examples, taking thence the supports from which they fight. Lastly, this is the short way: Where are those whom Menander himself drenched, whom he plunged into his Styx? Let the apostles come, abiding for ever, and stand by. Let my Thomas see them, hear, handle — and he believed.

[175993] 51. But the work of death is in the midst — the separation of body and soul. But some, to defend the immortality of the soul, which indeed, not taught by God, they uphold feebly, so beg their argumentations that they would have it believed that even after death certain souls cleave to bodies. For to this end Plato too, although he dispatches what souls he will to heaven straightway, yet in the Republic opposes the corpse of a certain unburied man preserved a long time without any decay — on account, namely, of the indivisibility of the soul. To this end too Democritus notes the growths of nails and hair in the graves for some space of time. Yet the quality of the air too could have been a protection to that body. For what, if the air were drier and the soil saltier? what, if the very substance of the body were more juiceless? what, if the very kind of death had already discharged the corrupting materials beforehand? But the nails, since they are the beginnings of the sinews, are with reason seen to be pushed out further, the sinews being stretched out by relaxation, and the flesh failing daily; the hairs too have their nourishment from the brain, which a hidden protection grants to last for a while. In short, even in the living, according to the richness of the brain, the head of hair either flows or deserts. You have the physicians. But neither is it the case that a little of the soul subsides in the body, destined to depart at some time itself too, when time shall have abolished the whole scene of the body. For this too is in the opinion of certain men. Therefore they say that the dead are not to be buried by fire, sparing the superfluous part of the soul. But there is another reason for this piety, not flattering the relics of the soul, but abhorring cruelty even in the name of the body, which too man assuredly does not deserve to have spent in a penal end. For the rest, the soul, being indivisible, as immortal, demands that even death be believed indivisible — befalling indivisibly, not as to an immortal, but as to an indivisible soul. But death too will be divided, if the soul too is, by the superfluous part, namely, of the soul that is some time to die. So a portion of death will remain with a portion of the soul. Nor am I ignorant that there is some trace of this opinion. From my own experience I have learned it. I know a certain woman, a native daughter of the Church, of unimpaired form and age, deceased after a single and brief marriage; who, when she had slept in peace, and while the burial was still delayed, was meanwhile being composed by the prayer of a presbyter — at the first breath of the prayer she removed her hands from her sides into the posture of a suppliant, and, the peace being again said, restored them to their station. There is too that report among our own people, that a body, set side by side with another in the cemetery, made room by withdrawal for the new-comer. And if among the heathen too any such thing is handed down, everywhere God sets forth signs of His power, for solace to His own, for testimony to strangers. For I would rather believe a thing done in testimony from God than from any relics of the soul; which, if they were there, would have moved the other members too; and if the hands only, yet not for the cause of prayer. That body too would not only have yielded to a brother, but otherwise too, by a change of posture, would have eased itself. Certainly, whencesoever these things are, they are rather to be reckoned signs and portents; they cannot establish a natural law. Death, if it is not at once wholly death, is not death. If anything of the soul remain, it is life. Death will no more be mingled with life than night with day.

[179729] 52. This work of death, then — the separation of flesh and soul — human feeling has distinguished in two ways, setting aside the question of fates and fortuitous things: into an ordinary and an extraordinary form; the ordinary indeed reckoning to nature, of any quiet death, but judging the extraordinary contrary to nature, of any violent end. But we, who know the first origins of man, boldly determine that death did not follow man from nature, but from fault, which is not itself even natural — though the name of nature is easily usurped for those things which seem to have cleaved from birth out of accident. For if man had been directly instituted unto death, then at last death would be ascribed to nature. But the law itself proves that he was not instituted unto death, suspending it by a conditional threat, and assigning the event of death to the choice of man. In short, if he had not sinned, he would by no means have died. So that will not be nature which befalls from the power of an option through the will, not from the authority of the institution through necessity. Accordingly, even though the exits of death are various, as the condition of causes is manifold, we call none so gentle that it is not wrought by force. That very operative reason of death, though simple, is a force. For what? since it tears asunder and divides so great a fellowship of soul and flesh, so great a coalescence of the sister substances from conception. For even though a man should breathe out his spirit for joy, as Chilon the Spartan, while embracing his son the victor at Olympia; even though for glory, as Clidemus the Athenian, while crowned with gold for the excellence of his historical style; even though through a dream, as Plato; even though through laughter, as Publius Crassus — much more violent is the death which makes its way through good things, which expels the soul through favourable circumstances, which brings death then when it is more pleasant to live, in exultation, in honour, in repose, in pleasure. There is force in the case of ships, when, far from the rocks of Caphareus, beaten by no whirlwinds, shaken by no great waves, with a flattering breeze, with a gliding course, with a rejoicing crew, they sink down suddenly by an inward shock with all their security. Not otherwise are the shipwrecks of life, even the outcome of a tranquil death. It makes no difference whether the ship of the body departs entire or shattered, so long as the soul's voyage is overthrown.

[182230] 53. But whither then will the soul, naked and ejected, turn aside? Without doubt we shall follow it out in order. Yet first I shall fill up what belongs to this place, lest, because we have spoken of the various exits of death, anyone should expect from us the reasons of each — to be left rather to the physicians, the proper arbiters of all lethal things or causes, and of the very corporeal conditions. Plainly, to protect here too the immortality of the soul, in mentioning death I shall interpose somewhat concerning that kind of exit in which the soul slips away little by little and bit by bit; for, sustaining the habit of failing, it is led off while it seems to be consumed, and offers a conjecture of perishing out of the temper of its excess. But the whole account is in the body and out of the body. For whatever that exit of death be, without doubt it is the overthrow either of the materials or of the regions or of the vital ways: of the materials, as of the bile, as of the blood; of the regions, as of the heart, as of the liver; of the ways, as of the veins, as of the arteries. While, then, these are laid waste in the body, each from its own cause of injury, even to the last overthrow and rescission of the vital things — that is, of the natural boundaries, seats, offices — necessarily the soul too, its instruments and dwellings and spaces gradually slipping away, is itself too gradually compelled to migrate, and is led off into the appearance of diminution, in no other manner than as the charioteer too is presumed to have failed when the exhaustion of his horses has denied their strength — as to the disposition of the man left destitute, not as to the truth of suffering. Just so the charioteer of the body, the animal spirit, fails in the name of the failing vehicle, not in his own — withdrawing from work, not from vigour; languishing in act, not in state; boiling away his constancy, not his substance, because he ceases to appear, not because he ceases to be. So too every swift death, as the harvest of necks, opening at once and so great a gate, as the force of a ruin dashing out all the vital things at once, as apoplexy, an inner ruin — affords no delay to the soul, nor racks its departure into moments. But where the death is long, as the soul is deserted, so it deserts; yet it is not cut down in this fashion, but drawn out; and while it is drawn out, it makes its last part seem its whole. Not every part, however, is at once severed too, because it is the last, nor, because it is small, is it at once itself too about to perish. Its own end follows in the series, and the middle part is drawn to the summit, and the remnants, cohering with the whole, are awaited by it, not deserted. And so I would dare to say that the last of the whole is the whole, since, though it be less and posterior, it is the soul's own. Hence, in short, it often happens that the soul, in the very divorce, is more powerfully set in motion, with more anxious gaze, with extraordinary loquacity — since, established now from a greater eminence in liberty, through the superfluous part that still lingers in the body, it announces what it sees, what it hears, what it begins to know. For if this body is, by the Platonic verdict, a prison, but by the apostolic the temple of God, when one is in Christ, yet meanwhile it blocks up the soul within its enclosure, and overshadows it, and befouls it by the coalescence of the flesh — whence to it, as through a horn window, the light of things is the more obscured. Without doubt, when by the force of death it is squeezed out of the coalescence of the flesh, and by the very squeezing is strained clear, certainly it bursts out of the curtain of the body into the open, to its own pure and clear and proper light; at once it recognizes itself in the freeing of its substance, and recovers its divinity by its very liberty, as one emerging from sleep, from images to truths. Then too it announces what it sees, then it exults or trembles, according as it perceives the equipment of its lodging — from the very face at once of the angel, the summoner of souls, the Mercury of the poets.

[186386] 54. Whither, then, the soul is conducted, we now render. Nearly all the philosophers who, in whatever fashion they will, yet vindicate the immortality of the soul — as Pythagoras, as Empedocles, as Plato — and those who grant it some time from its departure until the conflagration of the universe, as the Stoics, place their own souls alone — that is, those of the wise — in the supernal mansions. Plato indeed does not rashly grant this to the souls of philosophers, but to those of such as have, namely, adorned philosophy with the love of boys. So great a privilege, even among philosophers, has impurity. And so, with him, the wise souls are exalted into the ether; with Arius, into the air; with the Stoics, beneath the moon. At whom indeed I wonder that they prostrate the unwise souls about the earth, since they affirm that these are taught by the wise far above them. Where will be the region of the school, in so great a distance of lodgings? By what reason will the disciple-souls assemble to the mistress-souls, absent from each other by so great an interval? And what use and fruit of this posthumous instruction to them, who are at the very point of perishing in the conflagration? The rest of the souls they cast down to the lower regions. These Plato describes, in the Phaedo, as a kind of lap of the earth, whither all the dregs of worldly defilements, flowing together and there settling, breathe out, and, as out of the mire of their own uncleannesses, pack together there a grosser draught and a separate air.

[187918] 55. But to us the lower regions are believed to be not a bare hollow, nor some sewer of the world open to the sky, but a vast space in the pit of the earth, and a depth hidden away in its very bowels — since we read that Christ accomplished a three days' death in the heart of the earth, that is, in the innermost and inner recess, covered within the earth itself and shut up within it, and built over by yet lower abysses. But if Christ, God though He be, because man too, died according to the Scriptures and was buried according to the same, satisfied this law also, having undergone in the lower regions the form of human death, nor ascended into the heights of the heavens before He descended into the lower parts of the earth, that there He might make the patriarchs and prophets partakers of Himself — then you have ground both to believe that the region of the lower world is subterranean, and to thrust away with your elbow those who too proudly think the souls of the faithful unworthy of the lower regions: servants above their Lord, and disciples above their Master, scorning, it may be, to receive in the bosom of Abraham the solace of awaiting the resurrection. ‘But for this,’ they say, ‘Christ went to the lower regions, that we should not go.’ For the rest, what difference is there between heathen and Christians, if the prison be the same for the dead? How then will the soul breathe up to heaven, while Christ still sits there at the right hand of the Father, the trumpet of the archangel not yet heard at God's command, those whom the Lord's coming shall find in the world not yet caught up to meet Him in the air, with those who, dead in Christ, shall rise first? To no one is heaven open, while earth is still safe, not to say closed. For with the passing of the world the kingdoms of the heavens will be unbarred. But our slumber, you say, is in the ether with the boy-lovers of Plato, or in the air with Arius, or about the moon with the Endymions of the Stoics. Nay, you say, in paradise, whither even then both patriarchs and prophets, the appendages of the Lord's resurrection, migrated from the lower regions. And how is it that the region of paradise, revealed to John in the Spirit, which lies beneath the altar, showed no other souls with it save those of the martyrs? How is it that Perpetua, that most valiant martyr, on the day of her passion, in a revelation of paradise, saw there only her fellow-martyrs — unless because to none does the sword, the doorkeeper of paradise, give way, save those who have died in Christ, not in Adam? A new death for God, and an extraordinary one for Christ, is received into another and a private lodging. Recognize, then, the difference between the heathen and the faithful in death, if you die for God, as the Paraclete admonishes, not in soft fevers and in little beds, but in martyrdoms; if you take up your cross and follow the Lord, as He Himself commanded. The whole key of paradise is your blood. You have too, from us, a little book concerning paradise, in which we have established that every soul is sequestered in the lower regions until the day of the Lord.

[191060] 56. A debate presents itself: whether this is done at once from the departure, or whether some reason detains certain souls here in the meantime, or whether even those already received may afterwards intervene from the lower regions, by choice or by command. For persuasions for these opinions are not lacking. It has been believed that the unburied are not brought down to the lower regions before they have received their due rites — according to the Homeric Patroclus, demanding his funeral in dreams of Achilles, because he could not otherwise approach the gates of the lower world, the souls of the buried keeping him afar. But we know, besides the poetic rights, the industry too of Homer's piety. For he the more carefully placed the care of burial, in that he charged its delay as an injury to the souls; and at the same time, that no one, by detaining the dead at home, should himself be the more consumed with him by an excess of solace fed by grief. So he framed the complaints of the unburied soul to both ends, that both the urgency of the funeral and the honour of the bodies might be preserved, and the memory of the affections tempered. For the rest, how vain is it that the soul should await the rites of the body, as though it carried off thence anything to the lower regions! Much vainer, if the cessation of burial is to be reckoned an injury to the soul, which it ought rather to embrace as a favour. For surely it would prefer to be drawn off to the lower regions more slowly, which was unwilling to die at all. It will love an impious heir, through whom it is still fed by the light. Or if there is for certain some injury in being thrust beneath the earth more slowly, but the title of the injury is the cessation of burial, it is most unjust that it should be afflicted with an injury which will not be imputed to it — pertaining, namely, to its kindred. They say too that souls forestalled by an untimely death wander here until the remainder of their ages is completed — as long as they would have lived, had they not died out of season. Now either fixed times are appointed to each, and I shall not believe that the appointed times can be snatched away; or, if they are indeed appointed, but are mutilated by the will of God or some power, in vain are they mutilated, if they are still to be fulfilled. Or if they are not appointed, there will be no remainder of times not appointed. Further I shall add. Behold, an infant, say, has died beneath the founts of the breast; suppose now a beardless boy, suppose a youth coming of age, who yet would have lived eighty years — what kind of thing is it that the soul should pass these snatched-away years here after death? For age it cannot take on without a body, since ages are wrought through bodies. But let our own people too reconsider this, that souls are to receive again at the resurrection the same bodies in which they died. The same measures of bodies, then, are to be hoped for, and the same ages, which make the measures of the bodies. By what compact, then, can an infant's soul pass here the snatched-away times, so as to rise again at eighty in a body of one month? Or if it shall here be necessary for those times to be fulfilled which had been destined, will the soul also run through here, equally, the order of life which the times, equally destined here with them, had allotted — so that it should both study, being consigned from infancy to childhood, and serve as a soldier, being roused from adolescence to youth, and hold property, being weighted from youth to old age, and exact usury, and press the field, and sail, and go to law, and marry, and labour, and undergo sicknesses, and whatever sad and glad things awaited it along with the times? But these things, without a body, how shall they be transacted? life without life? But the times will be empty, to be filled up by their mere passage. What then hinders them from being fulfilled in the lower regions, where likewise there is no use of them? So we say that every soul, at whatever age it has deceased, abides in that age until that day on which the perfect thing is promised, tempered to the measure of angelic fullness. Accordingly, those will be held exiles from the lower regions whom they think to have been snatched away by violence, especially through the atrocities of punishments — I mean of the cross and the axe and the sword and the beast; nor, further, are those exits violent which justice decrees, the avenger of violence. ‘And therefore,’ you will say, ‘the wicked souls are exiled to the lower regions.’ Then I compel you to set up one of two things: either good lower regions, or evil. If you choose evil, then even now the worst souls ought to be hurled down thither; if good, why do you judge the souls of the immature and the unwedded, pure and innocent according to the condition of their age, meanwhile unworthy of the lower regions?

[195976] 57. Either it is best to be detained here, according to the ‘aori,’ or worst, according to the ‘biaeothanatoi’ — that I may use the very words by which magic, the authoress of these opinions, sounds: Ostanes and Typhon and Dardanus and Damigeron and Nectabis and Berenice. There is now a public literature which promises that it will summon up, from the dwelling of the lower world, even souls laid to rest at a lawful age, even disjoined by an upright death, even discharged with prompt burial. What then shall we call magic? What nearly all do: a deception. But the reason of the deception escapes the Christians alone, who know the spirits of wickedness — not by an allied consciousness, but by a hostile knowledge — and handle, not by inviting operation but by an expugnatory dominion, that multiform plague of the human mind, the artificer of all error, the waster alike of salvation and of the soul. So too in magic — that is, in the second idolatry, in which the demons feign themselves dead in the same way as in the former they feign themselves gods (why not, since the gods too are dead?) — the ‘aori’ and the ‘biaeothanatoi’ are likewise invoked, under that argument of faith, that it should seem credible that those souls especially do violence and injury whom a savage and untimely end has wrung out by violence and injury, as though by way of requital for the offence. But the demons operate under cover of them, and these above all who were in those very persons when they were alive, and who had thrust them into ends of this kind. For we have suggested too that scarcely any man is free of a demon; and it is known to many that even immature and atrocious deaths are wrought by the operations of the demons, which they ascribe to onsets. This deception too, of the evil spirit lurking under the persons of the dead, we prove, unless I am mistaken, even by facts, since in exorcisms it sometimes affirms itself to be one of the parents of its man, sometimes a gladiator or a beast-fighter, just as elsewhere it affirms itself to be a god — caring for nothing more than this very thing, to exclude what we proclaim, lest we should easily believe that all souls are brought down to the lower regions, that it may disturb our faith both in judgment and in resurrection. And yet that demon, after he has tried to circumvent the bystanders, overcome by the urgency of divine grace, unwillingly confesses what is in the truth. So too in that other species of magic, which is believed to pluck up souls now at rest from the lower regions and exhibit them to view, there is no other more operative force of deception. Plainly, because a phantom is furnished, because a body too is feigned; nor is it any great matter for it to circumvent the outward eyes of one whose inner sharpness of mind it is most easy to blind. Bodies, in short, the dragons of the magical wands seemed to Pharaoh and the Egyptians. But the truth of Moses devoured the lie. Many things assuredly even against the apostles did Simon and Elymas the magi; but the stroke of blindness was not from their juggleries. What new thing is the rivalry of truth by an unclean spirit? Behold, today the heretics of this same Simon are exalted by so great a presumption of their art that they undertake even to move up the souls of the prophets from the lower regions. And I believe they can — by a lie. For not even to the Pythonic spirit then was it less permitted to feign the soul of Samuel, when Saul consulted the dead after God. Far be it otherwise that we should believe the soul of any saint, let alone of a prophet, to be drawn forth by a demon — taught as we are that Satan himself transfigures himself into an angel of light, let alone into a man of light, being even about to assert himself God at the end, and to put forth more portentous signs to overthrow, if it could be, the elect. He hesitated not, it may be, then to assert himself a prophet of God — and indeed to Saul, in whom he himself now lodged. Do not suppose that it was one who administered the phantom, and another who commended it, but that it was the same spirit both in the false prophetess and in the apostate, easily lying that he had made it be believed, through whom Saul's treasure was there where his heart too was — where, namely, God was not. And therefore, through whom he believed he would see, he saw, because through whom he saw, he also believed. And if it be objected, concerning the nocturnal images, that the dead are often seen not in vain (for the Nasamones, by lingering at the tombs of their parents, catch their own oracles, as Heraclides or Nymphodorus or Herodotus writes; and the Celts, for the same cause, pass the night at the barrows of brave men, as Nicander affirms) — we no more truly suffer the dead in dreams than the living; but by the same reason the dead as the living, and all things that are seen. For things are not true because they are seen, but because they are fulfilled. The faith of dreams is reported from the effect, not from the sight. That to no soul whatever do the lower regions lie open, the Lord sufficiently sanctioned in that argument of the poor man reposing and the rich man groaning, in the person of Abraham, that no reporter of the infernal disposition could be sent back thence — which even then might have been permitted, that Moses and the prophets might be believed. But even though God's power has recalled certain souls into bodies, in proof of His own right, it will not on that account be shared with the faith and audacity of magicians, and the deception of dreams, and the licence of the poets. Nay, in the examples of resurrection, when the power of God, whether through the prophets, or through Christ, or through the apostles, represents souls into bodies, it has been pre-judged, by a solid and handleable and satisfying truth, that this is the form of truth — so that you should judge every incorporeal exhibition of the dead a jugglery.

[201940] 58. ‘All souls, then, are in the keeping of the lower regions?’ you say. Will you or no, there are both punishments already there and refreshments; you have the poor man and the rich. And because I have deferred something or other to this part, I shall now opportunely render it in the conclusion. For why should you not think that the soul is both punished and cherished in the lower regions, meanwhile, under the expectation of either judgment, in a certain anticipation, and indeed a foretaste, of it? ‘Because,’ you say, ‘its business ought to be kept safe in the divine judgment, without any prelibation of the sentence; and then, because the restitution of the flesh too must be awaited, as the partner of its works and of its wages.’ What then shall come to pass in that time? Shall we sleep? But souls do not sleep even in the living; for sleep belongs to bodies, whose is death too, with its own mirror, sleep. Or will you have nothing done there, whither the whole of humanity is drawn, whither all hope is sequestered? Do you think judgment is foretasted, or begun? hurried on, or pre-administered? But indeed how most unjust it would be, even in the lower regions, if it goes well even there as yet with the guilty, and not yet with the innocent! What more would you have — that after death hope should be confused, and mocking us with an uncertain expectation, or that the review of life and the ordering of judgment should already be shuddered at? But does the soul always await the body, in order to grieve or to rejoice? Is it not of itself sufficient to itself for either title of feeling? How often, the body being unhurt, is the soul alone tormented by bile, by anger, by weariness, and most often unknown even to itself? How often, likewise, the body being afflicted, does the soul seek for itself a stolen joy, and withdraw then from the importunate fellowship of the body? I lie, if she is not wont, even out of the very torments of the body, to glory and rejoice alone. Look to the soul of Mucius, when he loosened his right hand in the fire; look to that of Zeno, when the torments of Dionysius passed him by. The bites of beasts are the ornaments of youth, as the scars of the bear in Cyrus. So fully does the soul know, even in the lower regions, both to rejoice and to grieve without the flesh; since both in the flesh, even unhurt, it grieves if it will, and, hurt, it rejoices if it will. If this be by its own choice in life, how much more by the judgment of God after death! But neither does the soul share all its works with the ministry of the flesh; for the divine censure pursues even mere thoughts and bare wills. ‘He who has looked to lust has already committed adultery in his heart.’ Therefore, even on this account, it is most fitting that the soul, even though the flesh be not awaited, should be punished for what, without the flesh's partnership, it committed. So too, for pious and benevolent thoughts, in which it had no need of the flesh, it shall be refreshed without the flesh. Nay, what if in carnal matters too it is the first which conceives, which arranges, which commands, which impels? And if ever unwilling, yet it first handles what it is to do through the body. Never, in short, will the conscience be later than the deed. So to this order too it answers that she should first weigh out the wages to whom they are first owed. In sum, when we understand that prison which the Gospel sets forth to be the lower regions, and interpret the last farthing to be even the smallest fault to be expiated there by the delay of the resurrection, no one will doubt that the soul pays back something in the keeping of the lower regions, the fullness of the resurrection being preserved through the flesh too. This too the Paraclete has most frequently commended, if anyone shall have admitted his discourses out of the acknowledgment of the promised gifts. To every human opinion concerning the soul, as I think, having engaged from the doctrine of faith, we have satisfied a curiosity at least just and necessary. But to one immense and idle there will be lacking as much to learn as it shall have pleased to inquire.