WORK: Adversus Marcionem  (slug: tertullian-adversus-marcionem-121178)

CHAPTER: 05-book-5



[107521] 15. ON THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS. It will not weary me to attend to the shorter epistles too. There is savour even in few things. The Jews had killed their own prophets. I can say, What has this to do with an apostle of another and indeed a supremely good God, who is said not even to condemn the offences of his own, and who too, by destroying those same prophets, in a manner slays them himself? For what evil did Israel commit with him, if it killed those whom he too reprobated, if he first pronounced a hostile sentence against them? But it sinned with their own God. He upbraided the iniquity to whom the injured one belongs; surely it is anyone rather than the adversary of the injured. But neither would he have loaded them by imputing the slaying of the Lord too, who both killed the Lord, by saying, and their own prophets — though Their own is the heretic's addition. For what so bitter, if they slew Christ the preacher of another God, who butchered the prophets of their own God? But the standing of the heightening is, that they had slain both the Lord and his servants. In short, if they slew the Christ of one God, the prophets of another, he equalled the impieties, he did not heighten them. But they were not to be equalled; therefore they could not be heightened, except the offences out of either title were committed against the same Lord. Therefore of the same God are both the Christ and the prophets. But what holiness he calls the will of God you would recognise from the contraries which he forbids. For he says, To abstain from fornication, not from marriage; that each should know how to treat his own vessel in honour. How? while not in lust, as the nations. But lust is not, even among the nations, ascribed to marriage, but to extraordinary and unnatural and monstrous things. The law of nature is contrary to luxury, and to baseness too and uncleanness, which excludes not marriage but lust, which would treat our vessel in the honour of marriage. But this passage I have treated with the precedence reserved for the other — that is, the fuller — holiness, preferring continence and virginity to marriage, but not to forbidden marriages. For I rebut the destroyers of the God of marriage, not the followers of chastity. He says that those who remain unto the coming of Christ, together with those who are dead in Christ, who shall first rise, shall be caught up in the clouds into the air, to meet the Lord. I recognise the heavenly substances themselves — even Jerusalem which is above — marvelling at these things already then foreseen, and announcing through Isaiah, Who are these that fly hither like clouds, and like doves with their young to me? If Christ has prepared this ascent for us, that will be the Christ of whom Amos says: Who builds his ascent into the heavens — surely for himself and his own. Thereafter from whom shall I now hope, except from him from whom I heard these things? Whose Spirit does he forbid to be quenched, and what prophecies does he forbid to be held as nothing? Surely not the Creator's Spirit, nor the Creator's prophecies, according to Marcion. For what he destroys, he has already quenched and made nothing, nor can he forbid that which he made nothing. Therefore it lies upon Marcion to exhibit today in his church the Spirit of his God, thenceforth, which is not to be quenched, and prophecies which are not to be held as nothing. And if he has exhibited what he thinks, let him know that we shall challenge whatever it be to the form of spiritual and prophetic grace and power, that it should both foretell things to come and reveal the secrets of the heart and expound mysteries. When he shall have produced and proved nothing of the kind, we shall produce both the Spirit and the prophecies of the Creator, foretelling according to himself. And so it will be established of whom the apostle spoke — namely, of those things which were to be in the church of that God who, while he is, his Spirit too works, and his promise is celebrated. Come now, you who deny the salvation of the flesh, and, whenever the body is named in such a context, interpret it as some other thing I know not what than the substance of the flesh — how did the apostle distinguish all in their new substances by definite names, and set all in the one matter of salvation, wishing that our spirit and body and soul be preserved without complaint at the coming of our Saviour Christ? For he set down both soul and body, as two things, so as two distinct ones. For though the soul too has a body of its own quality, as the spirit also, yet since both body and soul are distinctly named, the soul has its own proper term, not needing the common term of body; that is left to the flesh, which, not named by its own, must of necessity use the common one. For I see no other substance in man, after spirit and soul, to which the term body may be accommodated, except the flesh — understanding this so often under the name of body, as often as it is not named; much more here, since what is called body is named by its own name.

[112607] 16. ON THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS. We are compelled to repeat certain things again and again, that we may confirm by them what coheres. We say that here too the Lord, the recompenser of either merit, is carried about by the apostle — either the Creator, or, what Marcion would not have, the equal of the Creator — with whom it is just that to our afflicters affliction should be repaid, and to us, who are afflicted, rest, in the revelation of the Lord Jesus coming from heaven with the angels of his power and in a flame of fire. But the flame and fire which I defend the heretic has quenched, lest, namely, he should make the God ours. Yet the vanity of the erasure shines out. For when the apostle writes that the Lord will come to vengeance, to be exacted of those who know not God and who obey not the gospel — whom he says shall pay a penalty of destruction, eternal, from the face of the Lord and from the glory of his might — it follows that he introduces a flame of fire, namely, coming to punish. So here too, though Marcion be unwilling, Christ is of the burning God, and in that other it is the Creator's, that he avenges himself even on those who know not the Lord, that is, on the heathen. For he set apart, Those who obey not the gospel — whether Christian sinners or Jews. Further, to exact penalties of the heathen, who perchance do not know the gospel, is not the part of that God who is naturally unknown, and is nowhere revealed except in the gospel, not knowable to all. But to the Creator even a natural acknowledgement is owed, by understanding from his works and thence seeking unto fuller knowledge. His, therefore, it is to strike even those ignorant of God, whom it is not lawful to be ignorant of. The very thing he says, From the face of the Lord and from the glory of his might, using the words of Isaiah, savours from the very cause of the same Lord rising up to shatter the earth. But who is the man of sin, the son of perdition, who must first be revealed before the Lord's coming, exalting himself above all that is called God and above all religion, about to sit in the temple of God and to boast himself God? According to us, indeed, antichrist, as the old and new prophecies teach, as John the apostle, who says that already the antichrists have gone forth into the world, forerunners of the spirit of antichrist, denying that Christ has come in the flesh, and dissolving Jesus — namely, in God the Creator: but according to Marcion, I do not know whether he be the Christ of the Creator. He has not yet come, with him. But whichever of the two he is, I ask why he comes in all power and signs and lying wonders? Therefore, he says, because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved; and for this there shall be sent them a working of deceit, that all may be judged who believed not the truth, but consented to iniquity. Therefore, if it is antichrist — and according to the Creator — then the Creator will be God who sends him to thrust into error those who believed not the truth that they might be saved; his too will be the truth and salvation who avenges them by the suggestion of error — that is, the Creator's, to whom the very zeal belongs of deceiving by error those whom he did not take by truth. But if it is not antichrist, according to us, then it is the Christ of the Creator, according to Marcion. And what manner of thing will it be that, to avenge his own truth, he should send the Christ of the Creator? But if he agrees too about antichrist, I shall likewise say: What manner of thing is it that Satan, an angel of the Creator, should be necessary to him, and be slain by him, having to discharge the working of deceit for the Creator? In sum, if it is beyond doubt that the angel and the truth and the salvation are his whose are also the wrath and the emulation and the sending of deceits against the despisers and deserters, even against the ignorant (so that now Marcion too may come down a step, conceding his God too to be a zealous one) — who shall more worthily be angry? I think, he who from the beginning of things prepared nature by works, benefits, plagues, preachings, witnesses, unto the acknowledgement of himself, and yet was not acknowledged; or he who once, by the single instrument of the gospel — and that uncertain, surely not openly preaching another God — was brought forth? So, to whom vengeance befits, to him will befit the material of vengeance — I mean the gospel, and the truth and salvation. But that he should bid him work who would eat, is the discipline of him who ordered a free mouth for the ox treading out the corn.

[117254] 17. ON THE EPISTLE TO THE LAODICEANS. By the truth of the church, we hold this epistle sent to the Ephesians, not to the Laodiceans; but Marcion at some time desired to interpolate its title, as though he too were a most diligent investigator in this matter. But nothing turns on the titles, since the apostle wrote to all when he wrote to some — yet certainly preaching in Christ that God to whom belong the things that are preached. To whom, then, will they belong, according to the good pleasure which he set forth in the sacrament of his will, unto a dispensation of the fulfilment of the times (so to speak, as that word sounds in the Greek) to recapitulate — that is, to bring back to the beginning, or to review from the beginning — all things in Christ which are in the heavens and which are on earth — except him whose are all things from the beginning, even the very beginning, from which are both the times and the dispensation of the fulfilment of the times, on account of which all things are reviewed unto the beginning in Christ? But of another God what is the beginning — that is, the whence — whose work is none? what times without a beginning? what fulfilment without times? what dispensation without fulfilment? In short, what did he do on earth already of old, that any long dispensation of the times to be fulfilled should be reckoned, unto the reviewing of all things in Christ, even of those which are in the heavens? Nor shall we suppose that the things in the heavens, whatever they are, were wrought by another than by him by whom it is established that the things on earth too were wrought, by all consent. But if it cannot be that all these things are reckoned of another God from the beginning than the Creator, who will believe that they are reviewed by another unto another Christ, and not by their own author and unto his own Christ? If they are the Creator's, of necessity they must be diverse, since of a diverse God; if diverse, surely contrary. How then are contraries reviewed unto him by whom in the end they are destroyed? For also, what Christ do the following words announce, when he says, That we should be unto the praise of his glory, who first hoped in Christ? For who could have first hoped, that is, hoped before he came, in God, except the Jews, to whom Christ was foretold from the beginning? He, then, who was foretold was also first hoped in. And so this he refers to himself, that is, to the Jews, that he may make a distinction, turning to the nations: In whom you too, when you had heard the word of truth, the gospel, in whom you believed and were sealed with the holy Spirit of his promise. Of what promise? made through Joel: In the last days I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh — that is, upon the nations too. So both the Spirit and the gospel will be in that Christ who was first hoped in, while he was being preached. But the Father of glory too is he whose Christ is sung the King of glory in the psalm, ascending: Who is this King of glory? the Lord of hosts, he is the King of glory. From him is the Spirit of wisdom desired, with whom this species too of spiritual things is enumerated among the seven spirits through Isaiah. He will give the enlightened eyes of the heart who enriched the outward eyes too with light, who is displeased with the blindness of the people. And who is blind but my children? you are blinded, the servants of God. With him too are the riches of the inheritance in the saints, who promised that inheritance out of the calling of the nations. Ask of me, and I will give you the nations for your inheritance. He wrought in Christ his might, by raising him from the dead, and placing him at his right hand, and subjecting all things — who also said, Sit at my right hand, till I make your enemies the footstool of your feet; because also elsewhere the Spirit says to the Father concerning the Son, You have subjected all things under his feet. If from these things another God and another Christ are inferred, which are recognised in the Creator, let us now seek the Creator. Plainly, I think, we find him, when he says that those were dead in the offences in which they had walked, according to the age of this world, according to the prince of the power of the air, who works in the sons of unbelief. But the world here too Marcion cannot interpret as the God of the world. For the made is not like the maker, the thing fashioned like the fashioner, the world like God. Nor will he be called the prince of the power of the air who is the prince of the power of the ages. For never is the president of the higher noted from the lower, though the lower too are reckoned to him. Nor can he be seen as the worker of unbelief, which he himself rather suffers both from the Jews and from the nations. It is enough, then, if these things do not fall upon the Creator. But if there is also one to whom they better befit, surely the apostle knew this the better. Who is he? Without doubt that one who obstructs against the Creator himself the sons of unbelief, having gained possession of this air, as the prophet reports him saying: I will set my throne in the clouds; I will be like the Most High. This will be the devil, whom elsewhere too (if indeed they will so have the apostle read) we shall acknowledge as the god of this age. For thus he has filled the whole world with the lie of his divinity. And plainly, if he had not been, then these things might have looked toward the Creator. But the apostle too had walked in Judaism. Not because he interposed about offences, in which we too all walked, is the Creator on that account to be understood the lord of offences and prince of this air; but because in Judaism he had been one of the sons of unbelief, having the devil as his worker, when he persecuted the church and Christ of the Creator — on which account too, We were, he says, children of wrath, but by nature. Lest, because the Creator called the Jews sons, the heretic argue from this that the Creator is the lord of wrath. For when he says, We were by nature children of wrath, but the Jews are not by nature the sons of the Creator, but by the election of the fathers, he referred the children of wrath to nature, not to the Creator — to sum it up, subjoining, As also the rest, who surely are not the sons of God. It appears that to the common nature of all men are reckoned both offences and the concupiscences of the flesh and unbelief and wrath, the devil nevertheless seizing upon nature, which he too has already infected by the seed of sin brought in. We are, he says, his workmanship, created in Christ. It is one thing to make, another to create; but he gave both to one. Now man is the workmanship of the Creator. The same, then, created in Christ who also made. For as far as concerns substance, he made; as far as concerns grace, he created. Look at the cohering words too. Remember that you were once nations in the flesh, who were called uncircumcision by that which is called circumcision in the flesh, made by hand; that you were at that time without Christ, alienated from the converse of Israel and strangers to their testaments and promise, having no hope, and without God in the world. But without what God were the nations, and without what Christ? Surely him whose was the converse of Israel and the testaments and the promise. But now, he says, in Christ you who were far off are made near in his blood. From whom were they formerly far off? From those whom he names above: from the Christ of the Creator, from the converse of Israel, from the testaments, from the hope of the promise, from God himself. If these things are so, then the nations are now made near in Christ to those from whom they were then far off. But if to the converse of Israel, which is in the religion of God the Creator, and to the testaments — from God himself. If these things are so, then they are now made near, by calling, to those called from afar. They who were far from me have drawn near to my righteousness. For both the righteousness and the peace of the Creator were announced in Christ, as we have often already shown. And so, He himself, he says, is our peace, who made the two one — the Jewish people, namely, and the Gentile. The near and the far, the middle wall of enmity being dissolved, in his flesh. But Marcion took away His, that he might give the enmity to the flesh, as though to a carnal vice, not to a flesh hostile to Christ. Thus, as I said elsewhere, here too, not Marrucinian but Pontic, whose blood you confessed above, here you deny the flesh. If he made void the law of precepts by decrees — surely by fulfilling the law (for now there is no force in, You shall not commit adultery, when it is said, You shall not even look to lust; there is no force in, You shall not kill, when it is said, You shall not even curse) — he cannot make an adversary of the law out of one who assists it. That he might create the two in himself — who had made the same, creating (according to what is above too: We are his workmanship, created in Christ) — into one new man, making peace (if truly new, then truly a man too, not a phantasm; but new and newly — that is, newly born of a virgin by the Spirit of God) — that he might reconcile both to God, even to the God whom both kinds had offended, both the Jewish and the Gentile people, in one body, he says, having slain the enmity in it through the cross. So here too the flesh is the body in Christ, which could suffer the cross. This, then, announcing peace to those near and to those far, having obtained access together to the Father, we are now no longer strangers nor sojourners, but fellow-citizens of the saints, and of the household of God (surely of him from whom we showed above that we were aliens and set far off), built upon the foundation of the apostles. The heretic took away, And of the prophets, forgetting that the Lord set in the church, as apostles, so prophets too. He feared, namely, lest our building in Christ should stand even upon the foundations of the old prophets, since the apostle himself everywhere does not cease to build us up out of the prophets. For whence did he take to call Christ the chief cornerstone, except from the signification of the psalm: The stone which the builders rejected, the same is made into the head of the corner?

[127607] 18. At the hands of the heretic who cuts away, I do not wonder if he withdraws syllables, when he very often subducts whole pages. The apostle, he says, was given grace, last of all, to enlighten all men as to what is the dispensation of the sacrament hidden from the ages in God, who created all things. The heretic snatched away the preposition In, and so makes it read: Hidden from the ages, to God who created all things. But the falsehood flashes out. For the apostle infers, That now there may be made known to the principalities and powers in the super-celestial places, through the church, the manifold wisdom of God. Of what principalities and powers does he speak? If the Creator's, what manner of thing is it that that God wished his wisdom to be shown to the Creator's principalities and powers, but not to himself — when the powers could not have known anything without their own prince? Or if for this reason he did not name God here, as though among them the prince himself too be reckoned, then he would have pronounced the sacrament hidden too from the principalities and powers of him who created all things, reckoning him likewise among them. But if he says it was hidden from them, to that one he ought to have said it was manifest. Therefore it was not hidden from God, but hidden in God the creator of all things, but hidden from his principalities and powers. For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who was his counsellor? Here the heretic, caught, perhaps changed it to say that his God wished to make known to his own powers and principalities the dispensation of his sacrament, of which the God the founder of all things was ignorant. And how was it fitting to allege the ignorance of the Creator — a stranger and severed by long separation — when even the household members of the superior God did not know it? Yet to the Creator too it was to be known as future. Or was it not surely known, what under heaven and on earth, which were his, was to be revealed? Therefore from this is confirmed what we built above. For if the Creator was at some time to know that hidden sacrament of the superior God, and so the scripture ran, Hidden to God who created all things, he ought to have inferred thus: That there may be made known to him the manifold wisdom of God — then also to the powers and principalities of whatever God, with whom the Creator was to know it. So fully is it established that it was subtracted, which even so is safe to its own truth. I wish now too to weave a controversy with you about the apostle's allegories. What forms would he have had in the prophets, as one new? He led captivity captive, he says. With what arms? in what battles? from the laying waste of what nation? from the overthrow of what city? what women, what children, or what petty kings did he, as victor, bind in chains? For when in David Christ is sung as girded with a sword upon his thigh, or in Isaiah as receiving the spoils of Samaria and the strength of Damascus, you truly hammer him out a visible warrior too. Acknowledge, then, both his armour and his warfare to be spiritual, if you have already learned that there is a spiritual captivity, that you may acknowledge this too to be his — or because the apostle took the mention of this captivity too from the prophets, from whom too his commandments. Putting off lying, speak truth, each to his neighbour; and, Be angry and sin not (in the very words by which the psalm would expound his sense), let not the sun go down upon your wrath. Do not partake in the works of darkness. For with the just you shall be just, and with the perverse you shall be perverted; and, Take away evil from your midst; and, Go out from the midst of them; and, Touch not the unclean thing; be separate, you who bear the vessels of the Lord. So too, To be drunk with wine is unto disgrace — that is from the place where those who make the saints drunk are rebuked: And you gave my saints wine to drink; which both Aaron the priest and his sons were forbidden to drink, when they approached the holy things. And to sing to God in psalms and hymns and to teach is his who knew how to accuse before God those who drank wine to timbrels and psalteries. Thus, whose precepts and seeds of precepts or increments I find, his apostle I acknowledge. For the rest, whence does he confirm that women ought to be subject to men? Because the man, he says, is the head of the woman. Tell me, Marcion: from a work of the Creator does your God lend authority to his own law? This now is plainly the lesser thing, since both for his own Christ and for his church he takes a status from there, just as Christ too is the head of the church. Likewise too, when he says, He who loves his own wife loves his own flesh, just as Christ too the church. You see your Christ and your church compared to a work of the Creator. How much honour is given to the flesh in the name of the church! Let no one, he says, hate his own flesh (except plainly Marcion alone), but nourishes and cherishes it, just as Christ too the church. But you alone hate it, taking away from it the resurrection. You ought to hate the church too, because it is likewise loved by Christ. But indeed Christ loved the flesh too, just as the church. No one but loves even the image of his bride; nay, he will both preserve and honour and crown it. The likeness has a partnership of honour with the truth. I shall now labour to prove the same God of the male and of Christ, of the woman and of the church, of the flesh and of the spirit, since the apostle himself adduces — nay, expounds — the sentence of the Creator: For this cause a man shall leave father and mother, and the two shall be in one flesh. This is a great sacrament. It is enough among these things if the Creator's sacraments are great with the apostle, the least with the heretics. But I, he says, speak of Christ and the church. He has an interpretation, not a separation, of the sacrament. He shows the figure of the sacrament to have been furnished beforehand by him whose surely the sacrament was. What seems to Marcion? The Creator surely could not furnish figures beforehand to an unknown God — and even, if known, to an adversary. The superior God ought to have borrowed nothing from the inferior, and that rather unto destruction. Let children too obey their parents. For though Marcion took away, This is the first precept in promise, the law speaks, Honour father and mother; and, Parents, bring up your children in the discipline and correction of the Lord. For you have heard it said to the ancients too, You shall tell these things in the ears of your children, and your children likewise in the ears of their children. Why now do you give me two gods, if the discipline is one? And if there are two, I will follow him who first taught. But if our wrestling is against the world-holders — O how many gods the Creators already are! For why should I not vindicate this too — that one world-holder ought to have been named, if it signified the Creator, whose were those powers which he set before? Further, since above he bids us put on the armour in which we may stand against the machinations of the devil, he now shows that those things are the devil's which he subjoins to the devil — the powers and world-holders of these darknesses, which we too reckon to the devil. Or if the devil is the Creator, who will be the devil with the Creator? Or, as there are two gods, so two devils too, and, in the plural, powers and world-holders? But how is the Creator both devil and God, when the devil is not himself both God and devil? For either both are gods too, if both are now devils; or he who is God here and not devil, just as the devil is not God. The very word devil — I ask of what accusation it can befit the Creator. Perhaps he carried off some plan of the superior God — which the Creator himself suffered from the archangel, and that one lying. For he had not forbidden the taste of that little tree lest they should become gods, but lest they should die of the transgression. Nor did the spiritual wickednesses signify the Creator because he added, In the heavens. For the apostle too knew that spiritual wickednesses had been wrought in the heavens — of the angels that gave offence with the daughters of men. And what manner of thing was it that by ambiguities and through riddles I know not what he should tax the Creator — he who, set already in chains for the liberty of his preaching, was begging from God constancy in manifesting the sacrament by the opening of his mouth, which there he was bidding to be demanded of God, and surely furnishing it for the church?

[136265] 19. ON THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS. In my prescription against all heresies I am wont to fix a compendium from the testimony of the times, vindicating our rule as prior to all heretical posterity. This now the apostle too will prove, saying, Of the hope laid up in the heavens, which you heard in the word of the truth of the gospel, which has come to you, just as into the whole world too. For if even then the evangelic tradition had spread everywhere, how much more now? Further, if ours is that which has spread everywhere, more than any heretical thing, much less the Antoninian Marcion's, it will be ours, apostolic. But Marcion's, though it have filled the whole world, will not even then be able to defend itself as apostolic. For that will even so be established to be apostolic which first filled the world — namely, with the gospel of that God who sang this too of his preachings: Into all the earth their sound has gone out, and into the ends of the world their words. He says Christ is the image of the invisible God. But we too call the Father of Christ invisible, knowing that the Son was always seen of old, if to any he was seen under the name of God, as his image — lest from this too he split off some difference of a visible and an invisible God, since of old the definition of our God has been, No one shall see God and live. If Christ is not the firstborn of creation, as the Word of the Creator through whom all things were made and without whom nothing was made; if in him were not created all things that are in the heavens and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or principalities or powers; if all things were not created through him and in him (for these things Marcion ought to have been displeased at) — surely the apostle would not have set it down so nakedly, And he is before all. For how before all, if not before all things? How before all things, if not the firstborn of creation, if not the Word of the Creator? Whence shall he be proved to have been before all, who appeared after all things? Who knows that one to have been prior whom he did not know to be at all? How likewise did he think good that all fullness should dwell in himself? For first, what is this fullness, except out of those things which Marcion took away — created in Christ, in the heavens and on earth, angels and men — except out of those invisible and visible things, except out of thrones and dominions and principalities and powers? Or if our pseudo-apostles and Jewish evangelisers brought these in of their own, and to the fullness of his God, Marcion, who created nothing — for the rest, what manner of thing is it that the rival and destroyer of the Creator should have wished the Creator's fullness to dwell in his own Christ? To whom, in short, does he reconcile all things unto himself, making peace through the blood of his cross, except him whom these same things had offended, against whom they had rebelled by transgression, whose at the last they had been? For they could be conciliated to a stranger, but reconciled to no other than their own. So too us, once alienated and enemies in mind in evil works, he reduces into grace with the Creator, whose offence we had committed, worshipping the creation against the Creator. But if anywhere too he says the church is the body of Christ — as here he says that he fills up the remnants of the tribulations of Christ in his flesh for his body, which is the church — you will not on that account transfer the mention of the body wholly from the substance of the flesh. For above too he says that we are reconciled in his body through death — surely in that body in which he could die, through the flesh he died, not through the church, but plainly for the church, exchanging body for body, the carnal for the spiritual. But when he warns us to beware of subtle speech and philosophy, as of vain seduction which is according to the elements of the world — not speaking of heaven or earth, but of secular letters and tradition, namely of subtle-speaking men and philosophers — it is a long matter, indeed, and of another work, to show that by this sentence all heresies are condemned, because all consist of the resources of subtle speech and the rules of philosophy. But let Marcion acknowledge the chief boundary of his faith from the school of Epicurus, bringing in a dull lord, that he may say he is not to be feared; placing too matter, with God the Creator, from the porch of the Stoics; denying the resurrection of the flesh, on which likewise no philosophy agrees. From whose ingenuities our truth is so far removed, that it both dreads to rouse the wrath of God, and trusts that he brought forth all things out of nothing, and promises that he will restore the same flesh, and does not blush at a Christ born from a virgin's womb — though the philosophers and heretics and the very heathen laugh. For God chose the foolish things of the world to confound the wise — he, without doubt, who out of regard for this his arrangement threatened beforehand that he would destroy the wisdom of the wise. By this simplicity of truth, contrary to subtle speech and philosophy, we can savour nothing perverse. In short, if God makes us alive with Christ, forgiving us our offences, we cannot believe that offences are forgiven by him against whom they were not committed, as one formerly unknown. Come now, when he says, Let no one judge you in food and drink, or in part of a feast-day or a new moon or a sabbath, which is a shadow of things to come, but the body is Christ's — what seems to you, Marcion? Of the law we now do not treat again, except that here too he teaches in what manner it has been excluded, while, namely, it is transferred from the shadow to the body — that is, from figures to the truth, which is Christ. Therefore the shadow too is his whose is the body — that is, both the law is his and Christ. Separate the law to one God and Christ to another, if you can separate any shadow from the body of which it is the shadow. Manifestly Christ is of the law, if he is the body of the shadow. But if he also taxes some who out of angelic visions said that food must be abstained from — Touch not, taste not — wishing to walk in the lowliness of sense, not holding the head — not on that account does he assail the law and Moses, as though out of angelic superstition he had appointed the interdiction of certain foods. For it is established that Moses received the law from God. In short, this discipline — According to the precepts, he says, and doctrine of men — he reckoned upon those who held not the head, that is, him in whom all things are reviewed, brought back to the beginning in Christ — even the indifference of foods. The rest of the precepts — that it may suffice to have already taught elsewhere whence they flowed from the Creator, who, when he preached that the old things would pass, about to make all things new, commanding too, Make for yourselves a new renewal, even then was teaching to put off the old man and put on the new.

[143329] 20. ON THE EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS. When he enumerates the variety of preaching — that some, from the confidence of his chains, uttered the word more boldly, others through envy and contention, certain through esteem of the discourse, very many out of love, some out of emulation, now some too out of strife, preached Christ — there was surely here a place too for taxing the very preaching, on the diversity of sentence which made so great a variety even of dispositions. But, setting forth in the diversity the causes only of dispositions, not the rules of the sacraments, he confirms that one Christ nevertheless, and one God of his, was preached, whatever the intent; and therefore, It is nothing to me, he says, whether by occasion or in truth Christ is announced, because one was announced, whether out of occasion or out of the truth of faith. For he referred the mention of truth to the faith of the preaching, not to the rule itself, because the rule indeed was one, but the faith of certain preachers was true, that is, simple, of certain over-learned. Since this is so, it appears that the Christ preached was he who was always announced. For if another, far from the apostle, were brought in, the newness of the thing would have made a diversity. For there would not have been wanting those who would nonetheless interpret the evangelic preaching as of the Christ of the Creator, since even today the greater part in all places is of our sentence than of the heretical. So that here too the apostle would not have been silent about noting and rebuking the diversity. Thus, since the diversity is not even taxed, the newness is not proved. Plainly the Marcionites think that here too the apostle votes for them about the substance of Christ — that there was a phantasm of flesh in Christ — when he says that, being constituted in the form of God, he counted it not robbery to be equal to God, but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, not the truth, and in the likeness of man, not in man, and being found in fashion as man, not in substance, that is, not in flesh — as though fashion and likeness and form did not accrue to substance too. But well that elsewhere too he calls Christ the image of the invisible God. Surely, then, here too, in that he sets him in the form of God, will Christ likewise not be truly God, if not truly man too, being constituted in the form of man? For both ways the truth will have to be excluded, if fashion and likeness and form be claimed for a phantasm. But if in form and in image, in which he is the Son of the Father, he is truly God, it is prejudged that in the form and image too of man, in which he is the Son of man, he was found truly man. For he set down found with reason, that is, most certainly man. For what is found is established to be. So too God was found through power, as man through flesh, because he would not have pronounced one subject to death who was not constituted in mortal substance. But more is what he added, And the death of the cross. For he would not have heightened the atrocity by extolling the might of the subjection, had he known it imaginary, by a phantasm — rather frustrated than experienced, nor discharging any might in the passion, but in mockery. But the things which formerly he had reckoned gain, which above too he enumerates — the glory of the flesh, the mark of circumcision, the reckoning of Hebrew race out of a Hebrew, the title of the tribe of Benjamin, the dignity of pure Pharisaism — these now he reckons to himself for loss; not God, but the stupor of the Jews. These he counts but as dung, in comparison with the knowledge of Christ, not in rejection of God the Creator; having a righteousness not now his own, which is of the law, but that which is through him, namely Christ, of God. Therefore, you say, by this distinction the law was not of the God of Christ. Subtly enough. Receive, then, more subtly. For when he says, Not that which is of the law, but that which is through him, he would not have said Through him of another than him whose the law was. Our citizenship, he says, is in the heavens. I recognise the old promise of the Creator to Abraham: And I will make your seed as the stars in heaven. Therefore too star differs from star in glory. But if Christ, coming from the heavens, transfigured the body of our lowliness, conformed to the body of his glory, then this our body shall rise, which is humbled in sufferings, and cast into the earth by the very law of death. For how shall it be transfigured, if it shall be nothing? Or if it is said of those who, found in the flesh at the coming of God, are to be reckoned, what shall they do who first rise? They will have nothing out of which to be transfigured. But, We shall be caught up, he says, together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord. If caught up together with them, surely transfigured too together with them.

[148240] 21. ON THE EPISTLE TO PHILEMON. To this epistle alone its brevity was of profit, that it might escape the falsifying hands of Marcion. Yet I wonder that, when he received letters written to one man, he rejected the two to Timothy and the one to Titus, composed about ecclesiastical order. He affected, I think, to interpolate even the number of the epistles. Remember, inspector, that the things which were treated beforehand we have proved of the apostle too in their place, and that whatever was deferred to this work we have discharged — lest either here you think the iteration superfluous, by which we have confirmed the former hope, or there hold the deferment suspect, by which we drew out these very things. If you inspect the whole little work, you will judge neither here a redundance nor there a diffidence.