WORK: Apologeticum  (slug: tertullian-apologeticum-02366e)

CHAPTER: 01-apologeticum



[110384] 27. 1. Enough of this, in answer to the charge of treason against divinity — that we may not seem to injure that which we have shown not to exist. Being therefore challenged to sacrifice, we plant our foot in resistance, for the faith of our conscience, by which we are certain to what beings these offices come, under the prostitution of images and the consecration of human names.

[110768] 2. But some think it madness, that, when we might both sacrifice for the moment and depart unharmed, keeping our purpose in our mind, we prefer obstinacy to safety.

[110934] 3. You give us advice, of course, by which we should cheat you; but we know whence such things are suggested, who sets all this in motion, and how, now by the cunning of persuasion, now by the harshness of cruelty, it works to cast down our steadfastness.

[111191] 4. That spirit, namely, of demonic and angelic furnishing, which, our rival because of our separation and envious because of God's favour, fights against us out of your minds, secretly inspired and suborned to all that perversity of judgment and iniquity of cruelty with which we began at the outset.

[111493] 5. For although the whole force of demons and of spirits of that kind is subject to us, yet, like worthless slaves, they sometimes mingle defiance with their fear, and long to injure those whom otherwise they dread.

[111710] 6. For fear too breathes hatred. Besides, their desperate condition, out of their foredoomed sentence, reckons it a solace to enjoy meanwhile their malignity, during the respite of their punishment. And yet, when they are seized, they are subdued, and they sink down to their own condition; and those whom from afar they assail, from near at hand they entreat.

[112072] 7. Therefore, when, as in the rebellion of prisons or chain-gangs or mines or any servitude of that penal kind, they break out against us, in whose power they are, sure that they are no match for us, and that for this very reason they are the more lost — against our will we resist them as equals, and we fight back, persevering in that which they assail; and we never triumph over them more than when we are condemned for our faithful obstinacy.

[112520] 28. 1. But since it would readily seem unjust that free men should be forced against their will to sacrifice (for even otherwise a willing mind is required for the performing of a divine rite), it would certainly be reckoned absurd if one were compelled by another to the honour of the gods, whom of his own accord, for his own sake, he ought to propitiate — lest it should be at hand, by the right of liberty, to say: "I do not want Jupiter propitious to me; who are you? Let Janus meet me angry, with whichever face he pleases; what have you to do with me?" You have been trained by these same spirits, of course, to compel us to sacrifice for the welfare of the emperor; and the necessity of compelling is laid upon you, just as the obligation of incurring danger is laid upon us.

[113305] 2. We have come, then, to the second charge, of treason against a more august majesty, since with greater dread and a more crafty timidity you watch over Caesar than over Olympian Jupiter himself. And rightly, if you knew it. For who of the living, whoever he be, is not more powerful than any dead man?

[113610] 3. But you do not do this by reason rather than by regard for present power: so that in this too you will be caught being irreligious toward your own gods, since you assign more fear to human dominion. In short, among you men more readily swear falsely by all the gods than by the single genius of Caesar.

[113917] 29. 1. Let it first be established, then, whether those to whom sacrifice is offered can impart welfare to emperors or to any man whatever; and then arraign us for treason, if angels or demons, beings of the worst spiritual substance, work any benefit; if the lost preserve, if the condemned set free, if, in short — as is in your own conscience — the dead protect the living.

[114295] 2. For surely they would first protect their own statues and images and temples, which, as I suppose, the soldiers of the Caesars keep safe by their watches. Nay, I think these very materials come from the metals of the Caesars, and whole temples stand by the nod of Caesar.

[114571] 3. In short, many gods have had Caesar for an enemy. It tells for our case, if also for a friend, when he confers on them some bounty or privilege. How then shall those who are in Caesar's power, and wholly his, have Caesar's welfare in their power, so that they may seem able to bestow that which they themselves more easily obtain from Caesar?

[114918] 4. For this reason, then, we are said to commit treason against the majesty of the emperor, because we do not subject him to his own things, because we do not make a mockery of the office of guarding his welfare — we who do not think it lies in hands of lead.

[115179] 5. But you are the religious ones, who seek it where it is not, who ask it of those who cannot give it, passing over him in whose power it is; and, what is more, you make war upon those who know how to ask it, who can even obtain it, since they know how to ask.

[115442] 30. 1. For we, on behalf of the welfare of the emperors, invoke the eternal God, the true God, the living God, whom even the emperors themselves prefer to have propitious to them above all others. They know who gave them the empire; they know, as they are men, who gave them their life too; they feel that he is the only God, in whose power alone they are, after whom they are second, before whom and above all gods they are first. Why not? since they are above all men, who at least live, and are above the dead.

[115957] 2. They reflect how far the powers of their empire avail, and so they understand God; against whom they cannot prevail, by him they recognize that they prevail. Let the emperor make war on heaven; let him lead heaven captive in his triumph; let him set watches over heaven, lay tributes on heaven. He cannot.

[116267] 3. He is great for this reason, that he is less than heaven. For he himself is his whose is both heaven and every creature. He is emperor from him from whom he was a man before he was emperor; from him is his power, from whom is also his breath.

[116514] 4. Looking up thither, we Christians, with hands outspread, because they are harmless; with head bare, because we are not ashamed; in fine, without a prompter, because we pray from the heart — are ever making supplication for all emperors. We ask for them long life, a secure empire, a safe house, brave armies, a faithful senate, an honest people, a quiet world — whatever a man and a Caesar can wish for.

[116922] 5. These things I cannot ask of any other than him from whom I know I shall obtain them, since he it is who alone bestows them, and I am he to whom the obtaining is due — his servant, who alone observe him, who for his discipline am put to death, who offer to him a rich and a greater victim than he himself commanded, prayer sent up from a chaste body, from an innocent soul, from a holy spirit;

[117320] 6. not grains of incense worth a single as, the tears of an Arabian tree, nor two drops of wine, nor the blood of a worthless ox longing to die, and, after all this filth, a foul conscience too: so that I marvel, when victims are tested among you by the most vicious of priests, why it is the entrails of the victims rather than of the sacrificers themselves that are examined.

[117699] 7. So then, while we are stretched out toward God, let the claws dig us, the crosses hang us, the fires lap us, the swords cut off our throats, the beasts leap upon us: the very posture of a praying Christian is ready for every torment. Do this, good governors; wring out the soul that is making supplication to God for the emperor. Here will be the crime — where there is the truth of God and devotion.

[118104] 31. 1. We have now, you say, been flattering the emperor, and have lied about the prayers we spoke, to escape, of course, your violence. Plainly that deceit profits us: for you allow us to prove whatever we maintain. You, therefore, who thought that we care nothing for the welfare of the Caesars, look into the words of God, our writings, which we ourselves neither suppress, and which many accidents pass on to outsiders.

[118529] 2. Know from them that it is enjoined upon us, to the overflowing of kindness, to pray to God even for our enemies, and to invoke good upon our persecutors. Who are more the enemies and persecutors of Christians than those on whose majesty we are arraigned for treason?

[118800] 3. But even by name and expressly: "Pray," he says, "for kings and for princes and powers, that all may be peaceful for you." For when the empire is shaken, and its other members too are shaken, surely we also, though we be reckoned strangers to the crowds, are found in some place of the calamity.

[119100] 32. 1. There is also another and a greater necessity for us of praying for the emperors, and indeed for the whole state of the empire and the affairs of Rome: in that we know that the mighty force which threatens the whole world, and the very close of the age menacing dreadful disasters, is delayed by the respite the Roman empire affords. And so we are unwilling to experience it; and, while we pray that it be deferred, we favour the long continuance of Rome.

[119564] 2. But we swear too — not, indeed, by the genii of the Caesars, but by their welfare, which is more august than all genii. Do you not know that genii are called demons, and thence, by a diminutive word, demonia? We look up to the judgment of God in the emperors, who has set them over the nations.

[119863] 3. We know to be in them that which God has willed; and therefore we wish that to be safe which God has willed, and we hold this for a great oath. But demons — that is, genii — we are accustomed to adjure, in order to drive them out of men, not to swear by them, so as to confer on them the honour of divinity.

[120175] 33. 1. But why should I say more of the religion and piety of the Christian toward the emperor, whom we are bound to look up to as one whom our Lord has chosen — so that I might rightly say, "Caesar is more ours, appointed by our God"?

[120412] 2. And therefore, as more my own, I do more for his welfare; since I not only ask it of him who can grant it, or ask it as one who deserves to obtain it, but also, in that I keep the majesty of Caesar below God, I the more commend him to God, to whom alone I subject him. But I subject him to one to whom I do not make him equal.

[120743] 3. For I will not call the emperor God — either because I do not know how to lie, or because I do not dare to mock him, or because not even he himself will wish to be called God. If he is a man, it is the interest of a man to yield to God. Let him be content to be called emperor. That too is a great name, which is handed down by God. He who calls him God denies that he is emperor; unless he be a man, he is not emperor.

[121167] 4. That he is a man he is reminded even while he is triumphing in that most exalted chariot. For it is suggested to him from behind: "Look back behind you! Remember that you are a man!" And surely he rejoices the more that he flashes with such great glory, that the reminder of his condition is necessary to him. He would be less, if he were then called God, because he would not be truly called so. He is greater who is called back, lest he think himself a god.

[121631] 34. 1. Augustus, the founder of the empire, did not even wish to be called Lord; for this too is a name of God. I will indeed call the emperor Lord, but in the common manner, but when I am not forced to call him Lord in God's stead. For the rest, I am free toward him. For my Lord is one, the almighty and eternal God, the same who is his Lord too.

[121981] 2. He who is father of his country — how is he its lord? But the name of affection is also more welcome than that of power. Even in a household men are called fathers rather than lords. So far is it from being right that the emperor should be called God, a thing that cannot be believed without not only the most shameful but even a pernicious flattery.

[122336] 3. As if, having one emperor, you should call another by that name — would you not contract the greatest and most implacable offence of the one whom you have, an offence to be feared even by the very man whom you so called? Be religious toward God, you who would have him propitious to the emperor. Cease to believe another to be God, and so to call him God who has need of God.

[122716] 4. If such flattery does not blush at its lie, calling a man God, let it at least fear the ill omen. It is a curse to call Caesar God before his apotheosis.

[122874] 35. 1. For this reason, then, the Christians are public enemies — because they do not pay the emperors honours that are vain or false or rash; because, as men of a true religion, they celebrate their festivals with the conscience rather than with the wantonness of the soul.

[123150] 2. A great service, no doubt, to bring out braziers and couches into the public street, to feast from street to street, to make the city wear the look of a tavern, to work mud out of wine, to run in troops to insults, to indecencies, to the enticements of lust! Is public joy thus expressed by public disgrace? Do those things befit the festal days of princes which befit no other days?

[123538] 3. Shall those who keep observance out of regard for Caesar, desert it for Caesar's sake; and shall licence in evil morals be piety, and the occasion of luxury be reckoned religion?

[123721] 4. O how deservedly are we to be condemned! For why do we keep the vows and joys of the Caesars chaste and sober and upright? Why on a glad day do we not shade our doorposts with laurels, nor break the daylight with lamps? It is an honourable thing, when a public festival requires it, to clothe your house with the garb of some new brothel!

[124064] 5. Yet in this matter too, of the second majesty — on which we Christians are arraigned for a second sacrilege, in that we do not celebrate the festivals of the Caesars together with you, in a fashion which neither modesty nor decency nor chastity permits to be celebrated, but to which the occasion of pleasure rather than any worthy reason has persuaded — I would willingly show forth your good faith and truth, lest perhaps even here those should be found worse than Christians who refuse to have us reckoned Romans, but would have us reckoned enemies of the Roman princes.

[124642] 6. I call the very Quirites to witness, the very native rabble of the seven hills: does that Roman tongue spare any Caesar of theirs? Witness is the Tiber, and the schools of the beasts.

[124830] 7. Now if nature had spread over our breasts some translucent substance, like glass, to let them be seen through, whose heart would not be found graven with the spectacle of one new Caesar after another presiding over the dividing-out of the largess? Even at that very hour when they cry out: "From our years may Jupiter add to your years!" — these things a Christian no more knows how to utter than to wish for a new Caesar.

[125257] 8. "But it is the rabble," you say. Rabble though they be, yet they are Romans; and there are none who clamour more for Christians than the rabble. Plainly the other orders, in proportion to their authority, are religious from conscience. Nothing hostile breathes from the senate itself, from the knights, from the camp, from the very palace.

[125601] 9. Whence the Cassii and Nigers and Albini? Whence those who beset Caesar between two laurel groves? Whence those who practise the wrestler's art to strangle him? Whence those who in arms break into the palace, bolder than all your Sigerii and Partheniï? From among the Romans, if I mistake not — that is, from among non-Christians.

[125935] 10. And to that very point, up to the very outbreak of their impiety, they were all making sacrifices for the welfare of the emperor and swearing by his genius, some without, some within; and surely they were giving the name of public enemies to the Christians.

[126198] 11. But those too who are now daily detected as partners or applauders of those wicked factions — that gleaning of parricides surviving after the vintage — how with the freshest and most leafy laurels did they screen their doorposts, how with the loftiest and brightest lamps did they becloud their porches, how with the most ornate and proudest couches did they divide the forum among themselves, not to celebrate the public joys, but to learn beforehand their own vows in another's festival, and to inaugurate the example and image of their hope, changing in their hearts the name of the prince!

[126797] 12. The same offices are rendered by those who consult astrologers and soothsayers and augurs and magicians about the life of the Caesars — arts which, as being betrayed by deserter angels and forbidden by God, Christians do not employ even in their own affairs. But who has need to pry into the welfare of Caesar, except one by whom something is plotted or wished against it, or hoped and waited for after it? For one does not consult about dear ones in the same spirit as about masters. The anxiety of kinship is one thing, that of servitude another.

[127351] 36. 1. If these things are so, that those are detected as enemies who were called Romans, why are we, who are reckoned enemies, denied to be Romans? We cannot both be not Romans and be enemies, when those are found to be enemies who were held to be Romans.

[127609] 2. So far is it true that the piety and religion and faith owed to emperors does not consist in offices of this kind, by which hostility too can the rather perform its part as a veil for itself, but in those morals by which divinity commands that loyalty be shown as truly toward all men as it must of necessity be shown toward emperors.

[127948] 3. For these works of a good mind are not owed by us to emperors alone. We perform no good under exception of persons, because we do it for ourselves, who look for no payment of praise or reward from man, but from God, the exactor and rewarder of an impartial benevolence.

[128222] 4. We are the same toward emperors as toward our neighbours. For to wish ill, to do ill, to speak ill, to think ill of anyone, we are equally forbidden. Whatever is not lawful against the emperor, that is not lawful against anyone; what is lawful against no one, is for that reason perhaps the more not lawful against him who through God is so great.

[128574] 37. 1. If we are bidden, as we have said above, to love our enemies, whom have we to hate? Likewise, if, when wronged, we are forbidden to return the like, lest by the deed we become their equals, whom can we injure?

[128792] 2. For of this take note among yourselves. How often do you rage savagely against the Christians, partly out of your own minds, partly in obedience to the laws? How often too, even without regard to you, the hostile rabble assails us of its own right with stones and fires? With the very frenzies of the Bacchanals they do not spare even the dead Christians, but tear them from the rest of the tomb, from the asylum, as it were, of death, mangle and rend them in pieces, now no longer whole, now no longer themselves.

[129311] 3. Yet what, from men so banded together, so resolved even to death for their wrong, has ever been requited in return — when even one night, with a few little torches, could work an abundance of vengeance, if among us it were lawful to pay back evil with evil? But far be it that a divine sect should avenge itself by human fire, or grieve to suffer that in which it is proved.

[129690] 4. For if we wished to act as open enemies, and not merely as secret avengers, would there be wanting to us the strength of numbers and forces? The Moors, no doubt, and the Marcomanni, and the Parthians themselves, or any nations whatever, however great, yet of one place and within their own boundaries, are more numerous than the people of the whole world! We are of yesterday, and we have filled all that is yours: cities, islands, strongholds, towns, market-places, the very camps, tribes, town-councils, the palace, the senate, the forum. We have left you only your temples.

[130271] 5. For what war should we not have been fit, not ready, even though unequal in forces — we who are so willingly slaughtered — were it not that, by our discipline, it is more permitted to be slain than to slay?

[130482] 6. We could, even without arms, and without rebellion, merely by parting from you in the discord of mere separation, have fought against you. For if so great a force of men had broken away from you into some remote corner of the world, surely the loss of so many citizens, of whatever sort, would have put your dominion to shame; nay, it would even have punished you by that very desolation.

[130875] 7. Without doubt you would have been terrified at your solitude, at the silence of affairs, and a kind of stupor as of a dead world. You would have sought whom you might rule. More enemies than citizens would have remained to you.

[131107] 8. For now you have fewer enemies, by reason of the multitude of Christians, when almost all the citizens of almost all the cities are Christians. But you have preferred to call them enemies of the human race rather than of human error.

[131345] 9. And who would snatch you from those hidden enemies, everywhere laying waste your minds and your health — I mean from the assaults of the demons, which we drive off from you without reward, without pay? This alone would have sufficed for our vengeance, that thereafter the possession would lie open and empty to the unclean spirits.

[131681] 10. Yet, reckoning nothing of the recompense of so great a protection, you have preferred to judge a people not only not troublesome, but even necessary, to be your enemies — as indeed we are, but not of the human race, but rather of its error.

[131927] 38. 1. Ought not, then, this sect to be reckoned, with a little more leniency, among the lawful associations, seeing that nothing of the kind is committed by it which is wont to be feared from unlawful associations?

[132144] 2. For, unless I am mistaken, the cause for forbidding associations rests upon a provident care for public order, lest the city be torn into factions — a thing which might easily disturb the assemblies, the councils, the senate-houses, the gatherings, even the public shows, by the clashing emulation of rival enthusiasms, especially now that men had begun to make their violence a thing of profit, venal and for hire.

[132564] 3. But for us, who are cold to all ardour of glory and dignity, there is no need of combination; nor is anything more foreign to us than public affairs. We acknowledge one commonwealth of all: the world.

[132769] 4. Likewise we renounce your spectacles, in the same degree as we renounce their origins, which we know to be conceived of superstition, while we hold ourselves aloof from the very matters with which they are transacted. We have nothing to say, to see, to hear, of the madness of the circus, of the shamelessness of the theatre, of the atrocity of the arena, of the vanity of the gymnasium. How do we offend you, if we presume other pleasures?

[133214] 5. If we will not know amusements, the injury, if anything, is our own, not yours. But we reject what pleases you; nor do our things delight you. Yet it was permitted to the Epicureans to decree a certain truth of pleasure — that is, equanimity of mind. . .

[133473] 39. 1. I will now myself set forth the doings of the Christian society, so that, having refuted the evil, I may show the good. We are a body knit together by the consciousness of our religion, by the unity of our discipline, by the bond of our hope.

[133724] 2. We meet together in an assembly and congregation, that, as it were with marshalled forces, we may besiege God with our prayers. This violence is pleasing to God. We pray too for the emperors, for their ministers and the powers, for the state of the world, for the quiet of affairs, for the delay of the end.

[134036] 3. We come together for the recollection of the divine writings, if the character of the present times compels us either to forewarn or to recall anything. At all events, we feed our faith with the holy words, we lift up our hope, we fix our confidence, and none the less we make firm our discipline by the inculcation of the precepts. There too are exhortations, chastisements, and the divine censure.

[134440] 4. For judgment is passed with great weight, as among men sure of God's sight; and it is the highest foretaste of the judgment to come, if anyone has so sinned that he is banished from the communion of prayer and of the assembly and of all holy intercourse. Approved elders preside, having obtained that honour not by price but by witness of character. For no affair of God's stands by price.

[134834] 5. And even if there is a kind of treasury, it is not gathered from any sum paid for office, as though religion were a thing put up for sale. Each man lays by a modest contribution on a fixed day of the month, or when he will, and only if he will, and only if he can; for no one is compelled, but each contributes of his own accord. These are, as it were, the deposits of piety.

[135214] 6. For from them nothing is spent on feasts, nor on drinking-bouts, nor on thankless eating-houses, but on the feeding and burying of the poor, on boys and girls destitute of property and parents, and on aged servants of the house, likewise on the shipwrecked, and on any who are in the mines, or in the islands, or in prison — provided it be for the cause of God's sect — these become the foster-children of their own confession.

[135646] 7. But it is chiefly this work of love that fixes a brand upon us in the eyes of some. "See," they say, "how they love one another" — for they themselves hate one another — "and how they are ready to die for one another" — for they themselves will be readier to kill one another.

[135927] 8. And as for our calling one another brothers, they rave, I suppose, for no other reason than that among themselves every name of kinship is feigned out of mere affection. But we are your brothers too, by the right of nature, our one mother — though you are scarcely men, being evil brothers.

[136222] 9. But how much more worthily are they both called and held brothers who have acknowledged one Father, God, who have drunk one Spirit of holiness, who from one womb of the same ignorance have started in terror toward the one light of truth!

[136464] 10. But perhaps we are thought less legitimate, because no tragedy cries out about our brotherhood, or because we are brothers from the common family substance — which among you generally dissolves brotherhood.

[136676] 11. And so we, who are blended in mind and soul, have no doubt about sharing our goods. All things are undivided among us, except our wives.

[136818] 12. In that one matter we break off our fellowship, in which alone the rest of men exercise fellowship — men who not only usurp the marriages of their friends, but most patiently furnish their own to their friends; out of that, I suppose, discipline of the greatest and wisest of men, the Greek Socrates and the Roman Cato, who shared with their friends the wives they had married, that children might be begotten elsewhere too — against the wives' will, I do not know.

[137289] 13. For why should they care about chastity, which their husbands had so easily given away? O example of Attic wisdom, of Roman gravity! — the philosopher and the censor turned panders!

[137476] 14. What wonder, then, if so great a love holds its banquets together? For our little suppers, too, besides being defamed as criminal, you brand as extravagant. Of us, no doubt, was the saying of Diogenes spoken: "The Megarians provide as though they were to die tomorrow, but build as though they were never to die." But a man more readily spies the straw in another's eye than the beam in his own.

[137877] 15. With so many tribes and wards and town-councils belching, the air turns sour; the Salii, when they are to dine, will need a creditor; the keepers of the books will reckon up the cost of the tithes and offerings of Hercules; for the Apaturia, the Dionysia, the Attic mysteries, a levy of cooks is proclaimed; at the smoke of a feast of Serapis the firemen will be roused. It is only about the dining-room of the Christians that question is raised.

[138329] 16. Our supper shows its meaning by its name. It is called by the word which among the Greeks means love. However much it cost, it is gain to make outlay in the name of piety, since with this refreshment we help all the needy — not in the way in which, among you, parasites contend for the glory of selling their freedom to be fattened amid insults, under the bond of their belly, but in the way in which, before God, greater regard is had to the lowly.

[138784] 17. If the cause of our banquet is honourable, judge the rest of its order by that cause. Whatever is of the office of religion admits nothing of vileness, nothing of immodesty. We do not recline before prayer to God is first tasted. As much is eaten as satisfies the hungry; as much is drunk as is profitable to the chaste.

[139110] 18. So they are satisfied, as men who remember that even through the night they must worship God; so they converse, as men who know that the Lord hears. After water for the hands, and lights, each is invited into the midst to sing to God, as he can, from the holy Scriptures or from his own talent; hence it is proved how he has drunk.

[139447] 19. Prayer likewise closes the feast. Thence we depart, not into bands of cut-throats, nor gangs of vagabonds, nor outbreaks of wantonness, but to the same care of modesty and chastity, as men who have feasted not so much on a supper as on a discipline.

[139702] 20. This gathering of Christians may indeed deservedly be called unlawful, if it is like the unlawful ones; deservedly condemned, if anyone complains of it on the ground on which complaint is made against factions.

[139918] 21. To whose ruin have we ever met? We are, when assembled, the same that we are when dispersed; the same all together that we are singly — injuring no one, grieving no one. When the upright, when the good, when the pious, when the chaste come together, it is not to be called a faction, but a court.

[140220] 40. 1. On the contrary, the name of faction is to be applied to those who conspire in hatred of the good and the upright, who clamour against the blood of the innocent, alleging in defence of their hatred that empty plea too, that they think the Christians the cause of every public calamity, of every misfortune of the people.

[140549] 2. If the Tiber rises to the walls, if the Nile does not rise to the fields, if the sky has stood still, if the earth has moved, if there is famine, if there is plague — at once the cry is "The Christians to the lion!" So many to a single one?

[140794] 3. I ask you, before Tiberius — that is, before the coming of Christ — how many disasters fell upon the world and the cities? We read that Hiera, Anaphe, Delos, Rhodes, and Cos, islands, perished with many thousands of men.

[141019] 4. Plato relates too that a land greater than Asia or Africa was snatched away by the Atlantic sea. An earthquake too drank up the Corinthian sea, and the force of the waves carried off Lucania, cut away under the name of Sicily. These things surely could not have happened without injury to the inhabitants.

[141329] 5. But where then were — I will not say the Christians, the despisers of your gods — but your gods themselves, when the deluge blotted out the whole world, or, as Plato thought, only the level country?

[141532] 6. For that they are later than the disaster of the flood, the very cities testify in which they were born and died, even those which they founded; for these would not otherwise remain to this day, were they not themselves later than that calamity.

[141782] 7. Not yet had Palestine received the Jewish swarm from Egypt, nor had the origin of the Christian sect settled there, when a fiery rain burned up Sodom and Gomorrah, regions bordering upon it. The earth still smells of the burning; and if there are any fruits of trees there, they make an attempt only to the eye, but, being touched, they crumble to ashes.

[142141] 8. But neither did Tuscany then, nor Campania, complain of the Christians, when fire from heaven overwhelmed Volsinii, and fire from its own mountain overwhelmed Pompeii. No one as yet at Rome worshipped the true God, when Hannibal at Cannae measured out his slaughter of the Romans by the bushel of their rings.

[142455] 9. All your gods were worshipped by all, when the Senones seized the very Capitol. And it is well that, if any disaster befell the cities, the same calamity fell upon the temples as upon the walls; so that I now convict them of the fact that these things do not come from the gods, since they fell upon them too.

[142769] 10. The human race has always deserved ill of God. First, indeed, as undutiful toward him, since, when it understood him in part, it did not seek him out, but even devised for itself besides other gods to worship; and then, in that, by not seeking out the master of innocence and the judge and exactor of guilt, it grew hardened in every vice and crime.

[143124] 11. But if it had sought him out, it would have followed that it should know him whom it sought, and observe him whom it knew, and find him propitious rather than angry whom it observed. It ought, therefore, now also to know him as angry whom it has always known so of old, before the Christians were named.

[143433] 12. Whose blessings it enjoyed before it fashioned gods for itself, why does it not understand that its evils too come from him whose blessings it did not feel to be his? It is guilty toward him toward whom it is also ungrateful.

[143664] 13. And yet, if we compare the former disasters, lighter ones now befall, ever since the world received the Christians from God. For from that time both innocence has tempered the iniquities of the age, and there have begun to be intercessors with God.

[143918] 14. In short, when summer suspends its winter rains, and the year is in anxiety, you indeed, daily fed and ready straightway to dine, with your baths and taverns and brothels in full work, offer rain-sacrifices to Jupiter, proclaim barefoot processions to the people, seek heaven at the Capitol, look for clouds from the panelled ceilings — turned away from God himself and from heaven;

[144306] 15. but we, parched with fasts and wrung dry by all continence, deferred from every fruit of life, rolling in sackcloth and ashes, beat at heaven with our complaint, we touch God; and when we have wrung out mercy, Jupiter is honoured!

[144542] 41. 1. You, then, are the troublers of human affairs, you the lure that ever draws on the public misfortunes — among whom God is spurned and statues are adored. For it ought to be held more credible that he is angry who is neglected than those who are worshipped; or else those gods are most unjust, if for the sake of the Christians they harm even their own worshippers, whom they ought to set apart from the deserts of the Christians.

[144980] 2. "This," you say, "may be turned back upon your God too, if he likewise suffers his own worshippers also to be harmed for the sake of the profane." Admit first his dispensations, and you will not turn it back.

[145193] 3. For he who has once for all appointed an eternal judgment after the end of the age does not hasten the separation, which is the condition of judgment, before the end of the age. He is meanwhile impartial over the whole human race, both indulgent and rebuking. He has willed both prosperity to be common to the profane and adversity to his own, that by an equal fellowship we might all experience both his leniency and his severity.

[145629] 4. Because we have learned these things from him, we love his leniency, we fear his severity; you, on the contrary, despise both. And it follows that all the strokes of the age come upon us, if anything, by way of warning, and upon you from God by way of chastisement.

[145899] 5. And yet we are in no way harmed. First, because nothing concerns us in this age, save to depart from it as quickly as we may; and then, because, if any adversity is inflicted, it is set down to your deserts. But even if some calamities touch us too, as cleaving close to you, we rejoice the rather at the recognition of the divine predictions, confirming, namely, the confidence and the faith of our hope.

[146309] 6. But if from those whom you worship all your evils come upon you for our sake, why do you persist in worshipping beings so thankless, so unjust, who ought rather to have helped and championed you in the suffering of the Christians?

[146544] 42. 1. But under another head of injuries too we are arraigned, and are said to be unprofitable in business. How so — men who live among you, of the same food, dress, furniture, of the same necessity for life? For we are not Brahmans, nor gymnosophists of the Indians, dwellers in the woods and exiles from life.

[146858] 2. We remember that we owe thanks to God, our Lord and Creator; we reject no fruit of his works; we only temper ourselves, lest we use them beyond measure or amiss. And so it is not without your forum, not without your meat-market, not without your baths, shops, workshops, inns, market-days, and the rest of your commerce, that we dwell together with you in this world.

[147230] 3. We sail too with you, and serve in the army, and till the ground, and trade; and besides we share our skills, and make our works public for your use. How we can seem unprofitable to your business, with whom and from whom we live, I do not know.

[147479] 4. But if I do not frequent your ceremonies, yet on that day too I am a man. I do not bathe at dawn on the Saturnalia, lest I lose both night and day; yet I bathe at an honourable and a wholesome hour, which keeps me both my heat and my blood: I can be stiff and pale after the bath when I am dead.

[147779] 5. I do not recline in public at the Liberalia, as is the custom of the beast-fighters at their last supper; yet wherever I dine, I dine from your stores.

[147935] 6. I do not buy a garland for my head. What is it to you how I use the flowers, which I buy none the less? I think they are more pleasant free and loose and straying everywhere. But even if they are forced into a garland, we know a garland by the nose; let those look to it who smell it through their hair.

[148243] 7. We do not meet at the spectacles; yet the wares that are sold at those gatherings, if I desire them, I will take more freely in their own proper places. Incense indeed we do not buy. If the Arabias complain, let the Sabaeans know that more and dearer of their wares are lavished on burying Christians than on fumigating the gods.

[148577] 8. "At any rate," you say, "the temple revenues daily dwindle: how few there are now who throw in their contribution!" For we cannot suffice to bring help both to men and to your begging gods; nor do we think that it should be imparted to others than those who ask. Let Jupiter, then, hold out his hand and receive; for meanwhile our compassion spends more from street to street than your religion from temple to temple.

[148999] 9. But the rest of the revenues will give thanks to the Christians, who pay what is due in good faith, even as we abstain from defrauding another of his own; so that, if it were reckoned how much is lost to the revenues by the fraud and falsehood of your declarations, the account could easily be balanced, the complaint under one head being made good by the gain on all the other accounts.

[149391] 43. 1. I will frankly confess who they are, if any, who could perhaps truly complain of the unprofitableness of Christians. The first will be pimps, panders, and procurers' touts; then assassins, poisoners, magicians; likewise soothsayers, diviners, and astrologers.

[149659] 2. To be unprofitable to these is a great profit. And yet, whatever loss your interest suffers through this sect, it can be balanced by some protection. How highly do you value — I will not now say those who cast out demons from you, I will not now say those who offer up prayers for you too to the true God, because perhaps you do not believe it — but those from whom you can have nothing to fear?

[150059] 44. 1. But indeed that loss to the commonwealth, as great as it is real, no one regards; that injury to the state no one weighs, when so many just men are spent, when so many innocent are made away with.

[150264] 2. For now we call your own acts to witness — you who daily preside over the judging of prisoners, who discharge accusations by your sentences. So many guilty are reckoned up by you under the various headings of their crimes: which of them there is set down as an assassin, a cutpurse, a temple-robber, a seducer, a robber of bathers — which of them is also entered as a Christian? Or when Christians are brought forward under their own title, which of them is also such as those so many guilty?

[150761] 3. With your own people the prison is always seething; with your own the mines are always sighing; with your own the beasts are always fattened; from among your own the producers of the shows always feed their droves of criminals. No one there is a Christian, unless he is plainly only that; or if he is something else too, he is no longer a Christian.

[151115] 45. 1. We alone, then, are innocent. What wonder, if it must be so? For indeed it must. Innocence taught us by God, we both know perfectly, as revealed by a perfect Master, and we faithfully keep, as commanded by an Inspector not to be despised.

[151362] 2. But to you human estimation handed down innocence, and human dominion likewise enjoined it; hence yours is a discipline neither full nor so much to be feared, as touching the truth of innocence. As great is man's wisdom for pointing out the good as his authority for exacting it: the one as easy to be deceived as the other to be despised.

[151706] 3. And so, which is fuller — to say, "You shall not kill," or to teach, "You shall not even be angry"? Which is more perfect — to forbid adultery, or to keep men even from the solitary lust of the eyes? Which is more learned — to forbid evil-doing, or evil-speaking too? Which more thorough — not to permit injury, or not to suffer even the requital of injury?

[152068] 4. While yet you may know that those very laws of yours too, which seem to make for innocence, were borrowed from the divine law, as from an older pattern. We have already spoken of the age of Moses.

[152269] 5. But how great is the authority of human laws, when it falls to a man both to evade them, and for the most part to lie hidden in his offences, and sometimes to despise them, sinning of his own will or of necessity?

[152487] 6. Consider these things too in view of the brevity of any penalty whatsoever, which is not to last beyond death. So too Epicurus cheapens all torment and pain, pronouncing the slight to be contemptible, and the great to be not lasting.

[152725] 7. But we who are weighed in the sight of God, the inspector of all, and who foresee an eternal punishment from him, deservedly are the only ones who attain to innocence — both for the fulness of our knowledge, and for the difficulty of concealment, and for the greatness of the torment, not lasting but everlasting — fearing him whom even he ought to fear who judges those that fear; fearing God, that is, not the proconsul.

[153152] 46. 1. We have taken our stand, as I think, against the whole indictment of crimes which demands the blood of the Christians. We have shown our whole condition, and by what means we can prove it to be such as we have shown — namely, by the trustworthiness and the antiquity of the divine writings, and likewise by the confession of the spiritual powers. Who will dare to refute us — not by craft of words, but by the same method by which we established our proof — concerning the truth?

[153640] 2. But while our truth is being made manifest to each, meanwhile unbelief — while it is convinced of the goodness of this sect, which is now known by use and intercourse — does not, indeed, reckon it a divine business, but rather a kind of philosophy. "The same things," it says, "the philosophers too counsel and profess — innocence, justice, patience, sobriety, chastity."

[154016] 3. Why then are we, who are likened to them in discipline, not made equal to them in the licence and impunity of that discipline? Or why are not they too, as our equals, pressed to the offices which we, in not performing, are imperilled?

[154255] 4. For who compels a philosopher to sacrifice, or to swear, or to bring out useless lamps at midday? Nay rather, they openly destroy your gods too, and accuse your superstitions in their treatises, with your approval. Most of them even bark against the princes, while you bear with them, and are more readily rewarded with statues and salaries than condemned to the beasts.

[154630] 5. But rightly. For they are surnamed philosophers, not Christians. This name of philosophers does not put demons to flight. Why not? since philosophers rank demons next after the gods. It is a saying of Socrates: "If the demon permit." The same man, too, though he had some perception of the truth in denying the gods, yet at his end ordered a cock to be sacrificed to Aesculapius — in honour, I suppose, of his father, because Apollo had pronounced Socrates the wisest of all men.

[155114] 6. O thoughtless Apollo! He rendered testimony to the wisdom of a man who denied that there were gods. In proportion as truth is hated, so does he who maintains it in good faith give offence; while he who falsifies and affects it wins favour for that very reason chiefly with the persecutors of truth.

[155417] 7. This truth, which the buffoons and corrupters, the philosophers, affect in enmity, and by affecting corrupt, as men who hunt after glory — Christians both necessarily seek and wholly maintain, as men who care for their own salvation.

[155655] 8. So that we are equal to you neither in knowledge nor in discipline, as you suppose. For what certain answer did that Thales, prince of natural philosophers, return to Croesus when he questioned him about divinity, often frustrated in his respite for deliberation?

[155923] 9. The lowest Christian workman both finds God and shows him, and thereupon assigns in deed too the whole that is sought concerning God; although Plato affirms that the maker of the universe is neither easy to find, and, when found, hard to expound to all.

[156181] 10. For the rest, if we make our challenge on the score of chastity, I read a part of the Attic sentence pronounced against Socrates as a corrupter of youth. The Christian does not even change his sex. I know of Phryne too, the harlot, yielding to the ardour of Diogenes as he reclined above her; and I hear that a certain Speusippus of Plato's school perished in adultery.

[156556] 11. The Christian is born a man for his own wife alone. Democritus, by blinding himself because he could not look upon women without lust, and grieved if he had not gained his desire, confesses his incontinence by his remedy.

[156783] 12. But the Christian, with eyes unharmed, does not see women: he is, in mind, blind against lust.

[156883] 13. If I am to defend us on the score of uprightness — behold, Diogenes with muddy feet tramples the proud couches of Plato with another pride: the Christian is not proud even toward a poor man. If I contend on the score of modesty — behold, Pythagoras among the Thurians, Zeno among the Prienians, aim at tyranny: the Christian aims not even at the aedileship.

[157246] 14. If I close with you on the score of equanimity — Lycurgus chose to starve himself to death, because the Lacedaemonians had amended his laws: the Christian gives thanks even when condemned. If I make comparison on the score of good faith — Anaxagoras denied to his hosts a deposit entrusted to him: the Christian is called faithful even by those outside.

[157605] 15. If I take my stand on the score of simplicity — Aristotle basely drove his familiar friend Hermias from his place: the Christian does not injure even his enemy. The same Aristotle as basely flatters Alexander, to be ruled by him, as Plato sells himself to Dionysius for his belly's sake.

[157898] 16. Aristippus, in his purple, under a great show of gravity, plays the prodigal; and Hippias, while he plots treason against the state, is slain. This no Christian has ever attempted on behalf of his own people, scattered though they be with every atrocity.

[158158] 17. But someone will say that some of our number too depart from the rule of discipline. They cease, however, to be held Christians among us; whereas those philosophers, with such deeds upon them, persevere in the name and honour of wisdom.

[158400] 18. So then, what likeness is there between a philosopher and a Christian? — between the disciple of Greece and the disciple of heaven? between the trafficker in fame and the trafficker in life? between the worker of words and the worker of deeds? between the builder and the destroyer of things? between the friend and the enemy of error? between the falsifier of truth and its restorer and expounder? between its thief and its guardian?

[158840] 47. 1. Truth is more ancient than all things, unless I am mistaken; and this too serves me — the antiquity already established of the divine literature — that it may readily be believed it has been a treasury for every later wisdom. And were I not now sparing the bulk of my volume, I would run out into this proof too.

[159161] 2. What poet, what sophist, who has not at all drunk from the fountain of the prophets? Thence, then, the philosophers slaked the thirst of their genius; so that, in what they have of ours, they liken us to themselves. Hence too, I suppose, philosophy was even cast out by certain peoples — by the Thebans, I mean, and by the Spartans and the Argives —

[159515] 3. while they aim at our things, and, being men greedy of glory, as we have said, and given over to mere eloquence, if they stumbled upon anything in the holy Scriptures, after the manner of their own curiosity they turned it to their own works; neither believing them sufficiently to be divine, that they might forbear to interpolate them, nor sufficiently understanding them, as being even then still half-veiled, obscured even to the Jews themselves, whose property they seemed to be.

[160004] 4. For even if there was any simplicity of truth, the more did human scrupulosity, scorning belief, alter it; whereby they confounded into uncertainty even what they had found certain.

[160190] 5. For, having merely found God, they did not discourse of him as they had found him, so that they dispute both about his quality, and about his nature, and about his abode.

[160365] 6. Some affirm him to be incorporeal, others corporeal — as the Platonists and the Stoics respectively; some say he is of atoms, others of numbers, as Epicurus and Pythagoras; another of fire, as it seemed to Heraclitus. And the Platonists hold him to be careful of things; on the contrary, the Epicureans hold him idle and unemployed, and, so to speak, no one as regards human affairs;

[160753] 7. but the Stoics place him outside the world, to whirl this mass from without after the manner of a potter; the Platonists within the world, to remain, after the example of a pilot, within that which he governs.

[160967] 8. So too about the world itself they vary, whether it was born or unborn, whether it is to pass away or to remain. So too about the state of the soul, which some contend to be divine and eternal, others dissoluble; as each has thought, so has he laid it down or refashioned it.

[161247] 9. Nor is it any wonder if the genius of the philosophers perverted the old instrument. From their seed certain men have adulterated even this new-budded furniture of ours by their own opinions into philosophic notions, and out of the one way have cut many crooked and inextricable byways. This I have suggested for this reason, lest the variety known to exist in this sect should seem to liken us in this also to the philosophers, and lest from the variety of defences one should judge of the truth.

[161749] 10. But we readily prescribe to our adulterators that the rule of truth is that which comes transmitted from Christ through his companions, to whom these various commentators will be proved somewhat later in time.

[161964] 11. All things against truth have been built up out of truth itself, the spirits of error working this rivalry. By these have such adulterations of the saving discipline been suborned; by these certain fables too have been brought in, which by their likeness might weaken the faith of the truth, or rather might win it to themselves; so that one might therefore think Christians not to be believed, because neither poets nor philosophers are; or might think poets and philosophers the rather to be believed, because they are not Christians.

[162506] 12. And so we are laughed at when we proclaim that God will judge. For thus even the poets and philosophers set a tribunal among the dead. And if we threaten Gehenna, which is a treasury of hidden fire underground for punishment, we are likewise laughed to scorn. For thus too among the dead there is the river Pyriphlegethon.

[162834] 13. And if we name paradise, a place of divine pleasantness appointed for the receiving of the spirits of the holy, cut off from the knowledge of the common world by a kind of fiery wall of that zone — the Elysian fields have taken up the faith of it. Whence, I ask you, come these things so very like, in the philosophers or the poets? From nothing but our mysteries.

[163204] 14. If from our mysteries, as from the earlier source, then ours are the more trustworthy and the more to be believed, whose very images find belief. If from their own conceits, then our mysteries will be held to be images of later things — which the nature of things does not allow. For never does the shadow go before the body, nor the image before the truth.

[163567] 48. 1. Come now, if some philosopher affirm — as Laberius does, after the opinion of Pythagoras — that a man is made out of a mule, a snake out of a woman, and bend all the arguments of his eloquence to that opinion by the power of his rhetoric, will he not move assent and fix belief, so that men should abstain even from animals for that reason? Should anyone hold the persuasion, lest perchance in his beef he should be eating some great-grandfather of his? But if a Christian promise that a man shall return from a man, the very Gaius come back as Gaius, he will be driven off by the people with stones rather than even with gatherings of approval.

[164221] 2. If by any law souls are made to pass back into bodies, why should they not return into the same substance, since this is what it means to be restored — to be that which one was? They are no longer the same as they were, since they could not have been what they were not, unless they ceased to be what they had been.

[164541] 3. There would even be need, in many places, of leisure for the work, if we wished to sport in this matter — who might be seen reformed into what beast. But it is rather for our own defence, since we maintain that it is far more worthy of belief that man shall return from man, any man for any other, provided it be man; so that the same quality of soul may be restored into the same condition, even if not into the same shape.

[164970] 4. Certainly, because the ground of the restitution is the appointment of judgment, of necessity the very same man who had been will be brought forth, to receive from God the judgment of good or of the contrary desert. And therefore the bodies too will be presented again, because the soul alone can suffer nothing without solid matter, that is, the flesh; and because, whatever souls must suffer at all by the judgment of God, they have deserved it not without the flesh, within which they did all things.

[165478] 5. "But how," you say, "can the dissolved matter be brought forth?" Consider yourself, O man, and you will find the proof of the thing. Reflect what you were before you existed. Surely nothing. For you would remember, if you had been anything. You, then, who were nothing before you existed, and likewise became nothing when you ceased to exist — why can you not be again out of nothing, by the will of that same Author who willed you to be out of nothing?

[165936] 6. What new thing will befall you? You who were not, were made; when you shall again be not, you shall be made. Render, if you can, the reason by which you were made, and then ask the reason by which you shall be made. And yet surely you shall the more easily be made what you once were, since you were made, with equal ease, what you never were before.

[166291] 7. Doubt will be felt, I suppose, of the powers of God — of him who imposed this so great body of the world out of that which was not, no less than out of the death of vacancy and emptiness, animated by the Spirit, the animator of all souls, and itself signed as the very example of human resurrection, for a witness to you.

[166617] 8. The light, daily slain, shines again; and the darkness in turn, by retiring, gives place; the dead stars come to life again; the seasons begin where they end; the fruits are consummated and return; surely the seeds rise up the more fruitfully only when corrupted and dissolved; all things are preserved by perishing, all things are refashioned out of destruction.

[166985] 9. You, man, so great a name — if you understand yourself, learning it even from the inscription of the Pythian priestess — lord of all things that die and rise again: will you die to this end, that you may perish? Wherever you have been dissolved, whatever matter has destroyed you, swallowed you, abolished you, reduced you to nothing — it will give you back. The very nothing is his whose is the whole too.

[167396] 10. "Then," you say, "we must always die and always rise again?" If the Lord of all things had so appointed, you would against your will undergo the law of your condition. But as it is, he has appointed no otherwise than he has foretold.

[167635] 11. The same reason which composed the universe out of diversity — so that all things should stand fast in unity out of rival substances, out of void and solid, out of animate and inanimate, out of comprehensible and incomprehensible, out of light and darkness, out of very life and death — that same reason has knit together the age too under an appointed and distinct condition, so that this first part, which we inhabit from the beginning of things, flows down in a temporal span to its end, but the part that follows, which we await, is propagated into infinite eternity.

[168212] 12. When, therefore, the end and limit, the boundary that gapes between, shall be at hand — so that the very fashion of the world, likewise temporal, may be transferred, which has been spread before that ordering of eternity like a curtain — then shall the whole human race be restored, to discharge the account of what it has deserved in this age, of good or of evil, and thereafter to be paid out into the measureless perpetuity of eternity.

[168657] 13. And therefore there shall then be neither death any more, nor resurrection again and again, but we shall be the same that we are now, and no others afterward — the worshippers of God, indeed, with God forever, clothed over with the proper substance of eternity; but the profane, and they who have not been wholly toward God, in the punishment of a fire likewise unceasing, having out of its very nature, namely, a divine supply of incorruptibility.

[169111] 14. The philosophers too know the difference between the hidden and the common fire. So far other is that which is for human use than that which appears in the judgment of God, whether drawing down lightnings from heaven, or belching up from the earth through the summits of mountains; for it does not consume what it burns, but, while it draws upon it, repairs it.

[169478] 15. So the mountains remain ever burning; and he who is struck from heaven is safe, so that he is now reduced to ashes by no fire. And this shall be a witness of the eternal fire; this an example of the unceasing judgment that feeds the penalty. The mountains burn and endure. What of the guilty and the enemies of God?

[169799] 49. 1. These are the things which in us alone are called presumptions; in the philosophers and poets, the height of knowledge and signal genius. They are prudent, we are inept; they are to be honoured, we to be derided — nay, the rather even to be punished.

[170058] 2. Grant now that the things we maintain are false, and deservedly presumption; yet they are necessary: inept, yet useful; since those who believe them are constrained to become better, for fear of an eternal punishment and in hope of an eternal refreshment. It is not therefore expedient to call false, nor to hold inept, things which it is expedient to presume true. On no ground is it lawful at all to condemn things that do good.

[170493] 3. With you, therefore, this very thing is presumption, which condemns useful things. So neither can they be inept; certainly, even if false and inept, yet harmful to none. For they are like many other things to which you assign no penalties — vain and fabulous things, unaccused and unpunished, as harmless.

[170803] 4. But in things of this kind, if anything is to be judged worthy of derision, it should be of derision, not of swords and fires and crosses and beasts; at which iniquity of cruelty not only this blind rabble exults and insults, but some of you too, who hunt for the favour of the crowd out of that iniquity, make it your boast.

[171133] 5. As if all that you can do against us were not our own choice. Certainly, if I will it, I am a Christian. Then you will condemn me only if I wish to be condemned; but since what you can do against me you cannot, unless I will, what you can do is now a matter of my will, not of your power. So the rabble too rejoices vainly over our vexation.

[171479] 6. For ours, in like manner, is the joy which it claims for itself — we who would rather be condemned than fall away from God; whereas those who hate us ought to grieve, not to rejoice, since we have obtained what we chose.

[171704] 50. 1. "Why then," you say, "do you complain that we persecute you, if you wish to suffer, since you ought to love those through whom you suffer what you wish?" Plainly we wish to suffer, but in the manner in which a soldier wishes for war. No one indeed suffers willingly, since suffering means both fear and peril.

[172022] 2. Yet a man both fights with all his might, and, winning in the battle, rejoices in the battle, though he had complained of the battle, because he gains both glory and spoil. It is a battle for us when we are summoned to your tribunals, that there, at the hazard of our life, we may contend for the truth. But the victory is to obtain that for which you contended. That victory has both the glory of pleasing God and the spoil of living forever.

[172470] 3. "But you are cut down." Yes, when we have prevailed. So then we conquer when we are slain; in fine, we escape when we are led off. Call us now "faggot-fellows" and "half-axle men," because we are bound to a stake of half an axle and burned in a circle of faggots. This is the dress of our victory; this is our embroidered robe; in such a chariot do we triumph.

[172835] 4. Deservedly, then, we do not please the vanquished; for on this account we are reckoned desperate and ruined men. But this desperation and ruin, among you, in the cause of glory and fame, lift up the standard of valour.

[173058] 5. Mucius left his right hand willingly upon the altar: O sublimity of soul! Empedocles gave his whole self to the fires of Aetna at Catana: O vigour of mind! Some foundress of Carthage gave herself to the pyre rather than to a second marriage: O proclamation of chastity!

[173332] 6. Regulus, that one man might not live in exchange for many enemies, endured crosses over all his body: O brave man, and victor even in captivity! Anaxarchus, when he was being pounded with a pestle to the death, like barley-groats, kept saying, "Pound, pound the husk of Anaxarchus, for Anaxarchus you do not pound": O magnanimity of the philosopher, who even jested about such a death of his own!

[173733] 7. I pass over those who bargained for praise with their own sword, or with some milder kind of death. For behold, you crown even the contests of torments.

[173890] 8. The Attic harlot, when the executioner was already wearied, at last spat into the face of the raging tyrant her own tongue, which she had bitten off, that with it she might spit out her voice too, lest she should be able to confess the conspirators, even if, overcome, she had wished.

[174179] 9. Zeno of Elea, when asked by Dionysius what philosophy could offer, having answered, "Contempt of death," and being exposed unmoved to the tyrant's scourges, sealed his sentence to the death. The Spartan scourges too, made bitter under the very eyes of kinsmen who urge them on, confer upon their house an honour of endurance as great as the blood they have shed.

[174546] 10. O glory permitted, because human! to which neither desperate presumption nor desperate persuasion is imputed in the contempt of death and of every kind of atrocity; to which it is granted to suffer so much for fatherland, for empire, for friendship, as it is not lawful to suffer for God!

[174840] 11. And yet for all these you cast statues and inscribe images and carve titles unto eternity. So far as you can, by your monuments, you yourselves in a manner bestow a resurrection upon the dead. But he who hopes for the true resurrection from God, if he suffers for God, is mad.

[175122] 12. But go to, good governors — much better in the people's eyes if you sacrifice the Christians to them: rack us, torture us, condemn us, grind us down; for your iniquity is the proof of our innocence. For this reason God suffers us to suffer these things. For but lately, by condemning a Christian woman to the pander rather than to the lion, you confessed that among us a stain upon chastity is reckoned more dreadful than any penalty and any death.

[175576] 13. Yet nothing whatever does your every more refined cruelty profit you; it is rather an enticement to the sect. We are made more, as often as we are mown down by you: the blood of the Christians is seed.

[175783] 14. Many among you exhort to the endurance of pain and of death: Cicero in the Tusculans, Seneca in his work On Chance, Diogenes, Pyrrho, Callinicus. And yet their words do not find so many disciples as the Christians do, teaching by deeds.

[176025] 15. That very obstinacy which you reproach is the teacher. For who is not stirred, at the contemplation of it, to inquire what there is in the matter within? Who, when he has inquired, does not draw near? When he has drawn near, does not long to suffer, that he may purchase the whole grace of God, that he may obtain full pardon from him by the exchange of his own blood?

[176399] 16. For all sins are forgiven to this work. Hence it is that we give thanks then and there for your sentences. As there is a rivalry between the divine thing and the human, when we are condemned by you, we are absolved by God.