WORK: On Civil Liberty and Self-Government  (slug: theodore-dwight-woolsey-on-civil-liberty-and-self-govern-6f9899)

CHAPTER: 103-appendix-xvi-letter-of-the-french-minister-of-the-



[110346] So this regulation of the senate was prospectively repealed and declared inoperative “after the present session,” as by a previous resolution it had been expressly suspended during the debate on the case of Mr. Gallatin, Yet this step was not taken without reservation and caution, as is apparent from the fact that on the same day with the passage of the prospective resolution, it was unanimously resolved “That, on a motion made and seconded to shut the doors of the senate, on the discussion of any business which may, in the opinion of a member, require secrecy, the president shall direct the gallery to be cleared; and that during the discussion of such motion the doors shall remain shut.”

[111045] It only remains for us to add, in conclusion, that on the day following the passage of these resolutions the case of Mr. Gallatin was debated in open senate. The discussion extended through several days, and was conducted in the form of a trial, Mr. Gallatin affirming his right to the character of a citizen of the United States, and Mr. Lewis, a member of the Pennsylvania bar, attended by Mr. Schmyser, a member of the state senate of Pennsylvania, appearing as managers of the prosecution on the part of the petitioners. The pleadings, opened on the 21st of February, were closed on the 28th of the same month, when the senate decided that the election of Mr. Gallatin was void, in consequence of his not having been a citizen of the United States during the term of years required by the constitution as a qualification for membership in the United States senate. This case being settled, the doors of the senate were closed against the public during the residue of the session; but since that period, so far as we can recall, the legislative deliberations of the body have been uniformly conducted in public, without any interruption other than that which has sometimes arisen from the inadvertence of the senate, in resuming its legislative discussions after a secret session, and without thinking for a time to re-open the doors which had been closed during the transaction of executive business.

[112451] We need hardly say that it has been frequently proposed to abolish the secrecy of the senate even when called to sit in judgment on the treaties formed or the nominations submitted by the executive branch of the government. But the propriety of such a reservation, made in behalf of diplomatic negotiations not yet brought to a close, is too manifest to need remark, while the freedom and independence which the senator should enjoy in canvassing the propriety and character of the official appointments made with his advice and consent, plead perhaps with equal force in favor of retaining the rule so far as it relates to this other branch of executive business. The injunction of secrecy is from time to time removed by resolution of the senate from all subjects of popular concern whose publication can no longer frustrate the ends of prudent legislation.

[113312] It may not be uninteresting to add that President Jefferson, at the time when this change was made, attributed it to other causes. His first annual address to both houses of congress was sent in on the 8th of December, 1801, and was accompanied with the subjoined letter, addressed to the presiding officer of each body:

[113634] The circumstances under which we find ourselves at this place [Washington] rendering inconvenient the mode heretofore practised, of making by personal address the first communications between the legislative and executive branches, I have adopted that by message, as used on all subsequent occasions through the session. In doing this I have had principal regard to the convenience of the legislature, to the economy of their time, to their relief from the embarrassment of immediate answers on subjects not yet fully before them, and to the benefits thence resulting to the public affairs. Trusting that a procedure founded in these motives will meet their approbation, I beg leave, through you, sir, to communicate the enclosed message, with the documents accompanying it, to the honorable the senate, and pray you to accept, for yourself and them, the homage of my high respect and consideration.

[114535] The Hon. the President of the senate.

[114574] While these sheets were passing through the press, (March, 1859,) the house of representatives, at Washington, refused to consider certain amendments, passed in the senate, for the purpose of raising the postage on letters, the house declaring by resolution that these amendments interfered with the constitutional and exclusive right of the house to originate bills affecting the revenue.

[114965] [Can the house of lords reject a money bill? In 1671 and 1689 it was admitted that they could. The lords, however, abstained from interfering with bills affecting the supplies, and only now and then rejected or postponed such bills as bore incidentally on supplies and taxation, until 1860, when they postponed the second reading of the Paper Duties Repeal Bill for six months. This led to lively discussion of the privileges of the house of commons; to a search for precedents; and to resolutions of the commons, one of which was that, although the lords had sometimes exercised the power of rejecting bills of various descriptions relating to taxation, yet the exercise of that power was “justly regarded by the commons with peculiar jealousy, as affecting the right to grant supplies, and to provide the ways and means for the service of the year.” May, u. s. i. chap. 7, p. 449, whose words we have in part used.]

[115884] “Federalist,” No. xxx. and sequel, Concerning taxation, and other parts of that sage book.

[115976] “Memorials of John Hampden,” vol. i. p. 212, London, 1832.

[116036] [For the practice of short and specific supplies by the English commons, begun under Charles II., and since William III. an essential part of the constitution, see Hallam, iii. 159, 160; May, i. 140. The last-cited author points to the want of suspicion of the government on the part of the commons, growing out of the detailed budgets.]

[116375] Chatham, when minister to the crown in 1759, and while Lord Clive was making his great conquests in the East, said that neither the East India Company nor the crown ought to have that immense revenue. If the latter had it, it would endanger all liberty. Chatham's Correspondence, vol. i. In the year 1858, however, the government of the East Indies was taken from the company and given to the crown. It would seem that the commons felt so secure, in the middle of the nineteenth century, that they did not fear to have that vast Eastern empire ruled over, theoretically, by the monarch, in reality, by a minister responsible to parliament.

[117016] Francis, Chronicles and Characters of the Stock Exchange.

[117075] [For the history of the Civil List, see May, i. chap. 4.]

[117134] It may as well be observed here that congress means the senate and house of representatives. The president is not included in the term. Parliament, on the other hand, means commons, lords, and king. Practically speaking, the difference is not great; for the president has the veto power, of which he makes occasional use, while the King of England has not made any use of it for about a century. The English administration would resign before it would become necessary in their eyes to veto a bill. But the King of England has the greatest of all veto powers—he can dissolve parliament, which our executive cannot do.

[117753] Burke.

[117761] These subjects have been considered at length in the Political Ethics. The reader will peruse with advantage the chapter on Party in Lord John Russell's Essay on the History of the English Government and Constitution, 2d edit., London, 1823.

[118004] For instance, Locke. Montesquieu, at a later period, is generally considered the political philosopher who first distinctly conceived the necessity of the division of power. The English practised it earliest and established it most clearly; and the French have again given it up, for a time at least, ever since the revolution of 1848, nor has it ever been properly carried out by them, their principle of centralization preventing it. See Pol. Ethics, book ii. c. xxiii.

[118477] He has repeatedly given his views, but especially in an elaborate and brilliantly written, but, according to our opinion, superficial paper on the question, why the republic (of 1848) came to a fall. Mr. Girardin and all the French who believe that liberty exists in the right of choosing the ruler, although once elected he be absolute, seem entirely to forget that all the generals of the monastic orders are elective; that in many orders, even in those of nuns, for instance in the Ursuline order, the superiors are elected by universal suffrage, but that no person has ever claimed the possession of liberty for the monks or nuns. Indeed, their very vow is against it. But “republicanism” has actually been vindicated for the monastic orders. In the same way Rome might be considered a republic because the pope is elective.

[119307] [Centralization is opposed (i) to division of power between functions, (2) to diffusion of power, or local self-government, which is treated of afterwards.]

[119465] Innumerable official instances might be cited. The King of Prussia, when, in May, 1847, he delivered his first throne speech to the united committees of the provincial estates, which were to serve as a substitute for the expected estates general, “appealed in advance to his people “against everything we are accustomed to call-constitutional, “My people does not want a participation of representatives in ruling, … nor the division of sovereignty, nor the breaking up of the plenitude of royal power,” etc. General Bonaparte wrote to the Directory, May 14,1796: “One bad general is even better than two good ones. War is like government, it is a matter of tact”—words which Mr. Girardin quotes with approval, and as an authority for his theory of the best government consisting in a succession of perfectly absolute single rulers to be appointed, and at pleasure recalled by universal suffrage.

[120363] This I have endeavored plainly to show in the Political Ethics.

[120428] Esprit des Loix, xi. 5.

[120453] Mr. Madison's paper on The Meaning of the Maxim, which requires a Separation of the Departments of Power, examined and ascertained. Federalist, No. xlvii. and sequ.

[120619] Esprit des Loix, book v. c. 14.

[120652] The speech was delivered in the Senate of the United States on the 7th of May, 1834. If I might place myself by the side of these men, I would refer the reader to the Political Ethics, where I stated that despotism is simple and coarse. It is like a block of granite, and may last in its unchanging coarseness a long time; but liberty is organic, with all the delicate vitality of organic bodies, with development, growth, and expansion. Despotism may have accretion, but liberty widens by its own vital power, and gains in intensity as it expands. The long duration of some despotisms decides nothing. Longevity of states is indeed a requisite of modern civilization, but if we must choose, who would not prefer a few hundred years of Roman liberty to the thousands of Chinese dreary mandarraism and despotism? Besides, we must not forget that a shoe once trodden down to a slipper will always serve longer in its slipshod capacity than it did as a shoe.

[121609] Page 122, vol iv. of the Works of Daniel Webster. I have not transcribed this long passage without the permission of those who have the right to give it.

[121764] To my mind it appears the most Demosthenian passage of that orator. Perhaps I am biased, because the extract maintains what I have always asserted on the nature of liberty, and what has shown itself with such remarkable clearness and undraped nakedness in the late French affairs.

[122046] Guizot, Essais sur l'Histoire de France, p. 359.

[122096] General Rapp, first aid of Napoleon, gives a good picture of the false position of an absolute monarch, in his Memoirs, Paris, 1832, ch. 2. He says that “whenever Napoleon was angry, his confidants, far from appeasing him, increased his anger by their representations. ‘Your majesty is right,’ they would say: “such a person has merited to be shot, or disgraced, or discarded…. I have long known him to be your enemy. Examples are necessary; they are necessary for the maintenance of tranquillity.' When it was required to levy contributions from the enemy's country and Napoleon would perhaps ask for twenty thousand, he was advised to demand ten more. If it was the question to levy two hundred thousand men, he was persuaded to ask for three hundred thousand; in liquidating a debt which was indisputable, they would insinuate doubts on its legitimacy, and would often cause him to reduce to a half, or a third, and sometimes entirely, the amount of the demand. If he spoke of making war, they would applaud the noble resolution: war alone would enrich France; it was necessary to astonish the world in a manner suitable to the power of the great nation. Thus it was that in provoking and encouraging expectations and uncertain enterprises he was precipitated into continual wars. Thus it is that they succeeded in giving to his reign a character of violence which did not belong to him. His disposition and habits were altogether good-natured. Never a man was more inclined to indulgence and more awake to the voice of humanity. I could cite thousands of examples.”

[123667] Whether Napoleon was good-natured or not need not be discussed here, nor is it important to state that he was not so weak as represented by Rapp; but it is instructive to see how a man like Rapp, an uncompromising absolutist, unawares lays bare his own opinion of the character of an absolute monarch, because he is absolute.

[123994] Pol., v. 9, § 6; vi. 2, §§ 9, 12.

[124029] Since the foregoing chapter was originally written, history has furnished us with many additional and impressive illustrations of some of its contents. Numerous French writer, anxious to vindicate for France the leadership in the race of civilization, yet sadly aware that liberty exists no more in France, have declared that the essence of liberty exists simply in universal suffrage, or, if they abandon even the name of liberty, that the height of political civilization consists in two things—universal suffrage and the code Napoleon, with the proclamation of which it has been stoutly maintained a French army would find the conquest of England and the regeneiation of Italy an easy matter. Once the principle of universal suffrage established, the French statesmen of the imperial school demand that everything flowing from it, by what they term severe or uncompromising logic, must be accepted. This peculiar demand of severe logic is, nevertheless, wholly illogical, for politics are a means to obtain a high object, and the application to certain given circumstances is of paramount importance. We do not build houses, cure or sustain our bodies, by logic; and a bill of rights is infinitely more important and intrinsically true than the most symmetrically logical rights of men. The “severe logic” leads, moreover, diffeient men to entirely different results, as, for instance, Mr. Louis Blanc on the one hand, and the imperial absolutists on the other; and, if universal suffrage, without guaranteeing institutions, is the only principle of importance, the question presents itself immediately, Why appeal to it on lare occasions only, perhaps only once in order to transfer power, and what does universal suffrage mean if not the ascertaining of the opinion of the majority? If this be the object, then we must further ask, Why is discussion necessary to form the opinion suppressed, and how could Mr. de Montalembert be charged with, and tried for, having attacked the principle of universal suffrage, in a pamphlet the whole object of which could not be anything else than influencing those who, under universal suffrage, have to give their votes? This is not “severe logic.”

[126221] If much has happened and been written since the original penning of this chapter to illustrate the utter falsity of universal suffrage, naked and pure, we must not omit to mention, on the other hand, works of merit which have been written in a very opposite train of thought, by men of great mark, of whom Mr. de Tocqueville deserves particular mention on account of his Ancien Régime.

[126608] [The importance of the power of impeachment for obeying a king's unlawful commands would have been practically destroyed in England, if either a pardon had been pleadable against impeachment, or the dissolution of a house of commons had put an end to proceedings in such sort that a new house must commence them de novo. The earl of Danby had been saved for the time by Charles II., by means of a dissolution of the impeaching parliament, and when a new parliament revived the proceedings, pleaded a pardon in bar of the prosecution of the case. (1679.) It was decided in the act of settlement of13 Wm. III. that “no pardon under the great seal of England be pleadable to an impeachment of the commons in parliament.” The question whether an impeachment could survive a dissolution was decided, during the impeachment of Warren Hastings, by very large majorities of both houses in the affirmative. (1791.) After sentence on trial by impeachment, the king can pardon; and, in fact, the house of lords, in 1715, when six peers, involved in the rebellion of that year, had been by this process convicted, begged the king to exercise this prerogative, which he did by pardoning three of the number. Hallam, ii. 555-570. Thus a king can save his minister from the results of a legal sentence by impeachment, but not until he stands convicted before the country, and suffers, it may be, a lifelong loss of reputation.]

[128022] It is sufficiently remarkable to be mentioned here, that Napoleon III., when the sanguinary coup d'etat had been perpetrated, supported his demand of a cabinet exclusively dependent upon the chief of the state, by the example of the American president, not seeing or not mentioning that congress has a controlling power.

[128344] The following extract of a letter, written by Lord Liverpool to Lord Castle-reagh, (October 23, 1818,) and taken from Correspondence, Despatches, and other Papers of Viscount Castlereagh, second Marquis of Londonderry, 12 vols., London, 1853, is interesting, if we consider how thorough a tory minister Lord Liverpool was:

[128668] “Bathurst's despatch and letter of Tuesday, and my letter of to-day, will put you entirely in possession of our sentiments upon the present state of the negotiations. The Russians must be made to feel that we have a parliament and a public to which we are responsible, and that we cannot permit ourselves to be drawn into views of policy which are wholly incompatible with the spirit of our government.

[129072] “Ever sincerely yours,

[129096] [Such specific checks on legislative power are coming more and more into use. The people are beginning to distrust the legislatures, as they formerly did the executives.]

[129268] I have already mentioned the judgment given by the French court, with reference to the opening of letters by the police in order to find out the tracrs of offences. I now give an extract, and shall italicize those passages which bear upon the subject above:

[129527] “Considering that if, by the terms of existing legislation, and particularly by art. 187 of the penal code, functionaries and agents of the government, and of the post-office administration, are forbidden either to suppress or to open Setters confided to the said administiation, this disposition cannot reach the prefect of police, acting by virtue of powers conferred upon him by art. 10 of the Code of Criminal Instruction:

[129955] “Considering that the law, in giving to him the mission to investigate offences, to collect evidence in support of them, and to hand their authors over to the tribunals charged with punishing them, has not limited the means placed at his disposition for attaining that end;

[130230] “That, in fact, the right of perquisition in aid of judicial instructions is solemnly affirmed by numerous legal dispositions, and that it is of common law in this matter:

[130403] “That the seizure in question was made in order to follow the trace of an offence; that it resulted in the discovery of useful and important facts; that, finally, the authors of the said letters have been prosecuted in a court of justice:

[130643] “Considering, moreover, that the court is not called upon to inquire into the origin of documents submitted to this appreciation; that its mission is merely to establish their authenticity or their sincerity; that, in fact, the letters in question are not denied by their authors:

[130925] “For these reasons the letters are declared admissible as evidence,” etc.

[131000] It is pleasing to read by the side of this remarkable judgment so simple a passage as the following, which was contained in an English paper at the same time that the French judgment was given. It relates to a London police regulation concerning cabmen:

[131255] “Now, we have no wish to palliate the bad conduct of a class who at least furnish amusing topics to contemporaries. By all means let the evils be remedied; but let the remedy come within the limits of law. It will be an evil day for England when irresponsible legislation and police law, even for cabmen, are recognized and applauded by a certain public because in a given example it happens to be convenient to them. If the ordinary law is not sufficient, let it be reformed; but do not leave the making of penal laws to the police, and the execution of those laws to the correctional tribunal of the same authority.”—Spectator, April 2, 1853.

[131901] Does not this argument from the absence of restriction remind the reader of that Baron Viereck, who consented to his daughter's marrying the King of Denmark, the undivorced queen living, and who replied to an expostulating friend that he could find no passage in the Bible prohibiting kings of Denmark from having two wives?

[132227] They are generally called written constitutions; but it is evident that the essential distinction of constitutions, derived from their origin, is not whether they are written or unwritten, which is incidental, but whether they are enacted or cumulative. The English constitution—that is, the aggregate of those laws and rules which are considered of fundamental importance, and essential in giving to the state and its government those features which characterize them, or those laws and institutions which give to England her peculiar political organic being—consists in cumulated usages and branches of the common law, in decisions of fundamental importance, in self-grown and in enacted institutions, in compacts, and in statutes embodying principles of political magnitude. From these the Americans have extracted what has appeared important or applicable to our circumstances; we have added, expanded, and systematized, and then enacted this aggregate as a whole, calling it a constitution—enacted, not by the legislature, which is a creature of this very constitution, but by the people. Whether the constitution is written, printed, carved in stone, or remembered only, as laws were of old, is not the distinctive feature. It is the positive enactment of the whole at one time, and by distinct authority, which marks the difference between the origin of our constitutions and those of England or ancient Rome. Although the term written constitution does not express the distinctive principle, it was nevertheless natural that it should have been adopted, for it is analogous to the term lex sciipta, by which the enacted or statute law is distinguished from the unenacted, grown, and cumulative common law. [The distinguishing featuie of the English constitution is that the people have no direct voice in saying what it shall be; the parliament has theoretically an uncontrolled power of adding to or taking away from the fundamental laws.]

[134177] The ancient justicia of Aragon had the power of declaring laws unlawful, or unconstitutional, as we call it, against the king and estates, but it was done without the trial of a specific case and specific persons. He was therefore simply in these cases above king and estates, that is, king himself; and it became necessary in course of time to suppress this feature. See Pol. Ethics, vol. ii. p. 281

[134579] The term bureaucracy is called by many barbarous, nor has it, so far as I know, been introduced into dictionaries of great authority. Be it so; but, while we have innumerable words compounded of elements which belong to different languages, a term for that distinct idea which is designated by the word Bureaucracy has become indispensable in the progress of political science, because the thing which must be named has distinctly developed itself in the progress of centralization combined with writing. In spite, therefore, of the want of lexical authority, it is almost universally used; for necessity presses. I am under this necessity, and shall use it until a better and more acceptable term be proposed. Mandarinism would not be preferable. Mandannism would express indeed a government by mandarins, by officials, but it would not designate the characteristics which it is intended to point out by the term bureaucracy, namely, a government carried on not only by a hierarchy of officials, but also by scribbling bureaus. All bureaucracies must be mandarinisms, I take it; but every mandarinism reed not be a bureaucracy. I observe that the French, from whom indeed the term has been received, freely use it, even in their best writings. It is to be regretted that we Americans frequently use the French term Bureau for the old term Board. There are different associations of ideas connected with each of these words.

[136005] To refer to books on such a subject is very difficult; for it almost comprehends the whole history of modern liberty.

[136124] I have treated on many points connected with the representative system, in the Political Ethics. The reader will peruse with interest M. Guizot's Histoire des Origines du Gouvernement repiésentatif en Europe, Paris, 1851. It is interesting to learn the views of a Frenchman of such celebrity on a subject of vital interest to us. Regarding the deputative principle, the Histoire de la Formation et des Progiès du Tiers-Etat, by Augustin Thierry, Paris, 1853, is instructive. I am sorry that I have not been able to read Mr. George Harris's True Theory of Representation in a State, London, 1852.

[136721] [Xen., Hellen., i. cap. 7, § 12, comp. 15. It ought, however, to be remarked that the Athenians checked the action of the ecclesia by requiring previous action of the senate, (probouleumata,) and by having laws emanate, in the first instance, not from the ecclesia proper, but from a large committee of the people.]

[137038] I take here the term national in the sense of relating to an entire society spread over the territory of an extensive state, and as contradistinguished from what belongs to a city-state, or from the system of the middle ages, which was deputative, on the one hand, (see my Political Ethics on Representative System,) and from a system of juxtaposition rather than of pervading organization, like the Chinese language compared to our grammatical languages. In this sense, then, the government of Virginia or New York would be national, although we use the word in America as synonymous with federal. It were well if we could adopt a distinct term for national in the first sense. See the note at the end of this chapter.

[137759] A curious picture of Asiatic local self-government, without any liberty, has lately been given to the public, in Lieutenant-Colonel C. G. Dixon's Sketch of Maiwara, giving a Brief Account of the Origin and Habits of the Mairs, etc, London, 1851.

[138006] National representation is closely connected with the idea of country, indispensable for high modern civilization. Nations and Countries appear to me so much elements of modern civilization and of modern liberty that I may be permitted to give an extract relating to this topic, from my Inaugural Speech in 1858:

[138320] “Our government is a federal union. We loyally adhere to it and turn our faces from centralization, however brilliant, for a time, the lustre of its focus may appear, however imposingly centred power, that saps self-government, may hide for a day the inherent weakness of military concentrated polities. But truths are truths. It is a truth that modern civilization stands in need of entire countries; and it is a truth that every government, as indeed every institution whatever, is, by its nature, exposed to the danger of gradually increased and, at last, excessive action of its vital principle. One-sidedness is a universal effect of man's state of sin. Confederacies are exposed to the danger of sejunction,as unitary governments are exposed to absorbing central power—centrifugal power in the one case, centripetal power in the other. That illustrious predecessor of ours, from whom we borrowed our very name, the United States of the Netherlands, ailed long with the paralyzing poison of sejunction in her limbs, and was brought to an early grave by it, after having added to the stock of humanity the worsLipful names of William of Orange, De Witt, Grotius, De Ruyter, and William III. There is no German among you that does not sadly remember that his country, too, furnishes us with bitter commentaries on this truth; and we are not exempt from the dangers common to mortals. Yet, as was indicated just now, the patria of us moderns ought to consist in a wide land covered by a nation, and not in a city or a little colony. Mankind have outgiown the ancient city-state. Countries are the orchaids and the broad acres where modern civilization gathers her grain and nutritious fruits. The narrow garden-beds of antiquity suffice for our widened humanity no more than the shoit existence of ancient states. Moderns stand in need of nations and of national longevity, for their literatures and law, their industry, liberty, and patriotism; we want countries to work and write and glow for, to live and to die for. The sphere of humanity has steadily widened, and nations alone can nowadays acquire the membership of that great commonwealth of our race which extends over Europe and Amenca. Has it ever been sufficiently impressed on our minds how slender the threads are that unite us in a mere political system of states, if we are not tied together by the far stronger cords of those feelings which arise from the consciousness of having a country to clmg to and to pray for, and unimpeded land and water loads to move on?

[140854] “Should we, then, not avail ourselves of so well proved a cultuial means of fostering and promoting a generous nationality, as a comprehensive university is known to be?Shall we never have this noble pledge of our nationality?All Athens, the choicest city-state of antiquity, may well be said to have been one great university, where masters daily met with masters; and shall we not have even one for our whole empire, which does not extend from bay to bay like little Attica, but from sea to sea, and is destined one day to link ancient Europe to still older Asia, and thus to help completing the zone of civilization around the globe?All that has been said of countries and nations and a national university would retain its full force even if the threatened cleaving of this broad land should come upon us. But let me not enter on that topic of lowering political reality, however near to every citizen's heart, when I am bidden by you to discourse on political philosophy, and it is meet for me not to leave the sphere of inaugural generalities.”

[141906] Every historian knows that William of Orange, the founder of the Netherlands' republic, had much at heart to induce the cities of the new union to admit representatives of the country; but the “sovereign” cities would allow no representatives unless noblemen to the farmers and land-owners, who, nevertheless, were taking their full share in the longest and most sanguinary struggle for independence and liberty; but the following detail, probably, is not known to many. The estates of Holland and West Friesland were displeased with the public prayers for the Prince of Orange. which some high-calvinistic ministers were gradually introducing, in the latter half of the seventeenth century, and in 1663 a decree was issued ordaining to pray first of all “for their noble high mightinesses, the estates of Holland and West Friesland, as the true sovereign, and only sovereign power after God, in this province; next, for the estates of the other provinces, their allies, and for all the deputies in the assembly of the States General, and of the Council of State,”

[142972] “Separatismus, as German historians have called the tendency of the German princes to make themselves as independent of the empire as possible, until their treason against the country reached “sovereignty,” has made the political history of Germany resemble the river Rhine, whose glorious water runs out in a number of shallow and muddy streamlets, having lost its imperial identity long before reaching the broad ocean.

[143395] [The system of representation in Great Britain had long been most unequal and absurd until 1832. To mention but one fact—out of 658 members of the house of commons, 487 were nominees of the aristocracy or of the government, and only 173 represented independent constituencies. In 1832, after a great struggle, a reform bill was passed, by which (1) fifty-six rotten boroughs, returning one hundred and eleven members, were disfranchised, and other small boroughs lost in all thirty members; (2) twenty-two large towns, including districts of London, gained the right to return two members each, twenty to return one each, and the members for the larger counties were increased from 94 to 159. (3) As for the right of electing-in the boroughs it was given to 10l. householders resident in the place, paying rates and not receiving relief from the parish In the counties several classes were added to the old foity-shilling freeholders and leaseholders for terms of years, and tenants at will paying a rent of 50/. a year. (See May, i. chap. 6.)

[144440] The more recent bill of 1867, for reforming representation, contains among other provisions the following of principal importance. (1) The franchise. In the boroughs any full-aged man not legally incapacitated can vote in parliamentary and municipal elections, who has been for twelve months an inhabitant, as owner or tenant, of any dwelling-house, has been rated to rates for the lelief of the poor, and paid his rates like others; but no joint occupier can vote. Also the vote is given to every lodger in the boroughs who is sole tenant of a dwelling-house of the clear yearly value of 10/. or upward, has resided there twelve months before the last day of July of any year, and put in a claim to be registered. In the counties, any man of similar status can vote, who is seised in law or at equity of any lauds or tenements of freehold, copyhold, or any other tenure, for his own or anothei's life or any lives, of the clear yearly value of not less than 5/. He also has the vote who is lessee or assignee of lands, on any tenure, for the unexpired residue of any term originally created for a period of not less than 60 years, of at least 5/. net yearly value; and again, one who occupies lands of the ratable value of 12/. or over has been rated and paid rates. (2) Distribution of seats in parliament. No borough having in 1861 a population of less than 10,000 could return more than one member. 38 boroughs were thus reduced, 10 new boroughs were created, 3 cities returned three members instead of two, 2 old boroughs returned two instead of one, 1 borough was divided into two, and 13 counties were subdivided so as to return 35 members. (3) In London no one can vote for more than three, and in places where three members are returned, no one can vote for more than two. In 1872, ballot, with nomination of candidates, was introduced. The balloting has some rather troublesome formalities.]

[146343] [But it was majority of centuries, and not of votes, which determined an election.]

[146428] [It is perhaps needless to say that great changes have been made in the constitution of this state since the end of the war in 1865.]

[146563] [There are multitudes in the United States who still believe that universal suffrage is the root of all our political evils. In one state at least—Connecticut—the capacity to read is made a condition for being made a “fieeman.”]

[146793] According to the present constitution of Prussia (1859) there is universal suffrage for the election of a certain number of electors, and in addition a graduated property qualification for the election of other electors, who with the former elect representatives.

[147058] See Political Ethics on Opposition and Representatives.

[147115] [A resident not necessarily in the district, but in the state which he represents. “No person shall be a representative … who shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of +hat state in which he shall be chosen.” Constit., art i. sect. 2, 2.]

[147358] [The subject of representing the minority—so important in a country where government by party prevails—has, since Dr. Lieber published his second edition of this work, been much discussed, and already has a large literature of its own. I have caused two notes of the author's, which of course could not duly present the subject to the reader, to be omitted, and have put into their place a simple account of the methods which have been suggested for attaining this end, with the briefest possible comments. I mention—I, the limited vote—i.e, the vote for a less number of names than there are places, as for two when three persons are to be chosen. This method was introduced into the bill of 1867 for leforming representation in Great Britain. 2. The cumulative vote, where the voter is allowed to cast all or more than one at least of his votes for one person—eg., to cast two, three, or four for one candidate, or to divide them among several. This plan is especially applicable when the practice of voting by general tickets prevails. 3. The election by lists, a Swiss plan, according to which a certain number of lists of candidates, as many on each list as there are representatives in all in a district, are prepared beforehand, and each voter votes for one of these lists. The representatives are selected from each of these lists according to the ratio of the votes on each list to the entire number of votes—e.g., if there are four lists, and 10,000 voters, and 4000 votes for one list, 3000 for another, 2000 for a third, 1000 for a fourth, then 4, 3, 2, 1 would be returned as representatives from the several lists. 4 Preferential voting, or Mr. Thomas Hare's plan, in a book first published in 1859, and which has gone through four editions. This plan has been advocated by J. S. Mill in his Representative Government, chap, vii., and by other persons of note. This plan provides that each, voter or elector may vote in the order of preference for a number of persons, not confining himself in his selections to his own locality. When the votes are counted, the person having a number of votes larger than the electoral quota, that is, larger than the number of voters divided by the number of representatives, is elected, and all the votes for him above the quota are carried down to the next person on the list needing them in order to be elected. The somewhat puzzling details of this plan must be passed by. Its advantages are that it gives a fair chance to all interests and classes of thinkers to unite, although dispersed over a state or country; and no elector would be represented by one whom he had not chosen. 5. Substitute voting. Candidates may cast surplus votes, or those over the electoral quota, and insufficient votes, or those under, and may thus fill up the places which have not been filled by the voting of the electors. 6. Proxy voting, by which a representative may cast as many votes as he receives multiples of the electoral quota. These plans admit of some modifications. There might, for instance, be an aliquot part of the number of representatives chosen from localities, and the rest chosen from the state at large on Mr. Hare's plan.

[150539] All of these plans, which imply voting for persons outside of a small area, require more knowledge of men than belongs to the great majonty of voters under a system of universal suffrage]

[150728] We elect substitutes for executive officers. The Roman custom was to take, in case of need, the predecessor of the failing incumbent, a principle adopted, at least in former times, in Geneva and other cities. [When a consul or tribune died, the surviving colleague, or colleagues, at first co-optated another. Afterwords a colleague was chosen, (suffectus.) When inferior magistrates died or resigned, the superior held the comitia to fill his place. See T. Mommsen, Röm. Staatsr., vol i. p 161.]

[151226] Vertot's History of the Knights of Malta, folio edition, London, 1728, vol ii., Old and New Statutes.

[151329] Daru, Histoire de Venise, Paris, 1821, vol. i.

[151377] A full statement of all the laws relating to these guarantees in England will be found in Stephens's De Lolme, Rise and Progress of the British Constitution; and Story's Commentanes on the United States gives our con stitutional law on these subjects.

[151630] Fearful cases to the contiary have happened in France and our own country. In the former country a court of justice decided against a person, because, not being the government candidate, he had dared to print and distribute his own ticket. Mr. de Montalembert made a speech against the abuse, whereupon the minister of the Interior, Mr. Billault, formeily a socialist, issued a circular to the prefects, instructing them, April, 1857, how to conduct themselves regarding the distribution of election tickets. In our country sanguinary troubles have occurred in New Orleans and Baltimore, in October, 1857, which called forth proclamations of the governors that revealed a frightful state of things, And these crimes at elections were not restricted to the two mentioned cities.

[152409] [For the triennial bill of the Long Parliament, Feb. 16, 1641, and its repeal in 1664, but with the provision continued that parliaments should not be intermitted for more than three years, see Hallam, ii. pp. 131, 447. The government could not be carried on with an annual session of parliament. Nothing kept the estates on the continent from a fit development so much as freqaent and long intermissions of their sittings.]

[152835] Volume ii. page 174, of Correspondence of William Pitt, Earl of Chatham.

[152909] I have given a sufficiently long account of the Septennial Bill, under this head, in the Encyclopaedia Americana.

[153024] Free discussion on all things that appear important to the representatives is a right which was obtained after hard struggles, and only in compaiatively recent times. Elizabeth repeatedly warned the commons, in no gentle terms, not to meddle with high matters of state, which they could not understand. James I. and Charles I. did the same.

[153366] A similar spirit is now visible on the continent of Europe in unfree or half-free countries. In the bed of justice, held in 1602, Louis XIV., then fourteen years old, forbade his parliament, [which, however, was propeily a judicial body] to deliberate on government and finance or upon the conduct of the ministers of his choice, and forbade its membeis to assume too sumptuous habits in the palaces of the great. Chevenix, on Nat. Charact., vol. ii. p. 510.

[153826] Hallam, Hist, of English Constitution, 5th edit., vol. i. p. 268.

[153893] Ibidem, vol. i. p. 303.

[153918] Why, indeed, it is called legislative corps does not appear. Legislative corpse would be intelligible.

[154022] A keeper of the seals, whom usage does not require to be a peer, is now appointed as the chief officer of the law, only when, for some reason or other, no lord chancellor is appointed. The keeper of the seals, nevertheless, presides in the house of lords, or “sits on the woolsack.” The chancellor is now always” made a peer if he is not already a member of the house of lords; and he is always a member of the cabinet. This mixture of a judicial and political character is inadmissible according to American views; yet it ought to be remembered, as an honorable fact, that no complaint of partiality has been made in modern times against any lord chancellor in his judicial capacity, although he is so deeply mixed up with politics. Lord Eldon was probably as uncompromising, and perhaps as bigoted, a politician as has ever been connected with public affairs, but I am not aware that any suspicion has existed on this ground against his judicial impartiality. There is at present a traditional fund of uncompromising judicial rectitude in England which has never been so great at any other period of her own history or excelled in any other country.

[155175] This difference in the position of the presiding officers appears, among other things, from the fact that the members of the house of lords address “My lords,” and not the chancellor, while usage and positive rules demand that the member of the other house who wishes to speak shall address “Mr. Speaker,” and receive “the floor” from him. The chancellor would only give the floor if appealed to in case of doubt. In the United States senate, the president of the senate is, indeed, directly addressed, although occasionally “senators” have been addressed in the course of a speech. That body, however, appoints its committees, and leaves little influence to the presiding officer, who, it will be remembered, is not a member of the senate, and has a casting vote only.

[155946] I would refer the general reader, on this and kindred subjects, to the article Parliament, in the Political Dictionary, London, 1846.

[156081] This is not the place for discussing the doubts which some have entertained regarding the power of the houses of congress to do that which is possessed by every court of justice, though the lowest, namely, to arrest and punish disturbers. The doubt is simply on the ground that it has not been conferred. But there are certain rights which flow directly from the existence of a thing itself, and some that are the necessary consequence of action and life, and without which neither can manifest itself. A legislative body without the power of sending for peisons to be examined by committees would be forced to le islate, in many cases, in the dark. It is true that legislative bodies have become tyrannical; but it must not be forgotten that wherever, in the wide range of history, any struggle for liberty has taken place, we find that a struggle to establish the habeas corpus principle has always accompanied it, and that this struggle for securing personal liberty is always against the executive. I do not remember a single case of an established and separate guarantee of personal liberty against parliamentary violence.

[157210] The reader is referred to Mr. Justice Story's Comm. on the Const. U. S., chap, xii., and to Chancellor Kent's Commentaries.

[157335] The ancients had no parliamentary law and usage. The Greek agora could of course not have it. Mass meetings cannot debate; they can only ratify or refuse proposed measures. [But there was debate on the probouleumata of the senate at Athens, which might be added to or modified as well as rejected, and free discussion took place on other subjects. The laws of order also were not bad.] It is the same in the democratic Swiss cantons, where the people meet in primary assemblage. (See Political Ethics.) In the Roman senate there was no debating piopei. There was rather a succession of set speeches; and I may be permitted to state here that in debating oratory, in replying on the spot vigorously and clearly to an adversary, the best orators of the last and present centuries are greatly superior to the ancients.

[158152] Since the publication of the first edition, an American senator, Mr. Edward Everett, has added his testimony to the vital importance of Anglican parliamentary rules. On December 8, 1853, when resolutions with reference to the late Vice-President of the United States, (and, therefore, presiding officer of the senate,) W. Rufus King, were under discussion, Mr. Everett observed, in the course of his remarks:

[158562] “In fact, sir, he was highly endowed with what Cicero beautifully commends as the boni Senatoris prudentia the ‘wisdom of a good senator;’ and in his accurate study and ready application of the rules of parliamentary law he rendered a service to the country, not perhaps of the most brilliant kind, but assuredly of no secondary importance. There is nothing which so distinguishes the great national race to which we belong, as its aptitude for government by deliberative assemblies; its willingness, while it asserts the largest liberty of parliamentary right, to respect what the senator from Virginia, in another connection, has called the self-imposed restrictions of parliamentary order; and I do not think it an exaggeration to say that there is no trait in their character which has pioved more conducive to the dispatch of the public business, to the freedom of debate, to the honor of the country—I will say even which has done more to establish and perpetuate constitutional liberty.”

[159558] He was himself of unmixed French descent, as Lord Brougham observes, although his family had resided for generations in England.

[159688] Memoirs of the Life of Sir Samuel Romilly, etc., 2d edit., vol. i. p. 103.

[159764] A Treatise on the Formation of Laws, (Traitè de la Confection des Lois,) or an Inquiry into the Rules (Règlements) of the French Legislative Assemblies, compared with the Parliamentary Forms of England, the United States, Belgium, Spain, Switzeiland, etc. by Ph. Vallette, Advocate, etc. and Secretary of the Presidency of the Chamber of Deputies, and by Benat Saint-Martin, Advocate, etc., 2d edit., Paris, 1839; with the words of Mr. Dupin, who long presided over the chamber, as motto: “The excellence of laws depends especially upon the care taken in the elaboiation of the bills. The drawing up of laws constitutes a large share of their efficiency.”

[160421] As a striking instance may be mentioned the whole procedure of the people of Oregon, when congress omitted to organize the territory, and ultimately “Organic Laws” were adopted “until such time as the United States of America extend their jurisdiction over us.” They were printed by the senate, May 21, 1846, and, although consisting of a few pages only, form a document of great interest to the political philosopher in more than one respect. A French statesman of mark wrote to the author, years ago, from Algeria: “I wish your way of organizing distant territories, or of allowing them to organize themselves., could be transplanted to this colony.” Justice requiies to add now (1859) that our Kansas troubles had not then occuned.

[161157] An excellent book of its kind is the small work of Judge L. S. Cushing, Rules of Pioceeding and Debate in Deliberative Assemblies, Boston, Mass. It has gone through many editions. The same author published in 1855, Law and Practice of Legislative Assemblies in the United States.

[161438] Mr. Jeremy Bentham's Tactique des Assemblées Legislatives, edited by E. Dumont, Geneva, 1816, is no pure invention, and could have been written by an Englishman or American only.

[161618] See also Mr. Jefferson's Manual of Parliamentary Practice for the use of the senate of the United States.

[161725] There is a very curious book, Parliamentary Logic, etc., by Right Hon. W. Gerard Hamilton, (called in his time Single-Speech Hamilton,) with Considerations on the Corn Laws, by Dr. Samuel Johnson, London, 1808. The copy which I own belonged to Dr. Thomas Cooper. That distinguished man has written the following remark on the fly-leaf: “This book contains the theory of deception in parliamentary debate;how to get the better of your opponent, and how to make the worse appear the beter reason. It is the well-written work of a hackneyed politician…. The counterpart to it is the admirable tract of Mr. Jeremy Bentham on Parliamentary Logic, the book of Fallacies. No politician ought to be ignorant of the one book or the other. They are well worth (not perusing, but) studying. T. C.”

[162513] Life and Letters of Joseph Story, Boston, Mass., 1851, vol. i. p. 203.

[162585] No instance illustrating this fact is perhaps more striking than the meeting of settlers in Oregon territory, when congress had neglected to provide for them, as has been mentioned in a previous note. The people met for the purpose of establishing some legislature for themselves, and at once adopted the principle of two houses. It is to us as natural as the jury.

[162952] It was at the period when Dr. Frankin asked why people would put horses not only before, but also behind the wagon, pulling in opposite directions. The true answer would have been, that whenever a vehicle is pulled down an inclined plane we actually do employ an impeding force, to prevent its being dashed to pieces. [Georgia, also, and the Confederation itself, had but one chamber. Franklin wished (Curtis's Hist., i. 435) to introduce the same system into the Constitution in the Convention of 1787.]

[163458] I have quoted this long passage from the First Report of the Commissioners, appointed by the General Assembly of Maryland, to revise, simplify, and abridge the Rules of Practice, Pleadings, etc. in the courts of the State, Frederic City, Md., 1855,—a work important also with reference to the subject of codification. This first report is believed to have been written by Mr. Samuel Tyler, one of the commissioners, a gentleman alike distinguished as advocate and writer on philosophy. His last work, on the Progress of Philosophy in the Past and the Future, entitles him to a place among the profoundest writers on philosophy. His friend, the late Sir William Hamilton, acknowledged his great merits.

[164161] The reader is referred to De Tocqueville's Ancien Régime for numerous passages showing how general the error of Turgot was in France, and how sincerely the Anglican diversity, necessarily accompanying self-government, was disrelished by the French, profoundly worshipping, not only unity of power, but also uniformity of action.

[164491] The speech was delivered on the 27th September, 1848. Mr. de Lamartine speaks of a division of the sovereignty into two parts, by two houses! Poor sovereignty! What strange things have been imagined under that word! If the reader can find access to that speech, I advise him to peruse it, for it is curious from beginning to end, especially as coming from a person who for a lime was one of the rulers of France. His exact words are these. Speaking of domestic dangers, he says: “To such a danger you must not think of opposing two or three powers. That which ought to oppose it is a direct dictatorship, uniting within its hand all the powers of the state.” “He adds more of the kind, but this extract will suffice.

[165209] Mr. Lamartine committed another grave error. He said that two houses in the United States were natural, because we are a confederacy, and the senate was established to represent the states as such. But he seems not to have been aware that all our states, in their unitary character, have established the same system, and that it is as natural to the men on the shores of the Pacific as to those in Maine, or to the settlers on the Swan River.

[165653] I ought in justice to add, however, that in 1850 Mr. de Lamartine said, in his Counsellor of the People, that he was now for two houses, and that he had been for one house in 1848 because he wanted a dictatorial power; and, added he, La dictature ne se divise pas. But how can a dictatorship be called undivided, when it belongs to a house composed of eight hundred members? And must not, in the nature of things, a division of execution always take place? It 18 surprising that something temporarily desired for a dictatorship should have been insisted upon by Mr. Lamartine with so much vehemence as an integral part of the fundamental law; or was peradventure the constitution of 1848 intended not to last?

[166364] [Compare the defence of representation and protection of interests by Mr. Calhoun, Works, i., beginning.]

[166471] [The same is shown ethically by the consideration that the constituents, if collected, would be bound to regard the general welfare. The representative takes their duties on himself with their power.]

[166673] [The suspensive veto in Norway, which three successive Storthings by a majority can make of no effect, deserves consideration, as avoiding some of the evils of our qualified veto.]

[166855] I shall append a paper on pardoning—a subject which has become all important in the United States.

[166955] The lack of a proper word for jus, in the English language, induced me to use it on a few occasions in the Political Ethics. The Rev. Dr. W. Whewell, some years later, seems to have felt the same want, adopting in his work on the Elements of Morality, including Polity, London, 1845, the word jural, first used in the Political Ethics, where a note explains why I was compelled to form the word.

[167352] When therefore I published a small work on this subject, during my visit to Germany, in 1848, I called it Die Unabhängigkeit der Justiz oder die Freiheit des Rechts, Heidelberg, 1848. Literally translated, this would be The Independence of Justice and Freedom of the Law. Justiz in German, however, does not mean the virtue justice, but the administration of justice; and Recht means, in this connection, jus, not a single jus, but the body of rights and usages, laws and lega practice, of a people.

[167853] Hence the peculiar power and the peculiar narrowness of the branch. I have treated of this subject, and the unceasing necessity of interpretation, at the beginning of my Principles of Interpretation and Construction in Law and Politics, Boston, 1839.

[168105] I cannot avoid referring again to my work on the Principles of Interpretation and Construction in Law and Politics, where this subject is repeatedly treated of, as it forms one of vital importance in all law, liberty, politics, and self-government. I have given there instances of prohibited commenting, and even lecturing, in the universities, on the codes. This is the pervading spirit of the civil law as it was adopted by modern nations. It is a necessary and combined consequence of the principle contained in the Justinian code itself, namely, that the emperor is the executive, legislator and all; that, therefore, no self-development of the law, such as had indeed produced the Roman jus, could any longer be allowed; and of the fact that the Roman law was adopted as a finished system from abroad. The principle of non-interpretation by the courts prevails for the same reasons in the canon law. I give the following as an interesting instance:

[169060] The bull of Pope Pius IV., 26 January, 1564, sanctioning and proclaiming the canons and decrees of the Council of Trent, contains also the prohibition to publish interpretations and dissertations on these canons and decrees. The words of the bull, which correspond exactly to the authority reserved by government concerning the understanding of the law, where codes have been introduced and the common law principle is not acknowledged, are these:

[169509] “Ad vitandam præterea perversionem et confusionem, quæ o[Editor: illegible character]ri posset, si unicuique liceret, prout ei liberet, in decreta Concilii commentaries et interpretationes suas edere, Apostolica auctoritate inhibemus omnibus—ne quis sine auctoritate nostra audeat ullos commentarios, glossas, admonitiones, scholia, ullumve interpretationis genus super ipsius Concilii decretis, quocunque modo, edere, aut quidquam quocunque nomine, etiam sub prætexta majoris decietorum corroborationis, aut executionis, aliove quæsito colore, statuere.”

[170066] The papal bull goes on to declare that if there be any obscurity in the decrees the doubter shall ascend to the place which the Lord has appointed, viz., the apostolic see, and that the pope will solve the doubts.

[170281] Life and Letters of Judge Story, vol. i. p. 448. The necessity of proper codification has appeared more and more clearly to the English mind, since this work was first published, and many preparatory steps have been taken. In the month of August Lord Chancellor Cranworth presented a report to the lords, of which he said that, in the first place, a list had been prepared of all the statutes not obsolete, nor for temporary and local but for general purposes, which have been passed since Magna Charta. The number is 16,000; but, taking away 5300 repealed or virtually repealed, a number besides those which relate to Scotland or Ireland exclusively, and 3900 which the commissioners have not determined on, there remain, say 2500 acts for consolidation; and these have been analyzed. As there is some difference of opinion as to the best mode of consolidation, specimens on different principles had been prepared; and one of these, a digest of the law of distress for rent, was in the report. Mr. Coode, he says, has completed a digest of the poor-laws. What Lord Cranworth then proposed was to see whether the whole of the provisions relating to one subject might not be put into one statute. Each of the commissioners had been requested to take a subject and frame a scheme of consolidation with that view.

[171593] A very interesting speech on this and cognate topics was made in February, 1856, in the house of commons, by Mr. Napier, attorney-general of Ireland, on the introduction of his motion:

[171779] “That, in the opinion of this house, as a measure of administrative reform, provision should be made for an efficient and responsible department of public justice, with a view to secure the skilful preparation and proper structure of parliamentary bills, and promote the progressive amendment of the laws of the United Kingdom.”

[172109] Locke's Constitution or South Carolina, 1669, paragraph 80.

[172170] Arrian, Anab., iv. § 10, 7.

[172199] Dr. Greenleaf published, in Portland, Maine, 1821, A Collection of Cases Overruled, Doubted, or Limited in their Application, taken from American and English Reports. Several subsequent editions have been published, with additions, for which Dr. Greenleaf, however, has declared himself irresponsible.

[172502] In my Ethics, and especially in my Principles of Legal and Political Interpretation and Construction.

[172605] Page 299, vol. i., Life and Letters of Joseph Story.

[172659] “The civil law, a law of wisdom but of servitude; the law of a great commercial empire, digested in the days of Justinian, and containing all the principles of justice and equity suited to the relations of men in society with each other; but a law tinder which the head of government was ‘Imperator Augustus, legibus solutus.’”—John Quincy Adams, seventh President of the United States, in a letter to Judge Story, page 20, vol. ii., Life and Letters of Judge Story.

[173127] The young American reader is recommended to peruse a letter to a young friend, by Mr. Legaré, first published in the National Intelligencer, in which he urges the study of the civil law as one of the best means of mental legal training. That distinguished advocate told the author that whenever he was peculiarly complimented on an argument in civil suits, or had gained a very difficult case, he could trace the reason to his having thoroughly studied the civil law in his younger days in Europe. Mr. Legaré also wrote an extensive article on Roman Law and Legislation in the Southern Review.

[173722] The case of Coggs vs. Bernard, 2d ed. Raym. R. 909—note by Judge Story.

[173795] Story's Miscellaneous Writings, p. 224

[173835] In a similar, though in a far less interesting way, I observe that a whole code has established itself for the extensive sale of books at auction in London. It is a real specimen of the genius of one part of common law.

[174056] See article Common Law, in the Encyclopædia Americana. It was written, as many others on subjects of law, by m) lamented friend, Judge Story. An opportunity has never offered itself to me publicly to acknowledge the great obligation under which I am to that distinguished jurist for the assistance he most readily and cheerfully gave me in editing the Americana. I shall never forget the offer he made to contribute some articles when I complained of my embarrassment as to getting proper articles on the main subjects of law, for my work intended for the general reader. Many of them were sent from Washington, while he was fully occupied with the important business of the supreme court. He himself made out the list of articles to be contributed by him, and I do not remember ever having been obliged to wait for one. The only condition this kind-hearted man made was that I should not publish the fact that he had contributed the articles in the work until some period subsequent to their appearance. They have met with much approbation, and I hope I am not guilty of indiscretion if I state here that another friend, a distinguished orator and lawyer, the Hon. William C. Preston, has repeatedly expressed his admiration of them.

[175292] The contributions of Judge Story to the Americana “comprise more than 120 pages, closely printed in double columns. But a higher interest than that growing out of their intrinsic worth belongs to them. They were labors dedicated purely to friendship, and illustrate a generosity which is as beautiful as it is rare.” To these words, copied from p. 27, vol. ii. of Life and Letters of Joseph Story, where a list of all his contributions may be found, I may add that Judge Story made his offer at a time when he to whom it was made was known to very few persons in this country, and had but lately arrived here; and that Judge Story took at once the liveliest and most active interest in the whole enterprise, and Contributed much to cheer on the stranger in his arduous task.

[176068] Theory of Politics: An Inquiry into the Foundations of Governments, and the Causes and Progress of Political Revolutions. By Richard Hildreth, author of “The History of the United States of America,” etc.; New York, 1853. In this work the reader will find the opinion maintained that the practical working of a democratic government in our own country is obstructed by several disturbing causes, of which the greatest is the common law—” a scheme directly hostile to the spirit of democracy,” and therefore, “under an enlightened democratical government, entirely out of place.”

[176648] Lord Mansfield, in a note to a Scottish judge who had asked his advice as to the introduction of trial by jury in civil cases into Scotland, has this remark: “Great alterations in the course of the administration of justice ought to be sparingly made and by degrees, and rather by the court than by the legislature.” Lord Campbell's Chief Justices of England, vol. ii. p. 554.

[177026] The learned “opinion” of the court of errors was delivered by Judge Ward-law, Hiller vs. English, 4 Strobhart's Reports, Columbia, S. C., 1850. While I was writing this, the supreme court of Massachusetts decided that the “squeeze of the hand” of a dying person, unable to speak, but having been made aware of the fact that the pressure would be taken as an affirmative, may be taken as “a dying declaration,” though with caution.—National Intelligencer, Washington, May 21, 1853.

[177508] Even the Constitution of the French Republic of 1848 said, article 89:

[177580] “Conflicts of privileges and duties between the administrative and judicial authority shall be regulated by a special tribunal composed of members of the court of cassation and of counsellors of state, to be appointed, every three years, in equal number, by the respective bodies to which they belong. This tribunal shall be presided over by the minister of justice.”

[177949] The letter is dated June 24, 1852.—London Spectator, July 3, 1852.

[178017] The trial by accusation has a distinct meaning in the English law; still, I have adopted the term Accusatorial Trial, in conformity to continental lawyers, A distinct term in contradistinction to the Inquisitorial Trial is necessary, and I prefer Accusatorial to Litigious Trial, which I observe Mr. Stephen uses in an interesting paper on English Criminal Law in the collection of articles published from time to time by former students of the two English universities, Oxford and Cambridge, respectively.

[178525] There was no public prosecutor in Rome. An individual appeared as accuser, and formed throughout the trial the prosecuting party. See article Criminal Law, in the Encyclopædia Americana.

[178713] See Feuerbach on the Jury.

[178741] Under the present absolutism, the trial is of course at the mercy of the executive, if the government has any interest in the matter; that is, punishments are inflicted without trial, and certain offences are punished summarily, although punishable with severe visitation of the law.

[179026] Such fearful inconsistencies are almost bewildering; but Woe to the penally indicted, was the word of the law on the whole continent. There are similarly glaring and cruel inconsistencies still existing in our proud race.

[179249] See “Federalist,” No. lxxviii. and sequ.

[179291] Hard as the task of recording the following occurrence may be, it is better that the distemper be known, so that its cure may become possible. In the year 1857, after the Police Law had long been resisted by the mayor of the city of New York, and after the supreme court of the state had declared it constitutional, a convention of one of the largest parties was held in that state, in order to nominate proper candidates for the various offices to be filled by the approaching election. When the judge of the supreme court, who belonged to the same party, and who, on the bench, had decided for the constitutionality of the Police Law, came to be nominated, the nomination was opposed by the person who had been mayor of New York, in a public speech, on the avowed ground that judges had been made elective by the party, although he himself had been adverse to it; that therefore the judges had been drawn into the sphere of party politics. The party had voted against the Police Law, and the judge had declared it constitutional, therefore he ought not to be nominated for re-election. The worst of the Stuarts never said anything worse concerning judges, and the painful account has been given here to show to the younger students of this work how fearfully rapid the decline of national sentiment is. Not more than ten years ago, such sentiments, publicly avowed, would have created universal abhorrence. May my younger readers remember that the curses pronounced on unjust judges extend to those who appoint judges known to be unjust, or adopt a system which must make them so; be they monarchs or the people—execrations and blessings make no distinction between them. That judges ought to judge by the law alone, has been often felt even by absolute monarchs. Frederic II. of Prussia wrote a letter to the supreme court of his kingdom, enjoining the members to be faithful to their oath, and to do justice in spite of royal demand. The court ordered the letter to be framed and hung up in its hall. Louis XII. of France, in his edict of 1499, concerning the parliaments or high courts of justice, ordained that the law should always be followed, in spite of royal orders, which, as the ordinance says, importunity may have wrung from the monarch.

[181545] The remarks of that wise philosopher, Sir William Hamilton, on the election of professors, in his minor works, apply, so far as I remember them now, with equal force, and probably even with greater strength, to the election of judges.

[181781] In 1774 parliament passed an act making the justices of the supreme court of Massachusetts independent of the people for their salaries. The grand jurors refused to serve. Paul Revere was one of the grand jury.

[181993] See Mr. Macaulay's speech in the commons, June 1, 1853, on a bill to exclude judges from the house of commons. The chief question was to exclude the vice-chancellor from a seat in the commons. Mr. Macaulay is decidedly in favor of letting judges sit in the commons.

[182260] The report of the Reform Committee of the New York legislature reveals a state of things which reminds us of the worst state of Athens, while the Louisiana papers copied the most important portions, with strengthening commentaries and illustrations from their state. Numerous individuals, judges, and lawyers have publicly expressed their disapprobation. We trust so great an evil will soon be redressed.

[182666] See Political Ethics, under the heads of Judge, Independence of the Judiciary.

[182746] I would refer the reader, on all these subjects, to Judge Chambers's Speech on the Judicial Tenure, in the Maryland Convention, Baltimore, 1851. [The evils pointed out by Dr. Lieber are admitted and deprecated by multitudes, but hitherto there are no steps backward. In New York, the state which has suffered most from a judiciary elected by the people and on party grounds, a vigorous effort has lately (1873) been made to change the mode of election, without success. Perhaps if the whole bar of a state was united and strong in desiring such a change it could be effected.]

[183324] This constitution will be found in the Appendix.

[183374] When it has become necessary to increase the salary of judges, the difficulty has sometimes been avoided by the judges resigning, upon the understanding that, after the legislature shall have increased the salary, they should be re-appointed.

[183618] It seems to me a strange anomaly that, as it would seem by a late resolution of the United States senate, the president has authority to remove judges in the “territories.”

[183792] At present, when the house of lords sits as a court of appeal, none but the law lords are generally present.

[183902] In some manufacturing districts on the continent of Europe, for instance in Rhenish Prussia, so called Manufactory Courts exist. They consist of elected employers and employed, and judge of all the minor difficulties which may arise between the employers and the employed out of their immediate relation to one another. The common question, for instance, whether the woven piece, returned by the weaver, contains all the material given to him, or whether it be returned in a perfect state, is adjudged by them. General satisfaction seems to prevail with these courts, whose German name is Fabrik-Gerichte. [Courts or councils somewhat like these have been introduced also into Great Britain.]

[184596] For the history of this institution in general, the reader is referred to William Forsyth, History of the Trial by Jury, London, 1852.

[184732] Lord Erskine, when he was raised to the peerage, adopted the words Trial by Jury, as the scroll of his coat of arms.

[184850] The laxity now unfortunately so common in the administration and execution of the laws, the crying evil that in our large cities numerous idlers, of a low character, make their living, during court time, by being ready to serve as jurymen when called upon, of which they are now very sure, owing to the facility with which judges excuse citizens from serving; the frequency of non-agreement and consequent new trials; the length to which the doctrine is carried that juries are judges of law as well as fact; and many other things, have induced several persons loudly to call for the abolition of the jury. They do not seem to know much of history, or they would know that courts without juries are not exempt from falling into abuses or from becoming actual nuisances. Let us imagine our present elective judges without jury: would that mend matters? The opposite is hardly ever the cure of an evil. A glutton would not take the right step of amendment by the resolution of starving himself to death. Our jury trials exhibit many deplorable facts, in the present time, owing to the general spirit of disorder; but the administration of justice, it would seem, suffers far more from want of energy in the judges. Let us fervently hope that the recuperative power which has been shown by modern nations, and by modern nations alone, will manifest itself also with us. At any rate, no good is done, when the thin of state is in danger, by cutting away the very ribs of the ship.

[186328] And this is the reason that nearly all great reforms have worked their way from without, and from the non-professional to the professional, or from below upward.

[186491] I beg to arrest the reader's attention for a moment on this topic.

[186559] In all civilized countries it is acknowledged that there are some important cases, which on the one hand it is necessary to decide, for Mine and Thine are involved, and which, on the other hand, are not of a character that the lines of demarcation can be drawn with absolute distinctness, in a manner which would make it easy to apply the law; e.g., the cases which relate to the imitation of a part of a work of art, of a pattern, or the question of a bona fide extract from an, author's work, which, according to the Prussian copyright law, was decided by a jury of “experts,” long before the general introduction of the jury in that country. A similar case is presented when an officer is accused of unofficer-like and ungentlemanly conduct. Now the question becomes: Are not these cases far more frequent than it is supposed in the countries where the trial by jury does not exist? Are not almost all complex cases such as require in a high degree strong common sense, the tact of practical life, together with the law, in order to be justly decided? Are not perhaps the greater part of civil cases such? The English and Americans seem to believe they are. They believe that close logical reasoning is indeed necessary in the application of the law, and they assign this to the law-officers, but they believe also that a high degree of plain good common sense, unshackled by technicalities, is necessary to decide whether, “upon the whole,” “taken all in all,” the individual case in hand is such as to bring it within the province of the specific law, with reference to which it is brought before the court, and they assign this part of the trial to the jury, that is, to non-professional citizens. The English, and the people of some American states, do not only follow this view in the first stage of a case, but, in order to avoid the evil of letting technicalities get the better of essential justice, of letting the minds of professional lawyers, whose very duty it is to tram themselves in strict, uncompromising logic, decide complicated and important cases in the last resort, they allow an appeal from all the judges to the house of lords, or to the senate.

[188732] It appears to me an important fact, which ought always to be remembered when the subject of trial by jury in general is discussed, that by the trial by jury the Anglican race endeavors, among other things, to insure the continuous and necessary admixture of common sense in the decision of cases; and who can deny that in all practical cases, in all controversies, in all disputes, and in all questions which require the application of general rules or principles to concrete cases, common sense is indispensable, that is, sound judgment, which avoids the Nimium? Who will deny that every one is liable to have this tact and plain soundness of judgment impaired in that very line or sphere in which his calling has made it his duty to settle general principles, to find general rules, to defend general points? The grammarian, by profession, frequently, perhaps generally, writes pedantically and stiffly; the religious controversialist goes to extremes; the philosopher, by profession, is apt to divide, distinguish, and classify beyond what reality warrants; the soldier, by profession, is apt to sacrifice advantages to his science. Dr. Sangrado is the caricature of the truth here maintained.

[189930] The denial of the necessity of profound study and professional occupation would be as fanatical as the disregard of common sense would be supercilious and unphilosophical. Truth stands, in all spheres, emphatically in need of both.

[190163] The whole history of the libel, down to Charles Fox's immortal bill, may serve as an illustration.

[190263] Lord Chancellor Cranworth said, in February, 1853, in the house of lords:

[190338] “There were many other subjects to be considered. Trial by judge instead of by jury had been eminently successful in the county courts; hut, in attempting to extend this to cases tried in other courts, we must not lose sight of the fact that we should be taking a step towards unfitting for their duties those who are to send representatives to the other house of parliament, who are to perform municipal functions in towns, and who are to exercise a variety of those local jurisdictions which constitute in some sort in this country a system of self-government. It may be very dangerous to withdraw from them that duty of assisting in the administration of justice Mechanics' schools may afford valuable instruction, but I doubt if there is any school that reads such practical lessons of wisdom, and tends so much to strengthen the mind, as to serve as a juryman in the administration of justice.”

[191239] On all these subjects connected with the jury I must refer to the Political Ethics.

[191324] My conviction has been much strengthened since the original writing of this work. The Scottish jury (consisting of fifteen members) decides by majority. Our continued failures of verdicts would cease. Whenever the jury is out more than half an hour, it is a pretty sure sign that the unanimity is, after all, only one in form and not in truth. Perhaps most professional men adhere to the unanimity principle; but reforms very rarely proceed from the profession, in any sphere. It was not the theologians of the pope from whom the Reformation proceeded. We can add, however, high authority in favor of our opinion. In January, 1859, Lord Campbell, chief justice of England, declared in court, after the jury had pronounced an absurd verdict, which he declined accepting, that he intended to propose a bill, in parliament, for the purpose of adopting the majority principle in civil cases; and while I was revising these pages, a very respectable petition, urged even by judges, to allow judges to decide in. civil cases by the majority of jurymen, when they cannot agree on a unanimous verdict, was presented to the Massachusetts legislature. I consider, however, the principle of verdicts by two-thirds in penal cases even more important than in civil cases.

[192584] Judge Daly's, Historical Sketch of the Judicial Tribunals of New York, New York, 1855, page 53.

[192681] Forsyth, History of the Trial by Jury.

[192721] Feuerbach, in his Manual of the Common German Penal Law, 10th edition, § 623, says that in the inquisitorial proceeding we have to represent the judge to our minds as the representative of the offended state, inasmuch as it is his duty to see justice done for it according to the penal law; as representative of the accused, inasmuch as he is bound at the same time to find out everything on which innocence or a less degree of criminality can be founded; and finally, as judge, inasmuch as he must decide upon the given facts. Why not add to this fearful triad the jailer, the executioner?

[193313] Although a “defensor” is appointed, it is difficult for him to do his work properly; for in the German inquisitorial process the defence begins when the inquiring judge has finished, or the “acta” are closed, that is, when the written report of the judge is made Now, a lawyer does not feel very free to attack the writing of a judge upon whom his advancement probably depend, even if any latitude were given to the advocate. Mr. Mittermaier, note d, § 14, of his Art of Defending, 2d edition, speaks openly of the great difficulty encountered by the “defensor” in unveiling the imperfections of the acta which have been sent him, because he thereby offends his superior, upon whom his whole career may depend; and Mr. Voget, the defensor of the woman Gottfried, in Bremen, who had poisoned some thirty persons, fully indorses these remarks of Mr. Mittermaier, in his work, The Poisoner, G. M. Gottfried, Bremen, 1830, (first division, pp. 17 and 18) He concludes his remarks with these words: “Who does not occasionally think of the passage, 1 Sam. 29: 6—Non inveni in te quidquam mali, sed satrapis non places,” (or, as our version of the Bible has it: Nevertheless, the lords favor thee not.)

[194510] For instance, Lord Brougham's well-known assertion tittered at the trial of Queen Caroline—often commented upon, but never taken back or modified by the speaker,—p. 91, Legal and Political Hermeneutics. See also an article on License of Counsel in the January number, 1841, of Westminster Review. The case of Sir Arthur Pigott, attorney-general of the Duchy of Cornwall, stating in court, for the Prince of Wales, that he had never heard of bonds of the Dutch loan, which the prince and some of his brokers had made, has been referred to before. The list of shameful tricks—actual tricks—to which counsel have occasionally resorted in our courts, would require a large space.

[195187] Consult Hortensius: an Historical View of the Office and Duties of an Advocate, by William Forsyth, London, 18-3.

[195302] There was a time when diplomacy and dishonest subtlety were nearly synonymous—when it was discussed how signatures might be written so that after a number of years they would vanish. Since that time, diplomacy has signally improved. We are now living in an age in which a corresponding improvement is manifestly going on in legal ethics. We discuss the pertinent topics at least, and public attention is alive. The following article, taken from the London Spectator, Sept. 3, 1853, may find an appropriate place in a note:

[195826] “However little the Smyth case can have answered the purpose of the man who claimed the property, it will not be entirely without beneficial result, since it has put in a very strong light a moral which has not escaped the legal profession. Some time ago it was argued that a barrister becomes completely the agent and advocate of his client, engaged solely to present all that may be said on the side of that client, and disengaged from any moral responsibility as to the merits of the case. This doctrine, however, although it was convenient for the consciences of professional men less sensitive than Romilly, could not be sustained entirely; and barristers have gone to the equally erroneous opposite extreme—that of throwing up a brief as soon as a grossly fraudulent character was exposed in their case. Mr. Bovill threw up his brief in the Smyth case, and in doing so, we think, violated the true principle upon which a barrister should act; a principle which has not been unrecognized by the profession. It is, that the barrister is engaged for the purpose of seeing that his client be treated according to law and in no other way; that he have all the evidence that can be procured and set forth for him; that the evidence be taken according to rule and practice; that the judge charge the jury according to law and rule; in short, that the whole proceedings be regular and complete in all that is required on the part of the client. Acting on this principle, the barrister can retain his brief to the last, as well as on the principle of absolute agency; but he is not required to be an accomplice in suborning false evidence, or in setting forth pleas that he knows to be fraudulent; nor is he bound to anticipate the judgment by a declaration of the verdict in the act of throwing up his brief.

[197634] “This principle has been recognized so far that there is a prospect of its becoming more generally adopted as the rule of the profession. But the Smyth case suggests to us that it may very properly be extended to the other half of the profession—the attorneys. They are bound to exercise discretion in their conduct with their clients, otherwise they become parties to conspiracy and fraud. Considering all the opportunities that a man in the profession has of discriminating, it is difficult to find him thus placed and to acquit him either of an extraordinary degree of dulness or of culpable knowledge. It is, for example, excessively difficult to understand how any professional man could see Smyth, hear him tell his lies—nay, take them down in writing in order to insert them in the brief—and not understand the whole character of the fraud. Now, no attorney would put himself into this position, however fraudulent his client might be, if he confined himself to the principle which we have mentioned as adopted by barristers.”

[198669] The famous case of Mr. Philips, now on the bench, when defending Courvoisier, is treated at considerable length in Townsend's Modern State Trials, under the trial of Courvoisier. It must be allowed that the defence is not successful, though ingenious. On page 312 of vol. i. of that work, the reader will also find the titles of numerous writings bearing on the moral obligations of the advocate, to which may be added those I have mentioned in the notes appended to my remarks on the advocate in the 2d vol. of the Political Ethics. I also refer to pp. 59 and sequ. in my Character of the Gentleman, Charleston, S.C., 1847.

[199295] At the very moment that these pages are passing through the press, (in 1853,) a case has occurred in an English court, of a young man indicted for burglariously entering the room of some young woman. His counsel in the defence suggested that probably the young lady had given an appointment to the prisoner. “That is not in the brief,” cried the prisoner himself, and the court justly reprimanded the barrister. It ought to be added that in this case the barrister wrote a letter of submission to the court. This has not been done in other cases quite as bad in principle. Thus, another publicly reproved barrister insisted that he had done what the profession required when he had resorted to the following trick. He had subpoenaed the chief witness against his client, so that he could not appear, and then argued that the prosecutor must know his client to be innocent, else he would certainly have produced his witness, etc.

[200225] Since this was written, the following case has occurred, (in Cincinnati, 1853.) When the defence came on, three hundred witnesses were sworn. The prosecution of course did not believe that its turn would come for a long time. But the defence only examined some four witnesses, and then declared it had done. The prosecution was not prepared to proceed, and asked for delay; but the court decided that the case could not be stopped. Thus the whole trial was upset, and a verdict of not guilty was found. Now, are such atrocities to be borne with? Does freedom consist in giving all possible protection to trickery?

[200840] There is a very excellent passage on this topic in the reflections of Sir Samuel Romilly on himself and the good he might do should he be appointed lord chancellor, page 384 and sequ. of vol. iii. of his Memoirs, 2d ed., London, 1840.

[201076] This was written in 1853.

[201103] The history of this proud word is this: It was doubtless made in imitation of the Greek autonomy, and seems originally to have been used in a moral sense only. It is of frequent occurrence in the works of the divines who flourished in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. After that period it appears to have been dropped for a time. We find it in none of the English dictionaries, although a long list of words is given compounded with self, and among them many which are now wholly out of use; for instance, Shakspeare's Self-sovereignty. In Dr. Worcester's Universal and Critical Dictionary, the word is marked with a star, which denotes that he has added it to Dr. Johnson's, and the authority given is Paley, who, to my certain knowledge, does not use it in his Political Philosophy, nor have several of my friends succeeded in finding it in any other part of his works, although diligent search has been made. [It is in Webster, ed. of 1848.]

[202057] Whether the term was first used for political self-government in England or America I have not been able to ascertain. Richard Price, D.D., used it in a political sense in his Observations on the Nature of Civil Liberty, etc., 3d edition, London, 1776, although it does not clearly appear whether he means what we now designate by independence, or internal (domestic) self-government. Jefferson said, in 1798, that “the residuary rights are reserved to their (the American states') own self-government.” The term is now freely used both in England and America. In the former country we find a book on Local Self-government; in ours, Daniel Webster said, on May the 22d, 1852, in his Faneuil Hall speech: “But I say to you and to our whole country, and to all the crowned heads and aristocratic powers and feudal systems that exist, that it is to self-government, the great principle of popular representation and administration—the system that lets in all to participate in the counsels that are to assign the good or evil to all—that we may owe what we are and what we hope to be.”

[203141] Earl Derby, when premier, said, in the house of lords, that the officers sent from abroad to assist in the funeral of the Duke of Wellington would “bear witness back to their own country how safely and to what extent a people might be relied upon in whom the strongest hold of their government was their own reverence and respect for the free institutions of their country, and the principles of popular self-government controlled and modified by constitutional monarchy.”

[203615] In one word, self-government is now largely used on both sides of the Atlantic, in a political sense.

[203718] This modern use of the word is no innovation, as it was no innovation when St. Paul used the old Greek word πίστις in the vastly expanded sense of Christian faith. Ideas must be designated. The innovation was Christianity itself, not the use of the word to designate an idea greater than Pistis could have signified before.

[204043] That self-government in politics is always applied by the English—speaking race for the self-government of the people or of an institution,—in other words, that self has in this sense a reflective meaning,—is as natural as the fact itself that the word has come, in course of time, to be applied to political government, simply because we must express the idea of a people or a part of a people who govern themselves and are not governed by some one else.

[204500] Self-government belongs to the Anglican race, and the English word is used even by foreigners. A German and a French statesman, both distinguished in literature and politics, used not long ago the English word in conversations in their own languages with me.

[204760] Donaldson's Greek Dictionary renders ἀντονομία by self-government.

[204828] The word self, or its corresponding term in other languages, may have a reflective sense, as in self-murder, or it may have a merely emphatic or exclusive meaning, ipse, he himself. Hence the fact that the Emperor of Russia calls himself autocrat of all the Russias, (self-ruler, himself and alone the ruler,) and we use the corresponding word self-government for the opposite, the government in which the ruling is left to the ruled. The old English self-sovereign is the exact rendering of autocrat. The Germans use the word Selbst-Verlag, i.e., sale of the book by the author himself. German wine-shops in New York have frequently on their signs, in English, the ludicrous words Self-Imported Wines.

[205532] As to the first part of this imperial dictum—tout pour le peuple—we know very well how difficult it is to know what is for the people, without institutional indexes of public opinion, and how easy it is, even for the wisest and the best, to mistake and substitute individual, family, and class interests, and passions, for the wants of the people. This, indeed, constitutes one of the inherent and greatest difficulties of monarchical despotism. A benevolent Eastern despot could not have said it, for there is no people, politically speaking, in Asia; and for a European ruler it was either hypocritical, or showed that Napoleon was ignorant of the drift of modern civilization, of which political development forms so large a portion.

[206270] London Spectator of September 18, 1852.

[206311] Do not all the following, and many more, find their daily or historical applications: Propter imperium imperandi perdere causas; Propter ecclesiam ecclesiæ perdere causas; Propter legem legis perdere causas; Propter argumenta tionem argumenti perdere causas; Propter dictionem dicendi perdere causas?

[206613] The Memoirs of Count Miot, the first volumes of which have lately been published, show more in detail than any other work with what eagerness, consistency, and boldness Napoleon I. endeavored, step by step, to break down every guarantee of liberty which the French people had established. He did this so soon as he had been made consul, for life, and succeeded, through the newly-established senate and council of state, in nearly all cases. When he attempted to abolish the trial by jury, supported as he was by his high law-officers, the institution was saved by a few men, showing, on that occasion, a degree of resolution which had become rare, even at so early a period.

[207290] Mr. de Tocqueville made this report on the 8th of July, in the name of the majority of that committee, to which had been referred several propositions relating to a revision of the constitution. It was the time when the constitutional term of the president drew to its end, and the desire of annulling the ineligibility for a second term became manifest. It was the feverish time that preceded the second of December, destined to become another of the many commentaries on the facility with which governments founded upon centralization are upset, by able conspiracies or by a terror-striking surprise, such as the revolution of February had been, when the Orleans dynasty was expelled, and another proof how easy it is in such states to obtain an acquiescent majority or its semblance.

[208078] In connection with the foregoing, I must ask leave to add the concluding remarks of the Ancien Régime, published since the first edition of Civil Liberty was issued. I know of no passage in modern literature which reminds the reader so directly of the energy and gloom of Tacitus. I quote from Mr. Bonner's translation, New York, 1856, and wish to say that the whole work of Mr. de Tocqueville is a continued historical commentary of all that is said in the present work on Gallican political tendencies.

[208584] “When I examine that nation (the French) in itself, I cannot help thinking it is more extraordinary than any of the events of its history. Did there ever appear on the earth another nation so fertile in contrasts, so extreme in its acts—more under the dominion of feeling, less ruled by principle; always better or worse than was anticipated—now below the level of humanity, now far above; a people so unchangeable in its leading features, that it may be recognized by portraits drawn two or three thousand years ago, and yet so fickle in its daily opinions and tastes that it becomes at last a mystery to itself, and is as much astonished as strangers at the sight of what it has done; naturally fond of home and routine, yet, once driven forth and forced to adopt new customs, ready to carry principles to any lengths, and to dare anything; indocile by disposition, but better pleased with the arbitiary and even violent rule of a sovereign than with a free and regular government under its chief citizens; now fixed in hostility to subjection of any kind, now so passionately wedded to servitude that nations made to serve cannot vie with it; led by a thread so long as no word of resistance is spoken, wholly ungovernable when the standard of revolt has been raised—thus always deceiving its masters, who fear it too much or too little; never so free that it cannot be subjugated, nor so kept down that it cannot break the yoke; qualified for every pursuit, but excelling in nothing but war; more prone to worship chance, force, success, éclat, noise, than real glory; endowed with more heroism than virtue, more genius than common sense; better adapted for the conception of grand designs than the accomplishment of great enterprises; the most brilliant and the most dangerous nation of Europe, and the one that is surest to inspire admiration, hatred, terror, or pity, but never indifference?

[210484] “No nation but such a one as this could give birth to a revolution so sudden, so radical, so impetuous in its course, and yet so full of missteps, contradictory facts, and conflicting examples. The French could not have done it but for the reasons I have alleged; but, it must be admitted, even these reasons would not suffice to explain such a revolution in any country but France.”

[210869] We have discussed the trial by jury, and even the grand jury, as elements of Anglican liberty. I am now obliged to add, that when this page was correcting for the press, the author learned that the state of Michigan had passed a law by which, after the 12th day of April, 1859, the grand jury is to be dispensed with as an ordinary instrument of criminal proceeding, though power is reserved to the judges to resort to it in certain Special cases. The people of Michigan have thus shown an inclination toward the French system. French, and continental European lawyers in general have an aversion to the grand jury.

[211486] Federalism is taken here, of course, in its philosophical and not in its party sense.

[211573] I lately saw a pamphlet, written by an American minister, in which the Constitution of the United States was called atheistical—an expression I have seen before. I do not pretend exactly to understand its meaning. I suppose, however, that the word atheistical is taken in this case as purely negative, and as equivalent to not mentioning God, not, of course, as equivalent to reviling the deity. Even in this more moderate sense, however, the expression seems to me surprising. There was a time when every treaty, nay, every bill of lading, began with the words, In the name of the Holy Trinity, and every physician put the alpha and omega at the lop of his recipe. Whatever the sources may have been from which these usages sprang, I believe it will be admitted that the modern usage is preferable, and that it does not necessarily indicate a diminished zeal. The most religious among the framers may not have thought of placing the name of God at the head of our constitution, for the very reason that God was before their eyes, and that this occasion did not suggest to them the idea of specially expressing their belief. Nee deus intersit nisi dignus vindice nodus.

[212744] In Europe, where an accurate knowledge of the American state of things did not exist, it was, I believe, universally considered as the beginning of a new nobility, and pointed out as a glaring inconsistency.

[212953] We can do entirely without it as to property in land. Our abundance of land does not require it; but there are countries in which the constant parcelling of land led to such a ruinous subdivision that the governments were obliged to establish a minimum beyond which land shall not be allowed to be divided, and which, thus undivided, goes either to the oldest or the youngest of the sons. The late president von Vincke, one of the most distinguished Prussian statesmen, mentioned in an elaborate report on the extreme division of land, that there had been a lawsuit in the Rhenish province about a square foot or two of vineyard land. Such cases, probably, are of frequent occurrence in China. What would be said, in those densely-peopled countries, of our Virginia or worm-fences, which waste a strip of land five feet wide throughout the South and West?

[213810] [Since Dr. Lieber published these words, in 1859, the system of slavery has disappeared, and perfect, or nearly perfect, political equality of all colors exists.]

[213974] This is treated more fully in the Political Ethics.

[214027] The Dred Scott case, already so famous, but which will become far more famous still in the course of our history.

[214142] See p. 260, note 1.

[214163] There is an instructive article on voting in the Edinburgh Review, of October, 1852, on Representative Reform. The writer, who justly thinks it all-important that every one who has the right to vote for a member of parliament should vote, proposes written votes to be left at the house of every voter, the blanks to be filled by him, as is now actually done for parish elections. There existed written votes in the early times of New England, and people were fined for not sending them. It was not necessary to carry them personally to the poll. These written votes prevailed in the middle ages. For this and other subjects connected with elections, see the paper on elections in the Appendix.

[214858] [The ballot is now introduced into England.]

[214904] Coxe's Memoirs of the Bourbons in Spain.

[214946] The character of the English and of our allegiance is treated at length in the Political Ethics. I there took the ground that even English allegiance is a national one, whatever the language of the law-books may be to the contrary. The following may serve as a farther proof that English allegiance, after all, is dissoluble. It appears from the New England charter, granted by James I., that he claimed, or had the right “to put a person out of his allegiance and protection.” Page 16, Compact, with the Charter and Laws of the Colony of New Plymouth, etc., Boston, 1836.

[215520] Had we any nobility, or had we closed our confederacy, we roust have been exposed to the troubles to which the ancient republics were exposed, and which form a leading feature through the whole history of Rome. We acquired Louisiana, and, with her French population, she is fairly assimilated with our great polity. She would have been a dangerous cancer had we treated her as Rome treated her acquisitions, and a war of the Socii, as the Romans had it, must ultimately have broken out. In this, then, we differ in a marked way from the English. When Scotland was united to England, by establishing one legislature for both, and when a similar process took place with reference to Ireland, a perfect assimilation was not the consequence, as had been the case with Wales. The non-assimilation is still more marked in the case of the colonies. English readers may possibly believe that a foreign author passes his proper boundary if he ventures to discuss a subject of the highest statesmanship peculiarly domestic in its character, but “the by-stander often sees the faults of the men in the ring.” How could we write on foreign history were we not allowed to judge of foreign subjects? Nor is this subject wholly foreign to an American, because he naturally knows more of Canada than most English do, and he knows his own colonial history. Thus justified, and making full allowance for the difficulties that may exist, we cannot help feeling surprised that England, in many other respects the only power that has shown true liberality toward colonies—so different from Spain!—and with our war of independence before her eyes, should not think of tying the distant empires she creates in all the portions of the globe, by a representation in her parliament, making it, so far as the colonies are concerned, the imperial congress. Though each distinct colony with a colonial self-government should have but two c: three representatives in the commons, representing the colony as such, it seems that the effect upon the consistency of the whole gigantic empire would be distinct, and that such a measure is the only one that would promise continued cohesiveness.

[217681] For the English reader I would add that the following works ought to be studied or consulted on this subject: The Constitution of the United States, and the constitutions of the different states, which are published from time to time, collected in one volume; the Debates on the Federal Constitution; The Federalist, by Hamilton, Madison, and Jay; the Writings of Chief-Justice Marshall, Boston, 1839; the History of the Constitution of the United States, by G. T. Curtis, a work of mark; Mr. Justice Story's Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States; Mr. Calhoun's and Mr. Webster's Works; Mr. Rawle's work on the Constitution, and Mr. Frederic Grimké's Considerations upon the Nature and Tendency of Free Institutions, Cincinnati, 1848. To these may be added the Course of Lectures on the Constitutional Jurisprudence of the United States, by W. A Duer, Boston, 1856, [and Pomeroy's Constitutional Law, New York, 1868.] An entire literature of its own has accumulated, by this time, on the constitution, jurisprudence, and constitutional history of the United States. The chief of the enumerated works will suffice to lead the student to the more detailed works of this department.

[218878] No. lxv.

[218888] As to the parties in America, they may fairly be said to have little to do with civil liberty, which will be readily seen by the so-called National Platforms, resolved upon as the true indexes of the parties by the conventions held preparatory to the presidential elections. Nor do the names of the parties indicate anything with reference to Liberty. The term Democratic has wholly lost its original meaning, as used to designate the party which has taken it. Among others, the Resolutions published by the different conventions in the year 1853, previous to Mr. Pierce's election, and which were drawn up with great care, fully prove this.

[219531] I owe to the friendship of Mr. Kapp (author of the Life of Baron Steuben) a book of remarkable interest, in many respects: Gottlieb Mittelberger's Journey to Pennsylvania in the Year 1750 and Return to Germany in 1754, Frankfurt, 1756. Mittelberger was organist and schoolmaster. He was seven weeks on his way from Würtemberg to Rotterdam, chiefly on the Rhine, The Journal of Albert Dürer, the great painter, gives the same lamentable account of his journey on the Main and Rhine.

[220014] A time may come—I believe it will—when the international law of our family of nations will acknowledge that those who border on a navigable river have a right, by nature, to sail down that river to the sea without hindrance, toll, or inconvenience.

[220264] Constitution, of the United States, section 9.

[220312] See, among others, Duer's Lectures on the Constitutional Jurisprudence of the United States, 2d edition, page 258 and sequ.

[220437] The original is in the possession of Dr. Charles King, president of Columbia College, New York.