WORK: On Civil Liberty and Self-Government  (slug: theodore-dwight-woolsey-on-civil-liberty-and-self-govern-6f9899)

CHAPTER: 103-appendix-xvi-letter-of-the-french-minister-of-the-



[0] The minister of the interior addressed the following circular to the prefects of the departments:

[99] “Monsieur le Préfet: You will shortly have to proceed to the elections of the legislative body. It is a grave operation, which will be either a corollary or a contradiction of the vote of the 20th December, according to the employment which you make of your legitimate influence. Bear well in mind that universal suffrage is a new and unknown element, easy for a glorious name to make the conquest of, unique in history, representing in the eyes of the populations authority and power, but very difficult to fix on secondary individualities; consequently, it is not by following former errors that you will succeed. I desire to inform you of the views of the head of the state. You perceive that the constitution has aimed at avoiding all the theatrical and dramatic part of the assemblies, by interdicting the publication of the speeches delivered; in that way the members of those assemblies, not being occupied with the effect which their words in the tribune are to produce, will think more of carrying on seriously the affairs of their country. The electoral law will pronounce on the incompatibilities. The situation of public functionaries in a political assembly is always a very delicate matter, as in voting with the government they lower their proper character, and in voting against it they weaken the principle of authority. The exclusion of functionaries, and the suppression of all indemnity, must necessarily limit, in a country where fortunes are so divided as in ours, the number of men who will be willing and able to fulfil such duties. Nevertheless, as the government is firmly decided never to make use of corruption, direct or indirect, and to respect the conscience of every man, the best means of preserving to the legislative body the confidence of the populations is to call to it men perfectly independent by their situation and character. When a man has made his fortune by labor, manufactures, or agriculture, if he has been occupied in improving the position of his workmen, if he has rendered himself popular by a noble use of his property, he is preferable to what is conventionally called a political man, for he “will bring to the preparation of the laws a practical mind, and will second the government in its work of pacification and re-edification. As soon as you shall have intimated to me, in the conditions indicated above, the candidates who shall appear to you to have the most chance of obtaining a majority of votes, the government will not hesitate to recommend them openly to the choice of the electors. Hitherto, it has been the custom in France to form electoral committees and meetings of delegates. That system was very useful when the vote took place au scrutin de liste. The scrutin de liste created such confusion, and such a necessity for coming to an understanding, that the action of a committee was indispensable; but now these kind of meetings would be attended with no advantage, since the election will only bear on one name; it would only have the inconvenience of creating premature bonds, and appearances of acquired rights which would only embarrass the people, and deprive them of all liberty. You will, therefore, dissuade the partisans of the government from organizing electoral committees. Formerly, when the suffrage was restricted, when the electoral influence was divided among a few families, the abuse of this influence was most shameful. A few crosses, little merited, and a few places, could always secure the success of an election in a small college. It was very natural that this abuse should cause great dissatisfaction, and that the government should be called on to abstain from any ostensible interference. Its action and its preferences were then occult, and for that very reason compromised its dignity and its authority. But by what favors could the government be now supposed capable of influencing the immense body of the electors? By places? The whole government of France has not establishments vast enough to contain the population of one canton. By money? Without speaking of the honorable susceptibilities of the electors, the whole public treasury would not be sufficient for such a purpose. You will remember to what the result of the efforts of the government was reduced on the 10th December, 1848, in favor of the candidate to the presidency who was then in power. With universal suffrage there is but one powerful spring, which no human hand can restrain or turn from the current in which it is directed, and that is public opinion; that imperceptible and indefinable sentiment which abandons or accompanies governments, without their being able to account for it, but which is rarely wrong in doing so; nothing escapes it, nothing is indifferent to it; it appreciates not only acts, but divines tendencies; it forgets nothing, it pardons nothing, because it has, and can have, but one moving power—the self-interest of each; it is alive to all, from the great policy which emanates from the chief of the state to the most trivial proceedings of the local authorities, and the political opinion of a department depends more than is generally believed on the spirit and conduct of its administration. For a long time past the local administrations have been subordinate to parliamentary exigencies; they occupied themselves more in pleasing some influential men in Paris than in satisfying the legitimate interests of the communes and the people. These days are happily, it may be said, at an end. Make all functionaries thoroughly understand that they must carefully occupy themselves with the interests of all, and that he who must be treated with the greatest zeal and kindness is the humblest and the weakest. The best of policies is that of kindness to persons, and facility for interests—and that functionaries shall not suppose themselves created for purposes of objection, embarrassment, and delay, when they are so for the sake of dispatch and regularity. If I attach so much importance to these details, it is because I have remarked that inferior agents often believe that they increase their importance by difficulties and embarrassments. They do not know what maledictions and unpopularity they bring down on the central government. This administrative spirit must be inflexibly modified; that depends on you; enter firmly on that path. Be assured that then, instead of seeing enemies in the government and local administration, the people will only consider them a support and help. And when afterwards you, in the name of this loyal and paternal government, recommend a candidate to the choice of the electors, they will listen to your voice and follow your counsel. All the old accusations of oppositions will fall before this new and simple line of policy, and people in France will end by understanding that order, labor, and security can only be established in a durable manner in a country under a government listened to and respected.

[7055] These views were laid before the civilized world in a pamphlet, published in the summer of 1858, well known to be countenanced by the ruling party in France, and have been frequently stated before. The code Napoleon flatters the vanity of the French people, and not being conscious of the fact that the most important element of political civilization is civil liberty, they take this code as the sum of political civilization, while it is peculiarly obtuse on all matters relating to political rights and man's protection as a freeman. How could it be otherwise with a code which proceeded from the civil law, and received, wherever it treats of personal rights, an impress from a man who, more perhaps than any other person on the stage of history, instinctively abhorred everything inclining toward liberty, even the first germs of freedom?

[7900] The necessity of a union of the different courts and bodies of the state was often perceived by those who felt called upon to resent the crown, and the corresponding desire to defeat it, by the crown. An instance was furnished in France in 1648, when Mazarin strove to annul the arrêt d'union.

[8195] I do not only allude to such bodies as the French parliaments, but to the fact that down to this century the continental courts of justice conducted, in innumerable cases, what is now frequently called the administrative business, such as collecting taxes, letting crown domains, superintending roads and bridges The early separation of the English judge—I do not speak of his independence, which is of much later date—and the early, comparatively speaking, independent position of the English church, seem to me two of the most significant facts in English history, and answer in a great measure the question so often asked, Why is it that France, constituted so much like England down to the twelfth or thirteenth century, lost her liberty, and England not? It partially accounts for the still more surprising fact that the most advanced portions of Spain, at one period, had a clearer perception of liberty than England had, but are now immeasurably behind her.

[9161] Even a Henry VIII. took care to have first the law changed when it could not be bent to his tyrannical acts. Despots in other countries did not take this trouble; and I do not know whether the history of any other period impresses the student with that peculiar meaning which the English word Law has acquired, more forcibly than this very reign of tyranny and royal bloodshed.

[9540] Trials, especially criminal trials, remained public in several countries, for instance, in the kingdom of Naples; but judicial and political publicity vanished everywhere except in England; nor was the publicity of such trials as those of Naples of much value.

[9802] In my Political Ethics.

[9827] I ask permission to draw the attention of the scholar to a subject which appears to me important. I have used the term Western history, yet it is so indistinct that I must explain what is meant by it. It ought not to be so. I mean by Western history the history of all historically active, non-Asiatic nations and tribes—the history of the Europeans and their descendants in other parts of the world. In the grouping and division of comprehensive subjects, clearness depends in a great measure upon the distinctness of well-chosen terms. Many students of civilization have probably felt with me the desirableness of a concise term, which should comprehend within the bounds of one word, capable of furnishing us with an acceptable adjective, the whole of the Western Caucasian portion of mankind—the Europeans and all their descendants in whatever part of the world, in America, Australia, Africa, India, the Indian Archipelago and the Pacific Islands. It is an idea which constantly recurs, and makes the necessity of a proper and brief term daily felt. Bacon said that “the wise question is half the science;” and may we not add that a wise division and apt terminology is its completion? In my private papers I use the term Occidental in a sufficiently natural contradistinction to Oriental. But Occidental, like Western, indicates geographical position; nor did I feel otherwise authorized to use it here. Europides would not be readily accepted. Japhethian would comprehend more tribes than we wish to designate. That some term or other must soon be adopted seems to me clear, and I am ready to accept any expressive name formed in the spirit and according to the taste of our language. The chemist and natural historian are not the only ones that stand in need of distinct names for their subjects, but they are less exacting than scholars. As the whole race is called the Caucasian, shall we designate the group in question by the name of Cis-Caucasian? It is more important for the scholar of civilization to have a distinct name for the indicated group, than it was for the student of the natural history of our race to adopt the recently formed term of prognathous tribes, in order to group together all the tribes with projecting jaws.

[12075] Is it necessary to remind the reader of Dr. Johnson's definition of the Knife? or of the fact that the greater portion of all law business arises from the impossibility of giving absolute definitions for things that are not absolute themselves? A knife and a dagger are terms sufficiently clear in common life, but it has been found very difficult to define them, in many penal cases, when the law awards different punishments for wounds inflicted by the one or the other.

[12549] I believe that this has never been shown with greater and more truculent naïvetè than by the present King of Dahomey in the letter he wrote to the Queen of England in 1852. Every case in which an idea, bad or good, is carried to a point of extreme consistency is worth being noted; I shall give, therefore, a part of it.

[12871] The British government had sent an agent to that king, with presents, and the direction to prevent him from further trade in slaves; and the king's answer contains the following passage:—

[13060] “The King of Dahomey presents his compliments to the Queen of England. The presents which she has sent him are very acceptable and are good to his face. When Governor Winiett visited the king, the king told him that he must consult his people before he could give a final answer about the slave-trade. He cannot see that he and his people can do without it. It is from the slave-trade that he derives his principal revenue. This he has explained in a long palaver to Mr. Cruikshank. He begs the Queen of England to put a stop to the slavetrade everywhere else, and allow him to continue it.”

[13653] In another passage he says:—

[13683] “The king begs the queen to make a law that no ships be allowed to trade at any place near his domains lower down the coast than Wydah, as by means of trading vessels the people are getting rich and resisting his authority. He hopes the queen will send him some good tower guns and blunderbusses, and plenty of them, to enable him to make war” (which means razzias, in order to carry off cartives for the barracu, or slave market).

[14116] The claims of “undoubted sovereignty” and the “independent power” of kings, put forth by the Stuarts, by Louis XIV., and by all who looked upon kings, restricted in their power, as unworthy peers of the “real princes,” must be classed under the same head with the aspirations of the principate of Dahomey, however they may differ in form.

[14456] I have dwelt on this subject at length in my Political Ethics.

[14520] Quod principi placuerit legis habet vigorem.—L. i. lib. i. tit. 4 Dig.

[14592] Summa divisio de jure personarum haec est, quod omnes homines aut liberi, sunt aut servi.—Inst., i. 3.

[14696] Observations on the Nature of Civil Liberty, etc., by Richard Price, D.D., 3d ed, Lond., 1776.

[14792] Quid est libertas? P 'estas vivendi ut velis.—Cic., Parad., 5, 1, 34.

[14863] Since the publication of the first edition of this work, an article on “Mahometanism in Western Asia,” has appeared in the “Edinburgh Review,” October, 1853, in which the Eastern equality as an ingredient of despotism is illustrated by many striking instances from different spheres of life. The writer, who is plainly master of his subject, from personal knowledge, it would appear, agrees with us that liberty is based on individuality. Indeed, it may be said that in a great degree it consists in essential protection of individuality, of personal rights. The present Emperor of the French felt this when he wrote his chapter, De la Liberté individuelle en Angleterre. He was then an exile and could perceive liberty.

[15585] More has been said on this subject in Political Ethics, and we shall return to it at a later period.

[15687] Descriptions of the Grecian Polities, by F. W. Tittmann; Leipsic, 1822.

[15760] De Republica, lib. xii. c. 6. I have mentioned in my Political Ethics that I studied, in the Congress library, the copy of Bodinus which had belonged to President Jefferson, and in which many pencil-marks and notes of the latter are found. It will interest many of my readers to hear that this relic has not perished in the fire which consumed the greater portion of the library.

[16141] Mr. Parry, Séances et Travaux de l'Acad. des Sciences Politiques et Morales, July, 1855.

[16231] Esprit des Lois, xii. 2: “Of the Liberty of the Citizen.”

[16290] He goes on treating liberty in a similar manner; for instance, at the beginning of chapter iv. of the same work.

[16404] That a writer of Montesquieu's sagacity and regard for liberty should have thus insufficiently defined so great a subject, is nothing more than what frequently happens. No man is always himself, and Bishop Berkeley, on Tar Water, represents a whole class of weak thoughts by strong minds. I do not only agree with what Sir James Mackintosh says in praise of Montesquieu, in his Discourse on the Study of the Law of Nature and Nations, but I would add, that no person can obtain a correct view of the history through which political liberty has been led in Europe, or can possess a clear insight into many of its details, without making himself acquainted with the Spirit of Laws. His work has doubtless been of great influence.

[17133] Beginning of the fifth chapter of Paley's Political Philosophy.

[17198] Paragraph four.

[17215] Paragraph six of the Declaration of the Rights of Men.

[17271] Lord John Russell's History of the English Government and Constitution, second ed., London, 1825. This prominent and long-tried statesman distinguishes, on page 15, between civil, personal, and political liberty; but even if he had been more successful in this distinction than he seems to me actually to have been, it would not be necessary to adopt it for our present purpose.

[17651] It will be observed that the terms Liberty and Freedom are used here as synonymes. Originally they meant the same. The German Fretheit (literally Freehood) is still the term for our Liberty and Freedom; but, as it happened in so many cases in our language where a Saxon and Latin term existed for the same idea, each acquired in the course of time a different shade of the original meaning, either permanently so, or at least under certain circumstances. Liberty and Freedom are still used in many cases as synonymous. We speak of the freedom as well as the liberty of human agency. It cannot be otherwise, since we have but one adjective, namely Free, although we have two nouns. When these are used as distinctive terms, freedom means the general, liberty the specific. We say, the slave was restored to freedom; and we speak of the liberty of the press, of civil liberty. Still, no orator or poet would hesitate to say freedom of the press, if rhetorically or metrically it should suit better. As in almost all cases in which we have a Saxon and a Latin term for the same main idea, so in this, the first, because the older and original term, has a fuller, more compact, and more positive meaning; the latter a more pointed, abstract, or scientific sense. This appears still more in the verbs, to free and to liberate. The Ger man language has but one word for our Freedom and Liberty, namely Freiheit; and Freithum (literally freedom) means, in some portions of Germany, an estate of a Freiherr (baron). In Dutch, the word Vryheid (literally freehood) is freedom, liberty; while Vrydom (literally freedom) means a privilege, an exemption from buidens. This shows still more that these words meant originally the same

[19373] [The greater part of this note, relating to the derivation of several words signifying free, and a note a little farther on, relating to the connection between frei and friede (free and peace in German), have been omitted, since much of what is said is not sanctioned by etymologists of the highest repute. Dr. Lieber derives the Greek έλεύθερος from the root ελῠθ, come, or go—a derivation which J. Grimm and G. Curtius accept, while Benfey, Kirchhoff, and Corssen prefer to connect the Greek word with the Latin līber. Liber, again, seems to have nothing in common with the German leib, body, as Dr. Lieber supposed, but is connected by G. Curtius with λιφ in λίπτομαι, a rare Greek word denoting to long for. There must be a common root, as Grimm thinks, in liber, libet, l bet, and in German lieben, our love. Frei, free, does not seem to belong to the same root with friede, peace. Comp. Grimm's Deutsch. Wörterb. Whatever the derivation of this word may be, we may well suppose, as Grimm suggests, that the notion of peace is derived from the earlier one of fence, defense, protection. Comp. einfrieden, to fence or hedge in.]

[20507] Autonomeia is literally translated Self-government, and undoubtedly suggested the English word to our early divines. Donaldson, in his Greek Dictionary gives Self-government as the English equivalent for the Greek Autonomy, but, as it has been stated above, it meant in reality independence of other states, a non-colonial, non-provincial state of things. I beg the reader to remember this fact, for it is significant that the term autonomy retained with the Greeks this meaning, facing as it were foreign states, and that Self-government, the same word, has acquired with ourselves, chiefly, or exclusively, a domestic meaning, facing the relations in which the individual and home institutions stand to the state which comprehends them.

[21247] The fact that man is in his very essence at once a social being and an individual, that the two poles of sociality and individualism must forever determine his political being, and that he cannot give up either the one or the other, with the many relations flowing from this fundamental point, form the main subject of the first volume of my Political Ethics, to which I would refer the reader.

[21643] The republic—if, indeed, we can say that an actual and bona fide republic ever existed in England—was called the State, in contradistinction to the regal government. During the Restoration under Charles II., men would say, “In the times of the State,” meaning the interval between the death of the first Charles and the resumption of government by the second. The term State acquired first this peculiar meaning under the Presbyterian government.

[22091] It is in a similar sense that Freiligrath, a modern German poet, begins one of his most fervent songs with the line, Die Freiheit ist die Republik; that is, Freedom is the Republic. On the other hand, I find that Prussia, at the time of Frederic the Great, was called, on a few occasions, the Republic, manifestly without any reference to the form of government, and meaning simply the com mon or public weal or concern.

[22513] It is a striking fact that nearly all political writers who have indulged in creating Utopias—I believe all without exception—have followed so closely the ancient writers, that they rose no higher than to communism. It may be owing in part to the fact that these writers composed their works soon after the restoration of letters, when the ancients naturally ruled the minds of men.

[22897] Chapter xiii. of the second book.

[22932] This was written in the year 1837. Since then, events have occurred in France which may well cause the reader to reflect whether, after all, the author was entirely correct in drawing this peculiar line between antiquity and modern times. All I can say in this place is, that the political movements in France resemble the dire imperial times of Rome just so far as the French, or rather the Napoleonists among them, step out of the broad path of modern political civilization, actually courting a comparison with imperial Rome, and that this renewed imperial period will be nothing but a phase in the long chain of political revulsions and ruptures of France. The phase will not be of long duration, and, after it will have passed, it will serve as an additional proof of our position.

[23720] Plato, Gorg., 71.

[23739] For the evidence and proof I must refer to the original. [Dr. Lieber is in an error in classing generals among the officers chosen at Athens by lot. Comp. K. F. Hermann, Gr. Staatsalterth.,i. § 149; Schömann, Gr. Alterth., i. 422; and Tittmann, Staatsverfass., who gives a list of appointments to office by lot and by cheirotonia, pp. 311-318.]

[24085] The history of no nation reminds the student so frequently of the fact that “His ways are not our ways,” as that of England. Many events which have brought rum elsewhere, served there, in the end, to obtain greater liberty and a higher nationality. The fact that the Norman nobility in England was the creature of the king—for this, doubtless, it was, although they came as Norman noblemen to the field of Hastings—is one of these remarkable circumstances. The English civil wars; the fact that most of England's monarchs have been indifferent persons, and that after Alfred the Great but one truly great man has been among her kings; the inhospitable climate, which was treated by the people like a gauntlet thrown down by nature; that they developed that whole world of domestic comfort and well-being, known nowhere else, and of such important influence upon all her political life; her limited territory; her repeated change of language; her early conquests,—these are some items of a list which might easily be extended.

[25112] Since this note was originally written, a work in praise of Henry VIII. has attracted sufficient attention to make it necessary for me to state that the author means William III. as the great monarch after Alfred.

[25327] A chronological table of the leading cases in England and the United States by which great constitutional principles or essential individual rights have been settled and sown like a spreading, self-increasing plant, would be highly instructive, and show how much we owe to the growth of liberty, and how much this growth is owing to the husbanding of practical cases in the spirit of freedom.

[25721] In the year 1848 I published, in an American journal, a paper headed Anglican and Gallican Liberty, in which I indicated several views which have been further developed in the present work. A distinguished German criminalist and publicist did me the honor of publishing a German translation of this paper, in which, however, he says that what I have called Anglican liberty is more generally called Germanic liberty. This is an error. I allow that the original Teutonic spirit of individual independence, distinguished as it is from the Celtic disposition of being swayed by masses, and from the consequent proclivity toward centralization in politics, religion, and literature, and a certain inability to remain long in the opposition, or to stand aloof of a party,—I allow that this original Teutonic spirit largely enters into what I have termed Anglican liberty, but this is a system of civil liberty which has developed itself independent of all other Teutonic nations, has been increasing while nearly all the other Teutonic nations lost their liberty, and of which, unfortunately, the Germans, who ought to be supposed the most Germanic of the Germanic tribes, have nothing, except what may remain of the late attempts at engrafting anew principles or guarantees of liberty on their polities, which had become more and more a copy of French centralization. This is not the place to discuss the subject of so-called Germanic liberty. All that is necessary here to state is, that what is called Anglican liberty consists, as was said before, in a body of guarantees which, as an entire system, has been elaborated by the Anglican race, and is peculiar to them unless imitated by others. Many a detail of Anglican liberty existed long ago in other parts of Europe, and was enjoyed at times in a higher degree than by the English at that period. But it withered or ran wild, and never became a part of a constitutional organism. What has become of the Aragonese fustuia or chief justice? What of the Hungarian excessive self-government of the county?

[27776] Bunsen, in his Signs of the Times, calls mutual toleration the true evidence of a firm Christian faith and the only valid evidence before God and men.

[27928] He speaks of religion; but the remark, with proper modification, is applicable in all spheres. Strong conviction of right and truth and reality early rises to respectful toleration—a generous acknowledgment of the rights as well as the opinions of others. Feebleness of conviction or consciousness of feebleness makes tyrannical and vindictive. And, let us add, this is one of the many points where true liberty and gentlemanliness meet in requirements and effects.

[28395] Political Ethics, chapter on Sovercignty.

[28438] The case is The Queen vs. Bernard. [It is, however, in itself right to punish conspiracies against foreign powers, when their base of operations is within our territory, because they are crimes committed on our soil, over which no other state has control, and also because they may involve us in unpleasant relations with foreigners. But in the case mentioned in the text the demand for new legislation was made in the spirit of intimidation.—The English claim to search our vessels in 1858 was dictated by the desire to ascertain whether a given vessel was really of foreign nationality, or an English vessel under false colors.]

[29070] The address and declaration of four thousand British merchants, presented in the month of April, 1853, to the emperor of the French, will forever remain a striking proof of British liberty; for in every other European country the government would have imprisoned every signer, if, indeed, the police had not nipped the petition in the bud; and it will also forever remain a testimony how far people can forget themselves and their national character when funds are believed to be endangered, or capital is desired to be placed advantageously. But I have alluded to it in the text as an instance only of popular interference with foreign governments, doubtless the most remarkable instance of the kind on record. Whether the whole proceeding was “not far short of high treason,” as Lord Campbell stigmatized it in the House of Lords, may be left undecided It certainly would have been treated as such during some periods of English history, and must be treated by all right-minded men of the present period as a most unworthy procedure.

[30107] To this must now be added the record of the tone which pervaded the address of the lord mayor and aldermen of London to Count Walewski, French Ambassador, in the early part of the year 1858, and the manner in which it was received, when Orsini had attempted to assassinate the count's master and cousin, having obtained his explosive weapons in England. The reply of the ambassador was submitted to, although rising to such a degree of impertinence that it was necessary, at a later period, diplomatically to explain and partially to unsay it.

[30652] In many countries, and even among hardly civilized tribes, it has been a rule that no one should enter a man's house without the consent of the owner. Missionaries tell us that the Yarriba people in Central Africa do not allow their king to enter a house, even to arrest a criminal, without the consent of the head of the family. So we are very often told that the trial by jury was known before England had its present name; but the question of importance is, how far a principle is developed, how securely it is guaranteed, how essential a part of a general system it is, and how strong it is to resist when public power should choose to interfere with it. The Chinese have no censorship, but this absence of censorship is not liberty of the press. The Romans cared very little about the religion of their subjects, (so that they were not Christians,) but this was not constitutional toleration or freedom of worship.

[31573] In the province of Kouang-St, containing mountainous regions.

[31636] A warrant to apprehend all persons suspected, or all persons guilty, etc. etc, is illegal. The person against whom the warrant runs ought to be pointed out. The law on this momentous subject was laid down by Lord Mansfield in the case of Money vs. Leach, 3 Burrow's Rep. 1742, where the “general warrant” which had been in use since the revolution, directing the officers to apprehend the “authors, printers, and publishers” of the famous No. 45 of the North Briton, was held to be illegal and void. [Comp. May, Constit. Hist., ii. chap. 11.]

[32180] [For arrests which officers or even private persons are allowed by English law to make without warrant, see Blackstone's Com., iv. chap 21, pp. 292, 293, and the notes of the annotators on his text.]

[32381] The reader will find a copy of the Constitution of the United States in the Appendix.

[32468] This is section 123 of vol. iii. of Dr. Greenleaf on Evidence, which I have copied by the permission of my esteemed and distinguished friend. I have left out all the legal references. The professional lawyer is acquainted with the book, and the references would be important to him alone.

[32758] Long imprisonments before trial are customary means resorted to on the continent of Europe in order to harass the subjects. Guerrazzi and other liberals were sentenced, in Tuscany, on the first of July, 1853, after having been imprisoned for fifty months before ever being brought to trial. It is useless to mention more instances; for long imprisonment before trial is the rule in absolute governments whenever it suits them.

[33186] The Appendix contains the habeas corpus act.

[33232] Paper No. 1xxxiv.

[33251] Blackstone's Commentaries, vol. i. page 136. Note, in the “Federalist.”

[33324] In 1854 a complete edition of the emperor's works was published. In that edition was a chapter headed De la Liberte individuelle en Angleterre. In it are the following passages:

[33503] “No inhabitant of Great Britain (excepting convicts) can be expelled from the United Kingdom. Any infraction of this clause (the habeas corpus act) would be visited with the severest penalties.” He remarks that we have no public prosecutor, the attorney-general interfering only on extraordinary occasions; and if criminals sometimes escape justice, personal liberty is the less endangered. “In England, authority is never influenced by passion; its proceedings are always moderate, always legal;” there is “no violation of the citizen's domicile, so common in France;” family correspondence is inviolate, and no passports bar the most perfect freedom of traffic,—” passports, the oppressive invention of the Committee of Public Safety, which are an embarrassment and an obstacle to the peaceable citizen, but which are utterly poweiless against those who wish to deceive the vigilance of authority.” A law deprived of the general support of public opinion would be a mere scrap of paper.

[34493] “It suffices for us to note this fact, that in France, where such jealousy is shown of everything which touches equality and national honor, people do not attach themselves sò religiously to personal liberty. The tranquillity of the citizen may be disturbed, his domicile may be violated, he may be made to undergo for whole months a preventive imprisonment, personal guarantees may be despised, and a few generous men shall raise their voices, but public opinion will remain calm and impassible as long as no political passion is awakened. There lies the greatest reason for the violence of authority; it can be arbitrary because there is no curb to check it. In England, on the contrary, political passions cease the moment a violation of common right is committed; and this, because England is a country of legality, and France has not yet become so; because England is a country solidly constituted, while France struggles by turns for forty years between revolutions and counter-revolutions, and the sanctity of principle has yet to be created there.”

[35551] The plan has not yet been published, but one of the ministers, Sir James Graham, said in the Commons, in April, 1853:

[35670] “The first point on which all the authorities consulted were agreed is, that whatever measures are taken, must rely for success on the voluntary acceptance of them by the seamen, and that any attempt to introduce a coercive mode of enlistment would be followed by mischievous consequences and failure.” The difficult question does not yet seem to be wholly settled (1859). It seems difficult to obtain a sufficient number of seamen to man the fleet in emergencies. In France seamen are drafted, as soldiers are for the army. [For the history of impressment, for the army as well as for the navy, down to 1860, comp. May, u.s., ii. 259 et seq. Until 1872 no law abolishing this practice was passed; but the practice itself seems to be in abeyance.]

[36419] I William and Mary, stat, ii, c. 2.

[36456] Esprit des Lois, xit. 2; “Of the Liberty of the Citizen.”

[36515] This comprehensive and excellent work was published in Germany, Erlangen, 1851.

[36596] [I.e., in cases of felony no counsel was allowed, unless upon collateral facts, or some point of law; and so in cases of petty larceny. But when a peison was indicted for high treason, he had, as early as 7 Wm. III., the privilege of counsel, which was granted also to persons impeached for the same crime by a statute of 20 Geo. III. In 1836, by statute of 6 and 7 Wm. IV., this privilege was granted in trials for felony. See Blackst., iv., chap. 27, p. 355, and May, u. s., ii. 558.] It must not be forgotten, however, that deficient as the penal trial of England without counsel for the defendant was, it contained many guarantees of protection, especially publicity, a fixed law of evidence, with the exclusion of hearsay evidence, the jury and the neutral position of the judge in consequence of the trial by jury, and the strictly accusatorial character of the trial, with the most rigid adhesion to the principle of trying a person upon the indictment alone, so that the judge could be, and in later times really had been, the protector of the prisoner. Had the trial been inquisitorial instead of accusatorial, the absence of counsel for defence would have been an enormity. To this enormity Austria has actually returned since the beginning of this century. The code promulgated by Joseph gave counsel, or a “defensor,” to the prisoner; but, although the process remained inquisitorial, the defensor was again disallowed. The late revolution re-established him, but whether he has been discontinued again of late I do not know. Nor can it be of very great importance in a country in which the “state of siege” and martial law seem to be almost permanent.

[38262] Penal trials of absent persons are common in countries where the principles of the Roman law prevail. They are common in France; and the church has even tried deceased persons for heresy, found them guilty, and confiscated the property which had belonged to the heretic. The presence of the indicted person at his trial is a right plain to every one as soon as once pronounced, but power acknowledges it at a late period only, and always has a tendency to depart from it, whether this power be a monaich or his government, or an impassioned populace. Several of the almost solemn procedures of lynch law which have occurred of late in some of our Western States, and according to which absent persons were warned nevet to return to their domicile, are instances in point.

[39035] The idea expressed by Dr. Paley regarding this point is revolting. He says, in his Political Philosophy, that we may choose between two systems, the one with fair punishments always applied, the other with very severe punishments occasionally applied. He thus degiades penal law, from a law founded above all upon strict principles of justice, to a mere matter of prudential expediency, putting it on a level with military decimation.

[39471] Lieber's Popular Essay on Subjects of Penal Law, and on Uninterrupted Solitary Confinement at Labor, etc.; Philadelphia, 1838. I have there treated of this all-important subject at some length.

[39666] Tiberius Gracchus erected a temple in honor of Liberty, with a sum obtained for fines. If the fines were just, there was no inconsistency in thus making penal justice build a temple of freedom, for liberty demands security and order, and, therefore, penal justice.

[39932] On the other hand, what does a citizen reared in Anglican liberty feel when he reads in a simple newspape article in a French provincial paper, in 1853, the following? “The minister of general police has just decided that Chapitel, sentenced by the court to six months' imprisonment for having been connected with a secret society, and Brayet, sentenced for the same offence to two months' imprisonment, shall be transported to Cayenne for ten years, after the expiration of their sentence!”

[40425] The decree of the eighth of December, 1851, not a law, but a. mere dictatorial order, upon which ten years' transportation is added by way of “nder” to a few months' imprisonment adjudged by the courts of law, is this:

[40645] ” Article 1. Every individual placed under the surveillance of the high police, who shall be found to have broken his assigned limits of residence, may be transported, by way of general safety, to one of the penitentiary colonies, at Cayenne or in Algeria.

[40903] ” The duration of transportation shall be five years or less, and ten years or more.” (We translate literally and conectly, whatever the reader may think of this sentence, which would be very droll, were it not very sad.)

[41126] “Article 2. The same measure shall be applicable to individuals found to be guilty of having formed part of a secret society.”

[41254] The French of the last sentence is, tndividus reconnus coupable d' avoir fau partte d'une société secrète. This reconnus (found, acknowledged) is of a sinister import. For the question is, Found by whom? Of course not only by the courts, for finding a man guilty by process of law is in French convaincre. The reconnaitre, therefore, was used in order to include the police or any one else in authority. So that we arrive at this striking fact: The despot may add an enormous punishment to a legal sentence, as in the cited case, or he may award it, or rather the minister of police under him may do it, without trial, upon mere police information. Two hundred years ago, the English declared executive transportation beyond the seas, or depoitation, to be an unwarranted grievance; and here we have it again, no doubt in imitation of the Roman imperial times, (the saddest in all history,) in the middle of the nineteenth century.

[42187] So far the note as written in 1853. In 1858 Orsini made his attempt of assassinating emperor of the French, when a far more stringent law was passed, and the principle of “suspicion,” so flourishing as an element of criminality in the first French revolution, was revived.

[42461] Sir Samuel Romilly's Memoirs, vol i. p. 315, 2d ed., London, 1840.

[42529] Phillipps's State Trials, vol ii. 214, et seq., and, indeed, in many parts of the work.

[42618] Beranger, De la Justice Criminelle de France, Paris, 1818, page 2.

[42686] The reader will find in Appendix III. a paper on the subject of some continental trials, and the admission of half and quarter proof and proportional punishment

[42848] This may be amply seen in the reports on Fiench trials, and, among other works, in Feuerbach's Collection of Geiman Criminal Trials.

[42982] See K. F. Hermann, Gr. Staatsalterth., § 144.

[43029] Memoirs of the Life of Sir Samuel Romilly, 2d ed., London, 1840, vol. ii P. 235. Strangely enough, there is an English law, 25 George II., ch. 36, accord ing to which prosecutors are to have the expenses of their prosecution reim bursed, and a compensation afforded them for their trouble and loss of time. This is evidently to induce people freely to prosecute; but no guarantee is given on the other hand against undue prosecution, and a compensation for the trouble and loss of time of the acquitted person.

[43541] The American reader ought to keep in mind that the term Political Offence is now a well-established term on the continent of Europe. It is used in legislation; thus the late French republic abolished capital punishment for political offenders, and in the treaty of extradition between France and Spain, “political offenders” are excepted, and not subject to extradition. It would, nevertheless, be difficult to give a definition of the term Political Offence sufficiently clear to be acceptable to a law-abiding administration of justice. Indeed, we may say that it was natural this term should have presented itself, in the course of things on the continent of Europe, and it is equally natural, and is full of meaning, that the English law does not know it.

[44302] The Writings of John Marshall, p. 42. Ex parte Bollman and Swartwout. The rebellion of the Mormons in 1858 has occurred since the remarks in the text were written. It would seem sound reasoning and statesmanship, that the narrower the limits are to which the public law restricts treason, the more necessary it becomes to execute the law fully within those limits.

[44668] Judge Story says: “A state cannot take cognizance, or punish the offence, (i.e. treason against the United States,) whatever it may do in relation to the offence of treason, committed exclusively against itself, if indeed any case can, under the constitution, exist, which is not at the same time treason against the United States.” Chap. 28, vol. iii. of Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States.

[45080] I seize upon this opportunity of advising every young reader of this work to study with earnest attention the history of the witch-trials forming, possibly, with the African slave-trade, the greatest aberrations of our Cis-Caucasian race. Such works as Soldan's History of the Witch-Trials [Gesch. der Hexenprocesse, Stuttgard, 1843] exhibit the psychology of public and private passion, of crime and criminal law, in so impressive and instructive a manner, that the sad course of crime and error having been run through, it ought not to stand on record in vain for us. We learn, in history and in psychology, as in nature, to understand the principles, motives, and laws of minor actions, by the changes and convulsions on a large scale; and the vast changes and revulsions by the microscopic observation of the minute reality around us.

[45920] When, in 1858, Count Montalembert was tried in Paris for having written a pamphlet in praise of England, a peculiarly small court-room was selected, only a few persons were admitted, by tickets, and no notes were allowed to be taken.

[46155] The American trials for treason are collected in Francis Wharton's State Trials of the United States, Philadelphia, 1846.

[46278] [And, it may be, acquitted, as the court of ordinary justice would have its own definition of crime, and its own rules of evidence.]

[46412] The reader may be acquainted with the Right Hon. Mr. Gladstone's pamphlet on Neapolitan trials for treason, published in 1851. It is but a sample.

[46560] I would mention for the younger student, that when I study pervading institutions, or laws and principles which form running threads through the whole web of history, I find it useful to make chronological tables of their chief advancements and reverses. Such tables are very suggestive, and strikingly show what we owe to the continuity of human society. None of these tables has been more instructive to me than that on the history of the law of treason.

[47018] The first fair play was given to a free press in the Netherlands.

[47085] The law of the United States prohibits any private person periodically and regularly to carry letters, and also to carry letters in mail ships.

[47230] [The letters publicly transmitted by mail were so few in number that the right was not felt to be very important. Nor had it been systematically invaded.]

[47386] The American states in which slavery exists have not considered the laws or principles relating to letters to apply to public journals, when suspicion exists that they contain articles hostile to slavery. In some cases people have broken into the post-office and seized the obnoxious papers; in other cases the state legislature have decreed punishments for propagating abolition papers. Thus we read in the National Intelligencer, Washington, October 6, 1853, that “Mr. Herndon, postmaster at Glenville, informs the editor of the Religious Telescope, at Circleville, Ohio, that having, according to the laws of Virginia, opened and inspected his papers, and found them to contain abolition sentiments, he has refused to deliver them as addressed, and has publicly burnt them in presence of a magistrate. It appears by his letter that the penalty for circulating such papers is imprisonment in the penitentiary for not less than one nor more than five years.”

[48347] Such is the law, and its lawfulness, wisdom, and dignity must be judged of by the laws and principles by which other measures are judged; but it cannot be denied that a freeman feels himself circumscribed so far as he is denied to read what he chooses. If a government or a set of men were to forbid a man to read an atheistic paper, though he might be a fervent Christian, his liberty would be undoubtedly circumscribed pro tanto.

[48780] That the seizure of English papers on the continent is of frequent occur rence, is well known by every reader of the daily papers.

[48912] In the decision of the appellate court in the same case we find this to be the chief argument, that government establishes post-offices, and cannot be expected to lend its hand to the promotion of mischief, by carrying letters of evil-doers. This is totally fallacious. Government does not establish post-offices, but society establishes them for itself, though it may be through government. The mail is no boon granted by government.

[49348] If it did, it is not a benefit done by a second party, as when A makes a present to B, but government is simply and purely an agent; and, what is more, the right of establishing post-offices is not an inherent attribute of government, such as the administration of justice or making war. Government merely becomes the public carrier, for the sake of general convenience. There are many private posts, and governments without government post-offices, for instance, the republic of Hamburg.

[49838] The opening of letters without proper warrant is a frightful perversion of power, and though government should be able to get at secret machinations, the secret of letters is a primordial condition. Government might, undoubtedly, know many useful things if the sacredness of Catholic confession were broken into; but that is considered a primordial and pre-political condition. So, many codes do not force a son to testify against a father; the family affection is considered a primordial condition. The very state of society, for which it is worth living, is invaded, if the correspondence is exposed to this sort of government burglary.

[50478] The argument is simply this. Man is destined to live in society, united by converse and intercommunion; this is a basis of humanity. If you open letters, you seriously invade this primary condition. Men are individuals, and social beings, destined for civilization and united progress, and the question is not whether they may be dispensed with, but how to govern with them. Governments too frequently act as though the government were the primary condition, and the remaining question only was, how much may be spared by government to be left for society or individuals. The opposite is the truth.

[51078] After this note had been published, the French court of cassation,” all chainbers united,” decided, in the last resort, that in the case of Coëtlogon, Flandin, and others, no illegal act had been committed by the prefect of the police, in opening letters, etc. etc. The decision is given in full in the Courrier des Etais-Unis, New York, December 12, 1853.

[51436] [Several corrections are necessary in this and the preceding paragraph. The long parliament-not the commonwealth-passed an ordinance June 11, 1643, for restraining the liberty of the press, and to strengthen some former order? made for that purpose. This led to Milton's Areopagitica, published in November, 1644. Afterwards, September 21, 1647, in consequence of a letter from Gen. Fairfax, complaining of scandalous pamphlets, a new ordinance was passed, which contains several of the particulars mentioned in the text. Comp. Cobbett's Parl. Hist., iii. pp. 131, 132,780. In 1662 a new licensing law was passed under Charles II. In 1695, under William, the Licensing act ceased to have effect, and was not again passed. Comp. Smyth's Lect. on Hist., ii. lect. 22; Macaulay's Hist., iv. 348, et seq., 541.]

[52245] On the other hand, an immense amount of capital annually returns, from successful emigrants in the United States, to Ireland and Germany. Persons who have not paid attention to the subject cannot have any conception how many hard yet gladly earned pounds and thalers are sent from our country to aged parents or toiling sisters and brothers in Europe. A wide-spread and blessed process of affection is thus all the time going on-silent, gladdening, and full of beauty, like the secret and beautifying process of spring. It is curious to observe, in connection with this emigration of coin from Europe, (for a large portion of the emigrating capital consists in European specie,) how the coins are first carried to the distant west in the pouches of the emigrants, and then are sent in large boxes from the western banks, into which they naturally flow, to the New York banks, to be sold to the specie-broker, who sells them for shipment back to France, Germany, or England. The Banks of New York, by T. S. Gibbons New York, 1859.

[53276] In the Prussian constitution of 1850, Tit. ii. Art. ii., it is said, “The right to emigrate cannot be restricted by the state, except with respect to the duty of military service.”

[53458] [Penalties for escaping a draft in time of war, or deserting one's country in its perils, may be perfectly just. Comp. the Oration of Lycurgus against Leocrates, e.g. §§ 11, 16.]

[53638] The papers of September, 1853, reported that “the Silby estate, belonging to the Hon. Mrs. Petre, has been sold to Lord Londesborough for £270,000. Mrs. Petre, whose property was left by her husband entirely at her own disposal, has taken the veil in a nunnery in France, which will of course receive the whole of her fortune.”

[53967] This emigration of more than a million of dollars, and serving for the purpose of a religious community not favored by the country whence it emigrates, (not to speak of the actual droit d'aubaine in France before the revolution,) indicates a great advance of civilization, and would not be allowed in several countries. [The laws of civilized states, however, may properly limit or forbid the acquisition of property in mortmain or by religious corporations. And if within a country religious bodies were forbidden to hold such property, why should they, if situated in another, have such capacity of acquisition from the foreign country?]

[54608] Hon. Edward Everett's dispatch to Mr. Crampton, on the Island of Cuba, December 1, 1852. The London Spectator of December 17, 1853, said:—

[54748] “Not less than £2,972,000 was remitted from Irish emigrants in America to their friends and relatives at home, in 1848, 1849, 1850, and 1851. It is estimated that if the remittances have continued at the same rate, upwards of four millions must have been remitted in the last six years.”

[55037] The primordial right of locomotion and emigration has been discussed by me in Political Ethics, at considerable length. The state of Mississippi declares in its bill of rights, that the right of emigration shall never be infringed by law or authority. The English distaste of passports was severely tried when, after Orsini's attempt to assassinate Napoleon III., stringent passport regulations were adopted in France; but the English found them so irksome (and the money they spend is so acceptable to the continent) that those police regulations were soon relaxed in a very great degree. Napoleon III., when an exile, wrote on the individual liberty in England, and called passports “that invention of the Committee of Public Safety.” See his works. The modern passport was, doubtless, greatly developed in the first French revolution, but not invented. The history of the passport, from the Roman Empire to the modern railroad, which naturally interferes with its stringency, is an interesting portion of the history of our race, but it belongs to what the Germans have carved out as a separate branch under the name of Police Science, (Polizei-Wissenschaft.)

[56201] Conscience lies beyond the reach of government. “Thoughts are free,” is an old German saying. The same must be said of feelings and conscience. That which government, even the most despotic, can alone interfere with, is the profession of religion, worship, and church government.

[56482] See Primordial Rights in Political Ethics.

[56526] [A state in the American Union might have a state church, although such an event is at present utterly improbable.]

[56643] This disqualification has at length been removed, in 1858. The words “upon the faith of a Christian” may be left out of the qualifying oath by a non-Christian. There are now (1859) three Jews in the house of commons.

[56861] Since the text, to which this note is appended, was written, the case of the Madiai family has attracted the attention of all civilized nations in the old and new world. The Madiai family, natives of Tuscany, had become Protestants, and used to read the Bible. No offence has ever been charged to them, except that they read the Bible in the vernacular. Their imprisonment and prosecution caused the formation of a Society for Protecting the Rights of Conscience, in England, in July, 1857. Archbishop Whately presided at the first meeting, and in giving the scope of the society, spoke of the topic in hand with a degree of discrimination which entitles his remarks to be reproduced here. He said:

[57561] “We are entirely unconnected with conversion, except so far as converts may be exposed to persecutions for conscience' sake. We enter into no connection with any society for diffusing religious knowledge of any kind. By rights, we understand not necessarily that every one is right in the religion that he adopts, but that his neighbors have no right to interfere with him. We merely maintain that a man has a right, not necessarily a moral right, nor a right in point of judgment, but a civil right, to worship God according to his own conscience, without suffering any hardships at the hands of his neighbors for so doing. We limit ourselves entirely to those descriptions of persecution in which the law can give no relief. As for assaults and violence of any kind, where the law provides and holds out a remedy, we leave all persons to seek that remedy for themselves; and we do not undertake to guard, or to remunerate, or to compensate any persons who are exposed to obloquy, to curses, denunciations of Divine vengeance uttered by men, to ridicule, or to any sort of annoyance of that kind. They should be taught to bear it and to support it with joy and satisfaction through Divine help, and rejoicing that they are counted worthy to suffer in the good cause. But when attempts are made to compel men to conform to what they do not conscientiously believe, by the fear of starvation, by turning them out of employment when they are honest and industrious laborers, by refusing to buy and sell or hold any intercourse with them, then I think it is, and then only, that a society like this ought to come forward, and that all persons, whatever religion they may be of, or whether they are of any religion at all or not, in a feeling of humanity and justice, ought to look with a favorable eye on such a society as yours, provided it keep itself within its own proper bounds.”

[59444] It has been one of the main objects in my Essays on Labor and Property, to show the necessity and justice of individual property, and its direct connection with man's individuality, of which it is but the reflex in the material world around him. Man suffers in individuality, therefore in liberty, in the degree in which absolutism, which is always of a communistic nature, deprives him of the possession, enjoyment, production, and exchange of individual property. The Essays treat of property in a political, psychologic, and economical point of view.

[59999] The subject of individual inheritance has also been treated at length in the Essays mentioned in the preceding note.

[60117] [Our author of course cannot object to fines, one of the most universal and most efficacious of penalties.]

[60226] I shall not have room to give a whole chapter to the subject of communism, or rather a single chapter would be wholly insufficient on this interesting subject, which, moreover, belongs to general political philosophy, rather than to our branch. I shall mention, therefore, this only, that I use in these pages the word communism in its common adaptation, meaning a state of society in which individual property is abolished, or in which it is the futile endeavor of the lawgiver to abolish it, such as hundreds of attempts made, in ancient times, in the middle ages, and in modern epochs, in Asia and in Europe, among the Spartans, the anabaptists, and French communists. I do not take here the term communism in that philosophical sense according to which every state, indeed every society whatever, necessarily consists of the two elements of individualism and socialism. The grave error of the socialist is that he extends the principle of socialism, correct in itself, to the sphere where individualism or separatism, equally correct, ought to determine our actions. The socialist is as mistaken an enthusiast as the individualist would be, who, forgetting the element of socialism, should carry his principle to the extreme of disjunctive egotism, and insist upon a dissolution of government and a disavowal of the sovereignty of society in political matters. It is instructive to observe how, also, in this case, the extremes meet; for works have been actually published by socialists which wind up with an entire denial of government, and an avowal of “individual sovereignty.”

[61812] See the constitution of the French Republic of 1848, in the Appendix. It contains a paragraph acknowledging private property, the family, etc. It was right to insert it, under the circumstances. If the Spartans had ever reformed their government, and passed from their socialism to individualism, they would have been justified in proclaiming the sanctity of the family and the acknowledgment of private cookery, however ludicrous this might be under other circumstances.

[62285] Points belonging to this subject and its primordial character were pronounced with clearness in the late pleadings in the French courts, when it was endeavored to show, unfortunately in vain, that Louis Napoleon had no right, even as a dictator, to confiscate the private property of the Orleans family, and that the courts were competent to restore it to the lawful owners.

[62661] See Judge Story, in his Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States, and his Opinion, as well as Chief-Justice Marshall's' in the celebrated Dartmouth Case, 4 Wheaton R. 518, and also Mr. Webster's Works for his argument in that case.

[62907] The English go much farther than ourselves, not indeed in principle, but because they consider many rights, places, and privileges as vested property which we by no means consider as such.

[63097] 4 An act of parliament under James I. (21 James I. i. 3) prohibited all monopolies granted by the crown, after the courts had repeatedly, even under Elizabeth, declared certain monopolies null and void.

[63301] Paragraph fifty-nine, chap. i. vol. i. of History of Europe from the Fall of Napoleon to the Accession of Louis Philippe. Possibly an opportunity may offer itself some day to treat of this melancholy subject at length and in all its details.

[63544] I cannot forbear, however, to copy a passage of Sir A. Alison, viz.: “The principal states of the Union have, by common consent, repudiated their state debts as soon as the storms of adversity blew; and they have in some instances resumed the payment of their interest only when the sale of lands they had wrested from the Indians afforded them the means of doing so, without recurring to the dreaded horrors of direct taxation”—and to add that there is not one fact in this whole passage. The principal states did not repudiate; the repudiation was not by common consent; no land has been wrested from the Indians and sold for the benefit of the states, and direct taxation exists in most states, perhaps in all the states to some extent. Many of those readers who have been my pupils will remember that for a number of years I was in the habit of delivering a course of lectures on Repudiation, in which, I trust, I showed no disposition to mince matters; but to repudiate the representative principle as Sir Archibald does when treating of Repudiation, and to present the latter as a natural consequence of republicanism, transcends the bounds of reason. What element in the English polity, we would ask, is it that makes English credit so firm? Is it the monarchical? This cannot well be, for many monarchs have more than loosely dealt with credit, public funds, and even private property. I believe, on the contrary, that the credit of England mainly rests on her representative, her republican principle. I do not mean to say that people lend their money just because she has a parliament. What I mean is that the rehance of the world on the good faith of England in money matters has been built up by her parliamentary government, and would not have been built up without it.

[65328] The Dutch Republic enjoyed great credit, while the Regent of France, and his council of state, seriously debated whether the “new government” was obliged to acknowledge the debts of the defunct Louis XIV. One of the worst cases of repudiation was exhibited in England long before the unhappy laxity became manifest in our land. The Prince of Wales (George IV.) and two of his brothers, the Dukes of York and Clarence, desired to escape paying a loan of 3,600,000 guilders which they had made in Holland, through the banker Thomas Hammersly. When the bond-holders came to England to enforce payment, Sir Arthur Pigott, attorney-general of the Duchy of Cornwall, acting for the Prince of Wales, stated in the court that he had never heard of the bonds, which was absolutely untine. All London, and indeed all England, knew of it. The arguments were worthy of any Mississippi repudiator, such as. The present bond-holders are not the original lenders; war has broken out. Ultimately the Dutch bond-holders who were in England were arrested under the alien law and put on board a vessel, where, English writers say, I cannot say with what degree of truth, they perished, though none of the crew died.

[66526] Sir A. Alison says somewhere in his writings, that the richest men in the city of New York do not dare to have stately fronts for their houses, however costly the interior may be, from fear of displeasing the democracy. Truth and essential progress are never promoted by wrong or false argument.

[66823] We shall presently say more on the all-important word Law; but for an extensive discussion of the subject I must refer the reader to the Political Ethics.

[66979] It will hardly be necessary to state that the term supremacy of the law has a meaning only when by law we understand general and pre-existing rules of action expressing public will. Whether the name of law be given to personal decrees and arbitrary decisions, is not of the smallest importance. Napoleon, at St. Helena, expressed his surprise at having been called a despot; “I,” said he, “who have always acted by law!” This forcibly reminds us of a prominent French paper, the Univers, which lately stated that it was decidedly in favor of representative government, and that it was only necessary to know what is understood by representative government. The Univers—so said the paper itself—understands by this term a legislative corps, which represents the government. I have known, in an official capacity, a patient in a hospital for the insane, who perseveringly maintained that the difference between him and me consisted solely in the name. “Suppose,” he used to say, “we patients vote that we are sane and the out-door party is crazy?” “Don't you see?” he would add, with a knowing look.

[68078] Our constitution prohibits them.

[68112] By extraordinary courts of justice are meant, in this connection, courts of an extraordinary composition, not those that are simply directed to sit at an unusual time. The difference between justice, that is, right distributed among men by lawful and regularly appointed judges on the one hand, and the trials, by commissioners on the other hand, is well pointed out by an anecdote, such as Plutarch would not have disdained to give in his writings. Montaign, grand master of the household of Charles VI., was tried, tortured, and executed by Commissioners. He was buried in the church of the Celestines, and when Francis I. came to see his tomb, the king said, “This Montaign has been condemned by justice.” “No, sire,” answered the simple monk who guided the king, “he was condemned by Commissioners.” Histoire du Parlement de Paris, Amsterdam, 1769, ch. 4. Commissioners as judges form a “packed” court, do not feel lasting responsibility, and, in cases of importance to the executive, act on the foregone conclusion almost as distinctly as the “judges” of the Duke d'Enghien did. In this consists the danger of courts-martial, when established for the ordinary courts.

[69286] See the French charter in the Appendix.

[69327] The act by which martial law was declared in Ireland, during the rebellion in 1798, can be seen in Tytler's Essay on Military Law, appendix, No. 6. I copy this reference from an article, Martial Law, in Political Dictionary, London,1846.

[69566] [For the question raised in our late war as to the president's power to do this, and for the limitation that the suspension of habeas corpus allows no illegal arrests, but only the detention of a prisoner arrested for good cause, comp Pomeroy's Constit, Law, p. 475.]

[69835] Extreme cases, as a matter of course, would be allowed to form exceptions.

[69911] I must again refer to the Political Ethics, chapter on Obedience to the Law.

[69989] Sir M. Foster, Discourse of Homicide, p. 319. I quote from Broom's Legal Maxims.

[70071] The very opposite to the Anglican principle, that each officer remains responsible for the legality of his own acts, prevails in China and Japan, and probably in all thoroughly systematized Asiatic despotisms. The superior officer is punished for the offence and even for the misfortime of the inferior, or for the accident which may have befallen the latter. The blows with the bamboo, which in China go down from the superior through many grades to the inferior, are well known. Before the late opening of the Japanese ports to the Americans and Europeans, a Christian vessel was driven on the shores of Japan. The governor ripped open his belly, and the viceroy in whose province the wreck had happened was imprisoned for one hundred days, although he was at the time a hundred miles from the place of the disaster. There is also, however, in these cases, to be taken into consideration the confusion of moral laws, and physical laws, and fate, which pervades the whole Chinese code, the ethics of Japan, the moral code of all early nations, and which we find in the early mythology of all nations. The earliest period of Greek history and mythology furnishes us with many illustrations.

[71263] Mr. King, in his Notes of the Voyage of the Morrison, New York, 1839, gives the following anecdote: “We had inquired of the Japanese how their officers were to be distinguished; whether they wore any badges besides the ever-famous ‘two sabres.’ The answer was, If you see a man come on board that trembles very much, he is a mandarin.”

[71600] The student must take care not to consider the fining of companies for want of caution, skill, or honesty in the persons or officers employed by them, (now so common in consequence of railway accidents,) as invalidating the principle laid down in the text.

[71858] For instance, in the scarcity of grain in the year 1766, Chatham prohibited exportation of grain. When parliament met, he read a passage from Locke, to show that what he had done was not legal yet right. Indemnity was passed for him and those who had acted under him. In 1818, ministers asked and obtained indemnity for the suspension of habeas corpus, for themselves and magistrates under them. Many other instances might be given. See Lieber's Legal and Political Hermeneutics, note to page 79. Acts of indemnity cannot be passed with us, because we have a constitution of which the legislature itself is but the creature, and we cannot pass ex post facto laws. All that remains for us to do in cases of absolute necessity or transcendent utility is to pass over the occurrence in silence; or congress may show its concurrence by aiding in the act. This was the case when Mr. Jefferson purchased the territory of Louisiana. Still, congress cannot make the act constitutional; though the silence of congress, or the countenance given by it to an act, gives it such apparent legality, that we find in the present time (1859) many men calling themselves adherents to the strictest interpretation of the constitution, and insisting on liberal interpretation, urging the purchase of the island of Cuba, as if the constitution, which itself declares that it permits nothing but what it distinctly and positively grants, had allowed the purchase of foreign territory.

[73322] [See the Petition of Right in Appendix V., and Forster's Life of Sir John Eliot, for earlier complaints about this old outrage.]

[73452] [The individual nature of the seaman is developed by many of his duties, while armies act chiefly as bodies and are directly under command.]

[73594] The guards of Charles II. were declared anti-constitutional, and the army of James II. was one of the evidences by which he was presumed to have abdicated; that is, in other words, one of his breaches of the fundamental law of the land. A new sanction was given to this principle in the sixth article of the Bill of Rights which runs thus: “A standing army, without the consent of parliament, is against law.”

[74005] A remarkable debate took place in the British commons in April, 1856, when Mr. Cowan brought under the notice of the house the billeting system pursued in Scotland, according to which “militia and troops of the line are billeted upon private houses in Scotland.” “It is an intolerable grievance.” Redress was obtained.

[74325] Considerations on the Corn Laws, by Dr. Samuel Johnson.

[74382] I write at the beginning of 1859.

[74417] The French soldiers vote at present, whenever universal suffrage is appealed to—not with the citizens, but for themselves, and the way in which this military voting generally takes place is very remarkable.

[74625] I do not feel authorized to say that the Anglicans consider it an elementary guarantee of liberty not to be subjected to the obligation of serving in the army, but certain it is that, as matters now stand and as our feelings now are, we should not consider it compatible with individual liberty—indeed, it would be considered as intolerable oppression—if we were forced to spend part of our lives in the standing army. It would not be tolerated. The feeling would be as strong against the French system of conscription, which drafts by lot a certain number of young men for the army, and permits those who have been drafted to furnish substitutes, as against the Prussian system, which obliges every one, from the highest to the lowest, to serve a certain time in the standing army, with the exception only of a few “mediatized princes.” The Anglicans, therefore, may be said to be at present unequivocally in favor of enlisted standing armies, where standing armies are necessary.

[75608] It was stated by him that the right of petition was of essential value only in a monarchy, against the encroachments of the crown. But this whole view was unquestionably a confined one, and caused by irritation against a peculiar class of persevering petitioners.

[75873] There is no more striking instance on record, so far as our knowledge goes, than the formidable petition of the chartists in 1848, and the calm respect with which this threatening document was received by the commons, after a speech full of dignity and manly acknowledgment of the people by Lord Morpeth, now Earl of Carlisle.

[76201] The discussion of petitions in the house of commons seems to have undergone a marked change, as will appear from the following remarks of Lord Brougham, which he made in the house of lords in June, 1853, when the extension of the time of the income tax was under debate. Lord Brougham said that he did not expect that the income tax would expire in 1860. He recalled the circumstances under which the old income tax was repealed, in defiance of the government of that day; through the instrumentality of nightly discussions on petitions—a popular privilege no longer allowed in the house of commons.

[76802] “In 1806, when the income tax was 10 per cent., it was imposed till the end of the war, and no longer, The war ended in 1814, but it broke out again in 1815; and after its final termination a great fight against the continuance of the tax took place in the house of commons. It had been said that the present income tax would not be abandoned in 1860; and he believed that the campaign which took place in parliament in 1816 could not be fought again. How was that campaign conducted? By means of petitions. For five or six weeks, from four o'clock in the afternoon till two or three o'clock in the morning, petition after petition was presented, and each petition was debated. If an account was given of the proceedings of the five or six weeks during which that campaign against the income tax was fought, it would describe one of the most extraordinary scenes ever witnessed within the walls of the house of commons, and a resistance which was perfectly successful. He might mention one incident which occurred during those discussions. After the fight had continued some three weeks or more, one night about eleven or twelve o'clock a question was put from the chair about bringing up the petitions; and all the members on one bench—who might have been supposed to be exhausted by the long sitting—rose in competition with each other to catch, as it was called, the Speaker's eye; and the gallantry of those men in standing by their colors under such circumstances so struck the house that they were hailed with a general cheer of applause. He did not think, however, that in 1860, unless a great change took place elsewhere, the same campaign and stand against the income tax would be possible.”

[78504] It would be a grave error, indeed, to conclude from this fact, or from the general democratic character of the Chinese system, that there is liberty in China—a conclusion as hasty as it would be to infer that freedom exists in France because the empire declares itself to be founded on universal suffrage.

[78811] The so-called Shakers endeavor to extirpate this principle, and furnish us with an illustration of the evils arising from the endeavor.

[78948] [This is not borne out by facts, although the same broad statement has been made by others. Sodalitates were frowned upon, but collegia opificum, although the state controlled and could dissolve them, were numerous. See the list in the Index in vol. in, of the Orelli-Henzen Inscr. Latinæ; which shows that there must have been thousands of such unions, under the empire, all over the west. Comp. also Rein in Paully's Lexicon, under Collegium and Sodalitas. It is true, however, that despotism, especially in modern times, since the means of communication are better and more used, instinctively dreads combined action for any social, moral, or religious end, as dangerous to political power.]

[79644] A careful study of the whole history of this remarkable association, which in no state of the European continent would have been allowed to rise and expand, is recommended to every student of civil liberty. It is instructive as an instance of perseverance; of an activity the most multifarious, and an organization the most extensive; of combined talent and shrewd adaptation of the means to the end; and, which is always of equal importance, of a proper conception of the end according to the means at our disposal, without which it is impossible to do that which Cicero so highly praised in Brutus, when he said, Quid vult valde vult.

[80282] I cannot forbear mentioning here one of those occuriences which, although apparently trivial, nevertheless show the constant action of a great principle, as the leaf of a tree reveals to the philosopher the operation of the vastest elements in nature. At a meeting of the Royal Academy at London in 1852, at which the ministers were present, the premier, Lord Aberdeen, said that “as a fact full of hope, he remarked that for several years the public, in the appreciation of art, had outstripped the government and the parliament itself.”

[80822] The chief executive officer considers it a fact full of hope that the people have outstripped, in interest and action, the government and parliament. How differently would a similar case have presented itself in any of the continental countries!

[81069] In the year 1857 the following case was decided in the court of common pleas at Columbia, S. C., in favor of the plaintiff The city council held, in 1855, a public meeting. The editor of one of the city papers, being present, was asked by the mayor whether he had come to take notes. The mayor, being answered in the affirmative, ordered the chief police officer to turn the editor out of the room, declaring at the time that he acted on the strength of a resolution of the city council. At a later period this procedure was defended on the ground that the city appoints a paper to give, officially, all the transactions of the board. Robert W. Gibbes us. Edward J. Arthur and John Burdell. This novel case was reported with great care, and published with all the arguments, at Columbia, S. C., in 1857, under the title, Rights of Corporations and Reporters. The public owes thanks to the plaintiff for having perseveringly pursued this surprising case, the first of the kind, it would appear. The pamphlet contains letters of nearly thirty American mayors, testifying that reporters cannot be denied admission to the deliberations of the councils of their cities, although there be an appointed printer to the board.

[82288] The following passage is given here for a twofold purpose. Everything in it applies to the government of the pen on the continent of Europe, and it shows how similar causes have produced similar results in India and under Englishmen, who at home are so adverse to government writing and to bureaucracy. In the Notes on the Northwestern Province of India, by Charles Raikes, Magistrate and Collector of Mynpoorie, London, 1853, we find this passage:

[82738] “Action, however, and energy, are what we now lay most stress upon, because in days of peace and outward tranquillity these qualities are not always valued at their true price, and their absence is not so palpably mischievous as in more stirring times. There is more danger now of men becoming plodding, methodical, mere office functionaries, than of their stepping with too hasty a zeal beyond the limits of the law. There is truth, too, in Jacquemont's sneer—India is governed by stationery, to a more than sufficient extent; and one of the commonest errors of our magistrates, which they imbibe from constant and early Indian associations, is to mistake writing for action; to fancy that dictation will supply the place of exertion. In no other country are so many written orders issued with so much confidence, received with such respect, and broken with such complacency. In fact, as for writing, we believe the infection of the ‘cacoethes scribendi’ must first have grown up in the East. It pervades everything, but is more lampant and more out of place in a police office than anywhere else It was not the magistrates who originated this passion for scribbling; but they have never succeeded in repressing it, nor, while the law requires that every discontented old woman's story shall be taken down in writing, is it to be expected they ever will. The Khayeths worship their pen and ink on certain festivals, and there is a sort of ‘religio’ attaching to written forms and statements, which is not confined to official life, but pervades the whole social polity of the writing tribes. An Indian scribe, whose domestic expenditure may average a sixpence a day, will keep an account-book with as many columns, headings, and totals as would serve for the budget of a chancellor of the exchequer. To Tudor Mul and such worthies we owe, no doubt, a great deal for the method and order which they infused into public records; but we have also to thank these knights of the pen for the plaguiest long-figured statements, and the greatest number of such statements, which the world ever saw.” Well may the continental European, reading this, exclaim, C’est tout comme chez nous! In 1858, one of the most distinguished statesmen of France, universally known as a publicist, a former member, cabinet minister, and orator in the house of representatives, wrote from Germany, “I observe that the writing which I have always considered so injurious to our affairs in France is carried, if possible, to a still greater degree in this country.”

[85277] This observation followed a request to write henceforth with caution, because, said he, choses politiques ne sont plus ici choses publiques.

[85419] I follow the opinion of Mr. Robert C. Winthrop, late Speaker of the house of representatives of the United States, and believe him to be correct, when in an address before the Maine Historical Society (Boston, 1849) he says: “The earliest instance of authorized publicity being given to the deliberations of a legislative body in modern days, was in this same house of representatives of Massachusetts, on the 3d day of June, 1766, when, upon motion of James Otis, and during the debates which arose on the question of the repeal of the stamp act, and of compensation to the sufferers by the riots in Boston to which that act had given occasion, a resolution was carried ‘for opening a gallery for such as wished to hear the debates.’ The influence of this measure in preparing the public mind for the great revolutionary events which were soon to follow, can hardly be exaggerated.” The American reader is referred to the note at the end of this chapter for an account of the introduction of publicity into the senate of the United States.

[86461] Great as the inconvenience is which arises from the abuse of public speaking, and of that sort of prolixity which in our country is familiarly called by a term understood by every one, Speaking for Buncombe, yet it must be remembered that the freest possible, and therefore often abused, latitude of speaking, is frequently a safety-valve, in times of public danger, for which nothing else can be substituted. The debates in congress, when lately the Union itself was in danger, lasted for entire months, and words seemed fairly to weary out the nation when every one called for action. There was no citizen capable of following closely all those lengthy and occasionally empty debates, with all their lateral issues. Still, now that the whole is over, it may well be asked whether there is a single attentive and experienced American who doubts that, had it not been for that flood of debate, we must have been exposed to civil disturbances, perhaps to the rending of the Union.

[87442] Nevertheless, it is a fact that the more popular an assembly is, the more liable it is to suffer from verbose discussions, and thus to see its action impeded. This is especially the case in a country in which, as in ours, a personal facility of public speaking is almost universal, and where an elocutional laxity coexists with a patient tenacity of hearing and a love of listening which can never be surfeited. It has its ruinous effect upon oratory, literature, the standard of thought, upon vigorous action, on public business, and gives a wide field to dull mediocrity. This anti-Pythagorean evil has led to the adoption of the “one-hour rule” in the house of representatives, in congress, and (in 1847) in the supreme court of the United States. The one-hour rule was first proposed by Mr. Holmes, of Charleston, in imitation of the Athenian one-hour clepsydra—yes, the prince of orators had that dropping monitor by his side!—and is now renewed by every new house. The English have begun to feel the same evil, and the adoption of the same rule was proposed in the commons in February, 1849. But the debate concluded adversely to it, after Sir Robert Peel had adverted to Burke's glorious eloquence. Our one-hour rule, however, is not entirely new in modern times. In the year 1562 (on the 21st of July) the Council of Trent adopted the rule that the fathers in delivering their opinions should be restricted to half an hour, which having elapsed, the master of ceremonies was to give them a sign to leave off. Yet, on the same day, an exception was made in favor of Salmeron, the pope's first divine, who occupied the whole sitting, (History of the Life of Reginald Pole, by T. Phillips, Oxford, 1764, p. 397,) very much as in February, 1849, the whole American house called “go on” when Governor McDowell had spoken an hour. He continued for several hours.

[89308] Having mentioned the inconvenience of prolix speaking, it may not be improper to add another passage of the address of Mr. Winthrop, already mentioned. It will be recollected that this gentleman has been Speaker. He knows, therefore, the inconvenience in its whole magnitude. “Doubtless,” he says “when debates were conducted with closed doors, there were no speeches for Buncombe, no clap-trap for the galleries, no flourishes for the ladies, and it required no hour rule, perhaps, to keep men within some bounds of relevancy. But one of the grea sources of instruction and information, in regard both to the general measures of government and to the particular conduct of their own representatives, was then shut out from the people, and words which might have roused them to the vindication of justice, or to the overthrow of tyranny, were lost in the utterance. The perfect publicity of legislative proceedings is hardly second to the freedom of the press, in its influence upon the progress and perpetuity of human liberty, though, like the freedom of the press, it may be attended with inconveniences and abuses.”

[90429] The following note consists of an article by Mr. James C Welling, of the National Intelligencer, Washington City. It appeared on the 30th of October, 1858, in consequence of some questions I had put regarding a previous article on my remarks on Publicity in the United States. Mr. Welling had doubtless free access to the ample stores of personal recollections possessed by the founders of that public journal. The student of history will find it an instructive document, and I have preferred to give the whole, even with the introduction on the early intercourse between congress and the President of the United States, partly on account of its antiquarian interest, partly because it is not unconnected with the publicity of debate in the senate.

[91179] Mr. Welling says that it has been remarked that the principle of publicity seems to have so thoroughly pervaded all the politics of the United States that the framers of our constitution never thought of it, or, if they did, they thought it hardly worth while to make special provision for it, since none doubted its observance. While this statement has a deep foundation in much of our civil history during the period of the revolution and the formation of our present constitution, it should not be forgotten that the sessions of our continental congress were held in secret, and even after the formation of our present constitution, one branch of the national legislature, for more than five years, sat with closed doors. We allude to the senate, whose deliberations, unlike those of the house of representatives, were conducted in secret during the whole of the first and second congresses, and also during a part of the third. As the particulars connected with this fact in our parliamentary history are perhaps not familiarly known to every reader, we have thought it might not be without interest to recall some of the reminiscences corroborative of a statement which at the present day, and with our established notions, must seem not a little extraordinary and anomalous. In doing so, we may take occasion to allude incidentally, by way of preface, to a few subsidiary topics relating to the forms of official intercourse existing between the executive and legislative departments of the government during the earlier days of the republic.

[92729] The first session of the first congress of the United States held under the constitution framed and submitted by the federal convention in Philadelphia was begun in the city of New York on the 4th of March, 1789. Neither house, however, could at once proceed to the transaction of business, from the want of a quorum, which was seemed in the popular branch only on the 1st of April following, and in the senate on the 6th of the same month. On that day the latter body, having elected a president pro tem., proceeded, in the presence of the house of representatives, assembled in the senate chamber by invitation, to count the votes of the electors of the several states for President and Vice-President of the United States, when it was found that George Washington was unanimously elected to the former office by the voice of the eleven states then composing the Union, (Rhode Island and North Carolina not having yet adopted the constitution,) and that John Adams was chosen Vice-President by a majority of the votes cast for that office. The senate thereupon appointed Mr. Charles Thomson (long the clerk of the continental congress) to notify Gen. Washington, and Mr. Sylvanus Bourne to notify John Adams, of their election to the offices for which they had been respectively designated.

[94023] Mr. Adams took his chair as president of the senate on the 21st of the same month, and on the 30th Gen. Washington received the oath of office, as President of the United States, in the senate chamber, in the presence of both houses of congress, assembled on the occasion to witness the ceremonial. The oath was administered by the chancellor of the State of New York, who proclaimed, as the same was accepted by the president, “Long live George Washington, President of the United States.” The president then resumed the seat from which he had risen to take the oath, and, after a short pause, rose and delivered before the senate and house of representatives his inaugural address. On its conclusion, the president, the vice-president, the senate, and the house of representatives proceeded to St. Paul's Chapel, in New York, where divine service was performed by the chaplain of congress, after which the president was reconducted to his house by a committee appointed for that purpose.

[95014] After the celebration of these religious exercises the senate reassembled and appointed a committee to prepare an “answer to the president's speech.” In the house of representatives a similar committee was appointed on the following day. The reply of the senate was read and adopted in that body on the 7th of May, and agreeably to previous arrangement was delivered to the president at his own house on the 18th following, the senate waiting upon the president for this purpose, with the vice-president, their presiding officer, at then head. The president, on receiving the address, made a brief and appropriate response. The reply of the house of representatives was read and adopted on the 5th of May, and, by a similar preconcert, was delivered to the president on the 8th of the same month, in a room adjoining the representatives' chamber, where the speaker, attended by the members of the house, placed in the president's hands, a copy of the address, for which the president returned his thanks in a few appropriate remarks.

[96049] Such was the nature of the ceremonial observed in the official communications interchanged between the president and the two houses of congress at the opening of every session of congress during the administration of Washington and John Adams. On the accession of Mr. Jefferson, the practice of delivering he annual presidential speech in person before both houses of congress at its opening was superseded by the present custom of sending a written message. And with this change the habit of preparing a formal reply on the part of both houses to the recommendations of the president fell into similar desuetude. Mr. Jefferson, it is well known, was subsequently accustomed to point to this change as one of the “reforms” he had effected in what he called the “Anglican tendencies” and “royal usages” of our government under the administration of the federalists.

[96915] To resume the principal topic of remark in the present article, we repeat that the senate, in the earlier days of the government, sat with closed doors, as well during its legislative as in its executive sessions. Its debates, therefore, unlike those of the house of representatives, were for a time held in secret; but it was provided by a resolution passed on the 19th of May, 1789, that one hundred and twenty copies of the journal of the legislative proceedings of the senate should be printed once a month for distribution among the members of the body, and, we suppose, for partial dissemination among the public, since it was provided that each member should be furnished with but a single copy on his own account.

[97638] At this distance of time we may not perhaps be able to understand or state the reasons which determined the senate to sit with closed doors in all their deliberations, as still in those which pertain to executive business. It is probable that the habit grew out of the fact that the senate, in the original theory of its constitution, was regarded primarily as a confidential and advisory council to the executive; and, as is well known, its earlier sessions were pre-eminently occupied in executive business. In relation to measures of legislation it seems to have been conceived that its function was mainly revisory and deliberative; and hence the greater prominence of the house in initiating and debating not only “revenue bills,” which it was provided by the constitution should be originated only by the representatives, but also other measures of federal legislation. In evidence of this fact we may state that the senate was wholly without standing committees until the year 1816, when during the second session of the fourteenth congress it was determined to provide for their appointment. In the house they had been raised by a standing rule as early as the year 1799, although at first their number was restricted to five—a committee respectively on elections, claims, commerce, ways and means, and on revisal and on unfinished business.

[98989] The first executive business of the senate was transacted on the 25th of May, 1789, when the president communicated for the advice and consent of the senate certain treaties made with the northern and northwestern Indians. At subsequent sessions he sent in by letter his nominations for various offices appointed to be filled with the advice and consent of the same body. The senate having refused to ratify the nomination of Mr. Benjamin Fishbourn as naval officer for the port of Savannah, President Washington, on the 7th of August, addressed a message to the body vindicating his reasons for nominating that gentleman, and suggesting to the senate the expediency of communicating to him their views on occasions where the propriety of his nominations appeared questionable to them.

[99776] Moved by this intimation of the president, the senate appointed a committee to wait on him for the purpose of concerting a mode of communication proper to be pursued between both parties in the formation of treaties and making appointments to office. Accordingly it was resolved that, in conformity with the president's pleasure, he might make his nominations to the senate either in writing or in person; and it was further provided that for this purpose he might wait on the senate in their own chamber, (in which case he should occupy the chair of the president of the senate,) or might summon the president of the senate and the senators to meet him at such place as he should designate. It was provided, however, that all questions, whether in the presence or absence of the President of the United States, should be put by the president of the senate, and “that the senators should signify their assent or dissent by answering, viva voce, aye or no.” On the day following the adoption of this minute, that is on the 22d of August, 1789, it appears from the journal that the President of the United States came into the senate chamber, attended by General Knox, and laid before the senate a statement of facts in reference to the negotiation of certain treaties with various Indian tubes. Desiring to fix certain principles on which the negotiations should be conducted, he reported to the senate a series of questions, to each of which he requested a categorical answer, to guide him in giving instructions to the commissioners appointed to treat with the Indians. The questions were seven in number, and were considered throughout two daily sessions, in the, presence of the president, and, as appears from the journal, of General Knox.

[101521] How long the relations between the president and the senate remained on this footing we are unable to say with any accuracy, though the practice of his personal attendance during their sessions in executive business seems to have been abandoned after a time; and authentic tradition records that its disuse was hastened by the blunt speeches of certain senators, who intimated that the presence of the president operated as a restraint on them in canvassing the merits of the candidates submitted for their advice and consent. It soon became habitual for the president to communicate all his nominations to the senate in writing.

[102152] As has been already stated, the proceedings of the senate, as well legislative as executive, were conducted during the first session with closed doors. During the second session of the first congress, which was begun in New York on the 4th of January, 1790, the same custom was retained, though, as appears from the journal, not without protest and dissent on the part of some senators. For it appears that on the 29th of April following it was moved “that the doors of the senate chamber shall be open when the senate is sitting in their legislative capacity, to the end that such of the citizens of the United States as may choose to hear the debates of this house may have an opportunity of so doing.” This resolution, being postponed for consideration on the following Day, was then taken up, and, after debate, rejected.

[102979] At a third session of the first congress, begun in Philadelphia on the 6th of December, 1790, it was again proposed, on the 23d of February following, “that it be a standing rule that the doors of the senate chamber remain open whilst the senate shall be sitting in a legislative capacity, except on such occasions as, in their judgment, may require secrecy; and that this rule shall commence and be in force on the first day of the next session of congress.” And to this end it was proposed “that the secretary of the senate request the commissioners of the city and county of Philadelphia to cause a proper gallery to be erected for the accommodation of the audience.” After debate, extending through two days, the proposition was rejected by a vote of 9 yeas to 17 nays. The names of those voting in the affirmative are Messrs, Butler, Foster, Gunn, Hawkins, King, Lee, Maclay, Monroe, and Schuyler. Those voting in the negative were Messrs. Bassett, Carroll, Dalton, Dickinson, Ellsworth, Elmer, Few, Henry, Johnson, Johnston, Izard, Langdon, Morris, Read, Stanton, Strong, and Wingate.

[104071] The first session of the second congress was begun at Philadelphia on the 24th of October, 1791. On the 26th of March following—a few weeks before the adjournment of congress at that session—a resolution identical in terms with that rejected at the last session of the first congress was moved by Mr Monroe and seconded by Mr. Lee, both of Virginia. The proposition met with the same fate, receiving fewer votes than at the former session. Some days after the rejection of this resolution it was moved “that when the senate are sitting in their legislative capacity the members of the house of representatives may be admitted to attend the debates, and each member of the senate may also admit a number not exceeding two persons; provided the operation of this resolution be suspended until the senate chamber is sufficiently enlarged.” This proposition also failed to be adopted, receiving only six votes.

[104979] We have recited these several and ineffectual attempts to procure the abrogation of this, established rule of the senate for the purpose of showing that it did not grow up as an unregarded usage, but was founded on considerations satisfactory to a majority of the senate at that day. Nor does it appear to have been a question of party politics, since we find federalists voting with republicans for its abolition, and republicans voting with federalists, for its retention

[105454] The first session of the thud congress of the United States, which commenced at Philadelphia on the 2d of December, 1793, was destined to witness the overthrow of the rule which had previously obtained on this point. The senate was called at this session to consider and decide a question which elicited a large share of public interest, because of the political susceptibilities which had been awakened by its discussion. We allude to the contest raised respecting the eligibility of Mr. Albert Gallatin as a member of the senate from the state of Pennsylvania. On the first day of the session of that year a petition was presented by Conrad Laub and others, representing that Mr. G at the date of his election had not been, as the constitution requires, “nine years a citizen of the United States.” The committee to which the whole subject was referred reported adversely to the claims of Mr. Gallatin on the 31st of December, and the report, after being read and ordered to he over for future consideration, was taken up on the 9th of January following, and discussed through several successive days, when, on the 13th of the same month, the matter was re-committed to a special committee of elections appointed for the purpose of hearing both parties to the contest. Before this committee reported, and on the 16th of January, 1794, Mr. Martin, of North Carolina, moved the adoption of the following formal resolutions against the principles and policy of the existing regulations of the senate in regard to the secrecy of its deliberations:

[107001] “Resolved, That in all representative governments, the representatives are responsible for their conduct to their constituents, who are entitled to such information that a discrimination and just estimate be made thereof.

[107224] “Resolved, That the senate of the United States, being the representatives of the sovereignties of the individual states, whose basis is the people, owe equal responsibility to the powers by which they are appointed, as if that body were derived immediately from the people, and that all questions and debates arising thereupon in their legislative and judiciary capacity, ought to be public.

[107618] “Resolved, That the mode adopted by the senate of publishing then journals, and extracts from them, in newspapers, is not adequate to the purpose of circulating satisfactory information. While the principles and designs of the individual members are withheld from public view, responsibility is destroyed, which, on the publicity of their deliberations, would be restored; the constitutional powers of the senate become more important, in being more influential over the other branch of the legislature; abuse of power, mal-administration of office, more easily detected and corrected; jealousies, rising in the public mind from secret legislation, prevented; and greater confidence placed by our fellow-citizens in the national government, by which their lives, liberties, and properties are to be secured and protected.

[108441] “Resolved, therefore, That it be a standing rule that the doors of the senate chamber remain open while the senate shall be sitting in a legislative and judiciary capacity, except on such occasions as in their judgment may require secrecy; and that this rule commence on the—day of—.”

[108727] These resolutions, being called up on the morrow, were postponed successively from day to day, when, on the 10th day of February, the committee which had Mr. Gallatin's case in charge made their report to the senate, and a day was fixed for its consideration. Immediately on the presentation of the report, it was moved by a member “that the doors of the senate be opened and continued open during the discussion upon the contested election of Albert Gallatin,” which resolution was adopted on the 11th of February, 1794. Meanwhile the series of resolutions abolishing the whole system of secrecy during legislative proceedings was still pending, and came up for consideration on the 19th of February, when each resolution was finally rejected, and a substitute offered in the following terms:

[109522] “Resolved, That after the end of the present session of congress, and so soon as suitable galleries shall be provided for the senate chamber, the said galleries shall be permitted to be opened every morning, so long as the senate shall be engaged in their legislative capacity, unless in such cases as may, in the opinion of the senate, require secrecy, after which the said galleries shall be closed.”

[109926] This resolution was passed on the following day by a vote of nineteen year to eight nays. Those who voted in the affirmative were Messrs. Bindley, Brown, Butler, Edwards, Ellsworth, Foster, Gallatin, Gunn, Hawkins, Jackson, King, Langdon, Livermore, Martin, Monroe, Potts, Taylor, and Vining. Those who voted in the negative were Messrs. Bradford, Cabot, Frelinghnysen, Izard, Mitchell, Morris, Rutherford, and Strong.