WORK: On Civil Liberty and Self-Government  (slug: theodore-dwight-woolsey-on-civil-liberty-and-self-govern-6f9899)

CHAPTER: 103-appendix-xvi-letter-of-the-french-minister-of-the-



[220534] This passage is copied from a Defence of the Right and the Duty of the American Union to improve the Navigable Waters, by Samuel B. Ruggles, a speech delivered in October, 1852. The speaker has given his views on this and kindred topics more extensively in a state paper of rare excellence, whether the contents, the historical survey and statistic knowledge, or the transparency of the style and language be considered. The paper bears the title, Memorial of the Canal Board and Canal Commissioners of the State of New York, asking for the Improvement of the Lake Harbors by the General Government, Albany, N. Y., 1858, and was, as such, adopted by the legislature of New York and presented to congress.

[221240] [It ought to be added, however, that this ordinance applied only to the Northwest territory, over which the treaty of peace with Great Britain, in 1783, gave to the Confederation full power to act. Navigation within or between the old thirteen states was not touched by this ordinance. The present freedom of navigable rivers depends on the constitutional power of Congress “to regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the several states, and with the Indian tribes;” as well as on the right of governing the territories, conferred by the constitution.]

[221803] Much that relates to the history of the spy and informer, in ancient and modern times, may be found in the second volume of Political Ethics, where the citizen's duly of informing is discussed.

[221998] I quote the whole passage of this stupendous allocution, which no historian or political philosopher, had he discovered it, as Cuvier found and construed remains of animals, would have assigned to the middle of the nineteenth century. What becomes of England and the United States if the essence of history does not he in the development of the nation and especially of its institutions? The following are the exact words:

[222422] “Soldiers, the history of nations is in great part the history of armies. On their success, or on their reverses, depends the fate of civilization and of the country. When they are vanquished, there is either invasion or anarchy; when victorious, glory or order.

[222686] “In consequence, nations, like armies, pay a religious veneration to the emblems of military honor, which sum up in themselves a whole past existence of struggles and of triumphs.

[222867] “The Roman eagle, adopted by the Emperor Napoleon at the commencement of the present century, was the most striking signification of the regeneration and grandeur of France; and so on.

[223053] When the democratic Cæsar reviewed the guards, before they started for the Crimea, in 1855, he called the army the nobility of the French nation.

[223200] The words of Robespierre are sufficiently clear, if taken as an illustration of what has been stated in the text; otherwise, I own, the sense is not perfectly apparent.

[223370] [I.e., chap. xxix. of the Charter of 9 Henry III., confirmed by Edward I. in the twenty-fifth year of his reign, and nearly agreeing with chapters xlvi. and xlvii. of John's Charter, as given in Appendix IV.]

[223580] Very scandalous judicial cases, offensive to public morals, are, in France, conducted with closed doors.

[223686] So Bishop Tomlinson tells as in the Life of his pupil.

[223742] Casser is the French for breaking; hence the name of the court.

[223807] We have seen that courts of conciliation have attracted renewed attention in England since Lord Brougham's proposition of an act for the Farther Cheapening of Justice, in May, 1851. An instructive article on this important subject, and the excellent effects these courts have produced in many countries, shown by official statistics, can be found in the German Staats-Lexicon, ad verbum Friedensgericht.

[224212] I have given my views on the subject of the nature of sovereignty and the way it acts, at length in the first volume of the Political Ethics. If I have not succeeded there in mastering the subject, I should not be able to do it here; if I have succeeded, I cannot in fairness repeat a long discussion.

[224515] Royer Collard's Opinion, or October 4, 1831.

[224561] Words spoken to Lord Ebrington, in his exile on the island of Elba.

[224630] Rousseau expressed the political idea of equality, the aversion to representative governments and institutional politics, and the disapproval of private property, boldly and clearly in his Social Contract, a masterly written work, which has exercised an incalculable effect on French affairs. It was the favorite book of the leading men of the first revolution, and continues largely to influence the French. Yet Rousseau only pronounced more clearly, and boldly carried farther, the ideas of unity, concentration, and equality, that had been gradually growing stronger in the French mind long before him. They can be traced not only in politics, but in all spheres.

[225298] I have given some remarkable instances of interference on the part of modern absolute governments, in the Political Ethics. I shall add the following recent instance: I am sure that no one accustomed to Anglican self-government considers such details trivial, however well he may be acquainted with the fact in general, that government in those countries tries to guide, direct, manage, initiate, and complete everything that seems of any importance. Some years ago a German king ironically called, in a throne speech, constitutions Paper Providences. The expression was every way most unfortunate. It seems to me that it is these very governments of centralized mandarinism that play at Providence, in which they closely resemble the communists, as indeed all absolutism contains a strong element of communism.

[226111] The following is taken from the Paris Moniteur, the French official paper, or organ of government, in October, 1852. I do not give the entire decree, but the principal articles:

[226290] There will be published, under the care of the minister of public instruction, a general collection of the popular poetry of France, either to be found in manuscript in the libraries, or transmitted by the successive memories of generations.

[226533] The collection of the popular poetry of France will consist of

[226597] Religious and warlike songs;

[226627] Festive songs and ballads;

[226655] Historical recitals, legends, tales, satirical songs.

[226710] The committee of language, history, and the arts of France, connected with the ministry of public instruction, is charged with the selection of all pieces sent for inspection, and to determine which are to be received, to regulate them, and give the necessary commentaries.

[226985] A medal is to be given to those persons who, by their discoveries and researches, particularly contribute to enrich the collection, which will be called Récueil des Poésies Populaires.

[227171] It is unnecessary to remind the reader that, if this undertaking has been dictated by any desire of promoting literature, a political motive has been at least equally strong, according to the old saying: Give me the ballad-making, and I will rule the people.

[227431] Nothing is more common than men with a decided intellectual bent towards freedom and an equally decided psychical inclination towards absolutism. Their intellect admires the grandeur of liberty, their reason acknowledges the principles of justice; their desires are for free action, and yet their souls resent every opposition. They appear, therefore, often as hypocrites, without being such in reality. There is a dualism within them whose two elements are at war, very similar to that which, without hypocrisy, makes many persons sincerely preach peace and charity abroad, but act at home as domestic tyrants.

[228044] History is full of such characters, and we have had an exhibition of it in one of our presidents. Happily, our institutional system did not allow a very wide play of such a disposition.

[228231] History of Civilization in France, lect. xiv., sub fin.

[228288] Theo-democracy does not contain a contradiction, however novel and, at first sight, startling the term may appear to us. If democracy necessarily expressed the idea of liberty, then indeed the name theo-democracy would be senseless, for all theocracy or sacerdotal rule is a negation of civil liberty. It immures in dogma.

[228612] In a similar manner, and with equal justice, the Rev. Mr. Payne says of the Grebo tribe, at Cape Palmas, that their constitution is patriarchal, with a purely democratic government. His account is contained in “The Report of the Rev. R. R. Gurley, who was recently sent out by the government to obtain information in respect to Liberia,” published by the senate of the United States, in 1850, thirty-first congress, first session, executive document No. 75. The political philosopher can hardly read a more interesting paper than this.

[229149] The extent to which this idea is occasionally carried out is, almost inconceivable to us, accustomed as we are to so essentially different a system and train of political thoughts. A few years ago the minister of the interior had given some new directions regarding the quarantine regulations. They were more in conformity with the opinions of scientific men on the contagiousness of the plague. The people of Marseilles, who still keep the terrible plague of the last century in vivid remembrance, disapproved of these orders from the central government, and a meeting of certain persons was called together. Whereupon most newspapers took part with the government, and charged the citizens, with whom this little germ of self-government had shown itself, with the hideous sin of federalism, the crime for which many had lost their heads in the first revolution. This was in the times of the so-called republic, before the second of December, and the few papers which took side with the citizens were legitimist papers, thus furnishing, by the way, another instance of the fact that all sorts of things are possible under peculiar circumstances. It was the Tories who resisted the septennial bill abolishing triennial parliaments in 1716; it was the Jesuits who first enunciated the doctrine of the sovereignty of the people, in order to get a fulcrum against heretical monarchs; it was a Spanish Jesuit who defended regicide under Philip II.; and here we have legitimists, working for a descendant of Louis XIV., who took side for a principle of self-action against the central government!

[230742] [In 1866 the four estates of Sweden were converted into two houses, of which the first or upper consists of one hundred and twenty-five members, who represent the noblesse, other landed proprietors, and the clergy, and are elected by landsthings or provincial assemblies, and the second, of one hundred and ninety-one members, represents the towns and rural districts. The term of office of the upper house is, we believe, nine years. In Norway the storthing, or legislature, chosen by electors chosen by the qualified citizens, holds office for three years, and divides itself on assembling into two houses,—the odalsthing, having three-quarters of the whole body for its members, and the lagthing, composed of one-quarter. AH projects of laws or acts originate in the odalsthing; and if the lagthing rejects them twice over, the storthing meets and legalizes the project only by a vote of two thirds.]

[231647] This idea has been, since, carried much farther. A large number of persons, and, it would seem, all imperialists, love to dwell upon the idea that imperialism represents Latin civilization, opposite to Teutonic unwieldy, uncentralized, barbaric freedom. When thus Latinism is taken as a distinctive mark, Roman imperialism is meant, not of course Republican Roman self-government The French, in trying to renovate Latinism, seem to fall, as to principle, into an anachronism not dissimilar to that into which the Germans fell as to language when they officially called their empire, down to its dissolution, the Holy Roman Empire of the Germans.

[232294] Ecclesiasticus, xxiv. 12.

[232321] The mutual influence of different literatures is daily extending. Take as an instance the literature of England, France, Germany, and the United States, and add the mutual influence of the journals of these nations. Then consider how many of the elements of civilization are not national, but common to all—the alphabet, the numeric signs, with the decimal system, musical notation and music itself, commercial usages and bookkeeping, international law, social intercourse and laws of politeness; the visiting-card, the railway, the steamboat, the post-office, the institution of money, the bill of exchange, insurance—indeed, it is impossible to enumerate all the agreements of nations belonging to our race. I shall only add the dress, the furniture, and even cookery.

[233093] The most recent and a choice illustration of progressive uniformity of our race and its civilization, is the adoption of Commander Maury's, U.S.N., plan of a uniform maritime observation and record, adopted by many governments in consequence of the naval congress at Brussels, in 1853. May a uniform standard of value soon follow. The wide-spread dollar or scudo has prepared the way for it.

[233486] At a sumptuous ball, which the city of Paris gave, in the year 1851, to the commissioners of the London Exhibition, I was sitting in a corner and reflecting on the police officers in their uniforms and the actual patrols of the military pompiers in the very midst of the festive and crowded assemblage, when I was introduced to one of the first statesmen of France and a liberal member of the national assembly. He had been at London, to view the exhibition. It was the first time he had visited England. “Do you know,” said he, “what struck me most—far more than the exhibition of works of art and industry? It was the exhibition of the civisme anglais (this was the term he used) in the London police.” It may be readily supposed that an American citizen turned his face toward the speaker, to hear more, when the Frenchman continued: “I am in earnest. The large number of policemen, with their citizen appearance, although in uniform, seeming to be there for no other purpose than to assist the people—and the people ever ready to assist them—this is what has most attracted my attention. Liberty and the government of law are even depicted in their police, where we should seek it least. What is it that stakes you most in coming here?”

[234728] “The American,” I replied, “in visiting the continent of Europe, is most impressed by the fact that the whole population, from Moscow to Lisbon, seems to be divided into two wholly distinct parts—the round hats, the people, and the cocked hats, the visible government. The two layers are as distinct as the hats, and the traveller sees almost as many of the one form as of the other.”

[235114] There are large police establishments in all European states. Densely-peopled countries require them. The different spirit and organization, however, of these establishments are most characteristic. Nothing, perhaps, shows more the character of a citizen-government in England than the wide-spread institution of the police, which has developed itself, under Sir Robert Peel, out of the ancient constable. It has great power; it has preventive, detective, and custodial authority; yet it is supported by the citizens, and no one fears that it ever will be used as an institution of political espionage and denunciation—as delatores of old and mouchards of modern times. It is strictly under the public law, and that implies tinder publicity. There is a whole literature on this subject, but I know of no brief paper exhibiting so well its essential character as the seventh paragraph of Mittermaier's English, Scottish, and American Penal Processes.

[236065] Paradise Lost, book 9, line 170.

[236099] In a circular, sent by the provisional government all over France before the general election for the national constituent assembly, in 1848, was this sentence: “Every Frenchman of the age of manhood is a political citizen; every citizen is an elector; every elector is a sovereign. There is no one citizen who can say to another: ‘You are more of a sovereign than I.’ Contemplate your power, prepare to execute it, and be worthy of entering on the possession of your kingdom.” The author of these phrases is Mr. de Lamartine, who says, in his Revolution of 1848: “The reign of the people is called the republic.”

[236714] 1 Vol. iii. p. 293.—A member of the late French national assembly, speaking of the enormous California lottery, which was then in its full ruinous operation in France, used the expression: “This is not a lottery; it is a series of lotteries; I ought to say an institution of lotteries.”

[237002] The exaggeration was carried farthest when an English newspaper called the Duke of Wellington an institution. We see, however, through the exaggeration, the original sense universally attributed to the term.

[237211] The word is a finished and a given thing; the idea is in a constant state of expansion or contraction, far exceeding the formative powers even of the most perfect language, so that frequently a whole class of words derived from the same root retains little in common but an association of ideas, which often almost vanishes. The history of the changing meaning of man's words is instructive, and equally so the history of the changing word. I need only allude to such remarkable words as Stare, Status, Statute, Stand, Establishment, Stabilis, Estate, and the whole history through which the meaning of the word State has passed and is still passing on the one hand, and the many branches such as Stable, Station, Statistics; or we may take Civis, Civitas, Civilis, Civilitas, Civility, Civil (in its two distinct terms,) Civilization, Citizen; Nascor, Nation, National; Populus, Publicus (for populicus,) Public, People, Popular; Gignere, Genus, Gens, Gentile, Gentle, Genteel, Gentleman, with the different meanings through which this last word has passed from the time when it meant a man of gentle—that is, not vulgar, not common-blood or extraction, to its present impoit, which relates exclusively to character and breeding. Breeding itself might be mentioned here.

[238484] [If Dr. Arnold means ordérs of men embodying a certain principle, idea, or political habit of a nation, he cannot be found fault with. So of officers. A tribune and the tribuneship cannot be separated. He conceived of the officer as gradually reaching, in old time, certain political functions, which could have otherwise no existence.]

[238822] The term Institute seems to differ from Institution, according to present usage, in this, that the first, when it does not mean the initiatory knowledge of a wide system of science, (as the institutes of the pandects, of medicine,) is chiefly used as a noun proper for an institution of learning or the diffusion of knowledge, for instance French Institute, Mechanics' Institute. It may be used as a generic term for institutions of diffusion of knowledge of a higher character; but it is frequently abused in these cases. Schools of some pretence are called institutes, with that deplorable extravagance with which common schools are called academies, common colleges universities, auction rooms auction marts, a single and simple person a party, every chairman a president, and which has so sadly invaded our manly language that many superlative words, such as splendid, magnificent, giantlike, transcendent, illustrious, and hundreds of others, can hardly be any longer used by a sober and vigorous writer, and have become worth little more than old coins, once good, but now clipped, punched, and sweated by unlawful usage.

[239951] The Latin Institutum does not exactly correspond to our word institution. It means a purpose, object, plan, or design, and, finally, a settled procedure, by which it is intended to obtain a certain object; hence a uniform method of action, to be observed when similar cases occur. Institutum is very frequently used in conjunction with consuetudo, and often means nothing more than settled usage with reference to certain cases. Institutum thus designates one of the elements of our Institution, but it does not include the idea of a distinctly limited system of laws or usages with a considerable degree of autonomy, nor does it comprehend the idea of our enacted institutions. Institutum retains the idea of usage throughout. Still, it is readily seen how the Roman word institutum was naturally changed and expanded into the modern word Institution.

[240805] The Roman shunned abstraction even though he should become illogical. He said: In medias res, into the middle things, instead of into the middle of things, and we moderns abstract even against all sense. I read but yesterday in large letters over a shop this word—Carpetings. Here we have first an unmeaning abstraction of a simple and sound word, carpet, and then a plural is made of the more abstract term. The Americans, altogether inclined to use pompous and grandiloquent words, are also given to use abstract terms, or those that approach abstraction, far more than the English. The sign of the smallest baker's shop will not be John Smith, Baker, but Bakery by John Smith, perhaps even American Bakery, or, should it happen to be near the sea, Ocean Bakery. A common shop of a green-grocer in the second largest city of the United States, calls itself United States Market. The negroes have caught the fever. Not long ago I saw a common shanty, erected in a Southern forest to accommodate travellers with coffee while their luggage was ferried over a river, adorned with the following words on a pine board: Jenny Lind and Sontag Hotel. The railway bridge had been carried away, and this café was erected for a few days only.

[242039] The best grammarians tell us that Latin nouns ending in io, and adjectives ending in ilis, (that is, abstract terms,) must be used with circumspection, and not without good authority, since they are comparatively rare in the best writers. It speaks volumes concerning the Roman character and mental constitution.

[242353] The reader who desires to become acquainted with the opposite view must turn to the Christian Politics, by Rev. Wm. Sewell, Fellow and Subrector of Exeter College, London, 1848; a book which carries out the views of Filmer to an extent which that apologist of absolutism never contemplated. It may be fairly considered to occupy the point opposite to that of the most rabid socialist of France; and, according to the rule that we ought to dwell on works which carry their principles to the fullest length, no matter what those principles may be, it is worth the student's while to make himself acquainted with it. If he can get through the whole, however, he is more patient than I found it possible to be. According to Mr. Sewell, there is but one true government, absolute monarchy, demanding absolute obedience; the king makes the state and the view I have endeavored to prove in my Ethics, that the state, despite of its comprehensive importance, still remains a means to obtain certain ends, is attacked as the opinion of mere “philosophers.” The king, the house of lords, and that of the commons, as they ought to be considered, indicate, according to this writer, the relation in which possibly the three persons of the one deity stand. Filmer stopped short at least with Adam. To counteract the revolting effect which may have just been produced, I refer the reader to page 146, where he will find, in a passage of great length, that the Greek at Marathon fought only for his country, his hearth, and his laws, while the Persian far surpassed him, because he fought for his king (those also who, according to Herodotus, were whipped into battle?), and that “a Christian eye will look with far greater satisfaction and admiration on the Persians who threw themselves out of the sinking vessel that by their own death they might save their king, than upon Thermopylæ or Marathon.” Enough! I should not have alluded to such extravagances and crudities, were not the book a very learned yet illogical apology for a doctrine which many may have supposed to be dead, and did it not occupy, in view of its preposterous theory, the first place of its class. Nor is it historically uninteresting that such a work has been written in the middle of the nineteenth century. So much is certain, that were the English government actually founded upon that hyper-absolutism which the author considers so Christian, no one would be permitted to assail its fundamental principles with that impunity which he now enjoys.

[244865] The great ability of this man seems to be peculiarly exhibited in his mixture of truth and arrant falsehood, his uncompromising boldness and insolence, and his organizing instituting mind. Two men have met almost simultaneously with great success in our own times—Joseph Smith and Louis Napoleon. Of the two, the first seems the more clever. What he performed he did against all probability of success, without any assistance from tradition or prestige.

[245320] He meant, of course, the senate, legislative corps, and the council of state. Why he calls these new institutions we cannot see, but he evidently wished to indicate his own belief, or desired that others should believe, in their permanency, as well perhaps as in their own independent action. To those, however, who consider them as nothing more than the pared and curtailed remnants of former institutions, who do not see that they can enjoy any independent action of their own, and are aware that their very existence depends upon the mere forbearance of the executive; who remember their origin by a mere decree of a dictator bound by no superior law,—to those who know with what studied and habitual sneer “parliamentary governments” are spoken of by the ruling party in France, all these establishments appear in principle no more as real institutions than a tent on a stage. The “constitution” of the present empire (Napoleon I. always spoke of les constitutions de l'empire) is a close copy of the organic laws of the first empire. Now, few of my readers, probably, are aware that the very name of senatus-consultum, which played so important a part in the first empire, and by which the most violent fundamental changes were effected, was literally smuggled in by Napoleon I. He did so on occasion of the conspiracy of Ceracchi and others, when the council of state resolved that no law should be demanded, because that “would lead to discussion.” The list of condemned was passed by the council of state, upon a report of the police, not even signed, and the senate adopted and decreed it, as a senatus-consullum. Memoirs of Miot de Melito, (himself a counsellor of state,) vol. i. page 360 and sequ. It hardly deserves mention here, that Napoleon adopted the term from the Roman empire, which was his political beau-ideal, as he did many other terms and symbols.

[247194] I am aware that many persons believe nowadays so little in this truth that not only does antiquity of itself appear to them as a proof of deficiency, but they turn their face from the whole Past, as something to be shunned, thus forgetting the continuity of society, progress, and civilization. Mr. Guizot, in his lectures on the History of Representative Governments, delivered in Paris, 1820, found it necessary to warn his hearers against this horror of the Past. The reader will find remarks on the impossibility of “beginning entirely anew,” in my Political Ethics.

[247766] Count Miot relates that when Napoleon, as consul, desired to change the entire character of the house of representatives, in order to bring it under the exclusive control of the executive, but hesitated to make an organic change by mere violence, Talleyrand at last suggested that the other assembly had no business assigned to it; why should it not be made to sanction the measure? The history of the whole consulate, and of the early period of the empire, is a striking and continuous illustration of the assistance which a despot derives from mere forms of liberty without the reality of freedom. It would seem that Napoleon I. established certain forms, in conquered countries, for the very purpose of assigning the appearance of responsibility to certain bodies of the state, while he left the government absolute. It is difficult otherwise to explain the constitution which he decreed for Naples, (page 359, vol. ii. of Memoirs of Count Miot de Melito,) according to which “the national representation” was to consist of one chamber divided into five sections, namely: the clergy, nobility, proprietors, savans, and traders; the clergy, nobility, and savans holding their places for life; the others removable at pleasure by the government. The Roman senate, when it had become the recording body of the imperial decrees, gave much support to the emperors, by its appearance of an ancient institution.

[249175] T. Toulmin Smith's Local Self-government and Centralization, etc., Lon don, 1851

[249257] A work which many of my readers will peruse with interest and instruction is Ferdinand Béchard's Lois Municipales des Républiques de la Suisse et des États-Unis, Paris, 1852. Mr. Béchard is also the author of a Traité de l'Administration Intérieure de la France—a work which must be welcome to every inquiring citizen, because it pictures the details of French centralization, the most consistently carried-out centralization in existence.

[249698] Mr. Béchard uses repeatedly in his French work the English term Self-government.

[249780] A German work, the title of which is: An Account of the Internal Administration of Great Britain, by Baron von Vincke, edited by B. G. Niebuhr, Berlin, 1815. Niebuhr, who had spent a portion of his early manhood in England, published, and probably modelled in a great measure, this work in order to influence, if possible, the Prussian government to reorganize the state after the expulsion of the French, and to reclaim that kingdom from the centralization it had adopted in many respects from the invaders of Germany. Niebuhr was a follower and great admirer of Baron von Stein, who, when minister of Prussia, had given to the cities some degree of self-government by his Städte-Ordnung—causing not a little umbrage to Napoleon. Niebuhr desired to give increased life to the principles contained in the Cities' Charter, when he published the work I have mentioned.

[250648] Coke's Institutes, part 10, ch. xxi., Justices of the Peace. The Earl of Stratford, who, like his royal master, died so well, after, politically speaking, having lived so ill, bade his brother, on the scaffold, to take this among other messages to his eldest son: “Wish him to content himself to be a servant to his country, as a justice of the peace in his county, not aiming at higher preferment.” May 12, 1641. Rushworth, (who was on the scaffold,) vol. viii. p. 760. George Washington, after having aided in founding a great commonwealth, and after having been twice its chief magistrate, was a justice of the peace in his county, in which he was imitated by John Adams, and, perhaps, by other ex-presidents.

[251362] S Reports, p. 125.

[251382] Reports, p. 63.

[251399] Ibid., p. 64.

[251414] See Smith's Local Self-government, p 230. The quotations from Coke to which the three last notes refer are likewise in Smith's work, which I recommend to every reader.

[251583] By, in by-law, is the same syllable with which the names of many English places end, such as Derby, Whitby, and is etymologically the same with the German Bauen (to build, to settle, to cultivate,) which is of the same root with the Gothic Bua and Boo, and especially the frequentative Bygga, ædificare. See Adelung, ad verbum Bauen. It is a word which runs through all the Teutonic languages, ancient and modern.

[251998] Gradually, indeed, bye-laws came to signify laws for a limited circle, a small society, laws which any set of men have the right to pass for themselves within and under the superior law, charter, etc., which constitutes them into a society, and thus it happened that bye-law was changed into by-law, as we have by-ways, roads by the side of others. It cannot be denied that by-law at present is used in the sense of law passed by the side, as it were, of another man law. Very few persons know of the origin, and the present sense of by-law is doubtless that of collateral, expletive, or subordinate law. Such double derivations are not uncommon in our language. The scholar is probably reminded, by this note, of the term God, which we Christians derive from good, and a better, holier derivation, as to the sense of the word, we cannot give to it; yet the historical derivation, the verbal etymology, if I might so say, is an entirely different one. See Jacob Grimm's German Mythology, ad verbum Gott. The starting-point of adoration is, with all tribes, dread, acknowledgment of superior power; then follows acknowledgment of wisdom, and last of all acknowledgment of goodness, purity, holiness.

[253198] Mr. Lemoisne, Wellington from a French Point of View.

[253253] General Scott has given an account of this affair in some remarks he made at a public dinner at Sandusky, in the year 1852. The generals of most countries would probably charge the victorious general with niaiserie, for declining so tempting an offer. We delight in the dutiful and plain citizen who did not hesitate, and, as the occurrence possesses historical importance, the entire statement of the general is here given. I have it in my power to say, from the best information, that the following account is “substantially correct,” and as authentic as reports of speeches can well be made:

[253849] “My friend,” said General Scott, “has adverted to the proposition seen floating about in the newspapers. I have nowhere seen it correctly stated that an offer was made to me to remain in that country and govern it. The impression which generally prevails, that the proposition emanated from congress, is an erroneous one. The overture was made to me privately, by men in and out of office, of great influence—five of whom, of enormous wealth, offered to place the bonus of one million of dollars (mentioned below) to my credit in any bank I might name, either in New York or London. On taking possession of the city of Mexico, our system of government and police was established, which, as the inhabitants themselves confessed, gave security—for the first time perfect and absolute security—to person and property. About two-fifths of all the branches of government, including nearly a majority of the members of congress and the executive, were quite desirous of having that country annexed to ours. They knew that, upon the ratification of the treaty of peace, nineteen out of twenty of the persons belonging to the American army would stand disbanded, and would be absolutely free from all obligations to remain in the army another moment. It was entirely true of all the new regiments called regulars, of all the volunteers, and eight out of ten of the rank and file of the old regiments. Thirty-three and a third per cent, were to be added to the pay of the American officers and men retained as the nucleus of the Mexican army. When the war was over, the government overwhelmed me with reinforcements, after there was no possibility of fighting another battle. When the war commenced, we had but one-fourth of the foice which we needed The Mexicans knew that the men in my army would be entitled to their discharge. They supposed, if they could obtain my services, I would retain these twelve or fifteen thousand men, and that I could easily obtain one hundred thousand men from home. The hope was, that it would immediately cause annexation. They offered me one million of dollars as a bonus, with a salary of $250,000 per annum, and five responsible individuals to become security. They expected that annexation would be brought about in a few years, or, if not, that I could organize the finances and straighten the complex affairs of that government. It was understood that nearly a majority of congress was in favor of annexation, and that it was only necessary to publish a pronunciamento to secure the object. We possessed all the fortresses, all the arms of the country, their cannon foundries and powder manufactories, and had possession of their ports of entry, and might easily have held them in our possession if this arrangement had gone into effect. A published pronunciamento would have brought congress right over to us, and, with these fifteen thousand Americans holding the fortresses of the country, all Mexico could not have disturbed us. We might have been there to this day, if it had been necessary. I loved my distant home. I was not in favor of the annexation of Mexico to my own country. Mexico has about eight millions of inhabitants, and out of these eight millions there are not more than one million who are of pure European blood. The Indians and mixed races constitute about seven millions. They are exceedingly inferior to our own. As a lover of my country, I was opposed to mixing up that race with our own. This was the first objection, on my part, to this proposition. May I plead some little love of home, which gave me the preference for the soil of my own country and its institutions? I came back to die under those institutions, and here I am, I believe I have no more to add in reply.”

[257584] There is no doubt in my mind that the institutional government is the real school of civil obedience. Whether the following remarkable passage, which I found in Baron Müffling's Memoirs of the Campaign of 1813 and 1814, edited by Col Philip Yorke, London, 1853, must be in part explained by the general self-government of England, and by the fact that every English gentleman is accustomed to political self-government and consequently to obedience, I shall not decide, but I strongly incline to believe that we must do so. General Müffling was the Prussian officer in the staff of the Duke of Wellington who served as an official link between the two armies. He was, therefore, in constant personal intercourse with the English commander, and had the very best opportunity of observing that which he reports.

[258395] “I observed,” says General Müffling, “that the duke exercised far greater power in the army he commanded than Prince Blücher in the one committed to his care. The rules of the English service permitted the duke's suspending any officer and sending him back to England. The duke had used this power during the war in Spain, when disobedience showed itself among the higher officers. Sir Robert Wilson was an instance of this.

[258821] “Amongst all the generals, from the leaders of corps to the commanders of brigades, not one was to be found in the active army who had been known as refractory.

[258983] “It was not the custom in this army to criticise or control the commander-in-chief. Discipline was strictly enforced; every one knew his rights and his duties The duke, in matters of service, was very short and decided. He allowed questions, but dismissed all such as were unnecessary. His detractors have accused him of being inclined to encroach on the functions of others—a charge which is at variance with my experience.”

[259410] Mr. Everett's Address before the New York Historical Society, 1853.

[259479] There are doubtless many causes operating together, and one of these may be that the French are not inherently fond of agriculture, as the Germanic races are. The English are eminently so.

[259669] From the Canadian census published in 1853, the following difference between the French and the Anglo-Saxon colonists appeared: The inhabitants of Lower Canada are chiefly of French origin, and are not much fewer in number than the Upper Canadians; the latter being 952,004, and the former 890,261, according to the last census. But although so close to them in point of numbers, and also in the quantity of land they have under cultivation, the inhabitants of Lower Canada raise a much smaller quantity of agricultural produce than the Upper Canadians obtain from the soil. With the exception of maple sugar and flax in which they far surpass the inhabitants of the Upper Province, they fall greatly below them in nearly all the more valuable products.

[260424] The reader has a right to ask here, why then did not the Netherlands, to institutional in their character, establish prosperous self-governments in foreign parts, as England did? I believe the answer which must be given is this:

[260654] The Netherlands lacked at home a protecting national government proper—one that could furnish them with a type of a comprehensive yet popular general government. The Netherlandish colonies always remained mere dependencies upon the executive. The Netherlanders did not plant colonial legislatures.

[260953] The Netherlands, moreover, had lapsed into a state of sejunction. The idea of their petty sovereignty was carried to the most ruinous extreme. The Greeks colonized, indeed, by dotting as it were foreign parts. The shores of the Mediterranean were sprinkled with Greek and Phœnician colonies corresponding to the ancient city-states—from which they had branched off. But a Netherlandish town could not thus have established a little colony in Java or the West Indies.

[261421] Lastly, I believe the Netherlanders did not become the disseminators of self-government, although institutional in their character, because they had no living common law to take with them, as the talent of the mother-country. They had learned the civil law—at least sufficient of it to stifle farther development of common law. We know already that the Roman Law, however excellent some of its principles are, is void of the element of self-government, and, because superinduced, antagonistic to self-development of law.

[261943] Nevertheless, it is a question of interest to Americans, whether, and how far, the settlers of New England were influenced by their sojourn in the republican Netherlands. I throw out the question. It deserves a thorough yet very plain and unbiased inquiry.

[262201] The same is said of the Manchous in China. The ruling soldier tribe has not assimilated itself with the Chinese, and the expulsion of the dynasty seems no incredible occurrence, even though the present rebellion should not be successful. In the case of China, the conquered race had many firmly-established laws and civil institutions, to which the conquering race continued strangers, at least so far as to remain chiefly soldiers. No reliance is weaker than that which rests mainly on the army, even if the army is in fighting-order, which the Chinese is not.

[262764] The word reported to have been used by Napoleon is lumières, which may mean men who enlighten, or the light which is given. The passage is found in the Mémorial de Sainte-Hélène, by Las Cases. Napoleon was speaking of the clergy, and the whole passage runs thus:

[263028] “Je ne fais rien pour le clergé qu'il ne me donne de suite sujet de m'en repentir, disait Napoléon; peut-être qu'après moi viendront d'autres principes. Peut-être verra-t-on en France une conscription de prêtres et de religieuses, comme on y voyait de mon temps une conscription militaire. Peut-être mes casernes deviendront-elles des couvents et des séminaires. Ainsi va le monde! Pauvres nations! en dépit de toutes vos lumières, de toute votre sagesse, vous demeurez soumises aux caprices de la mode comme de simples individus.”

[263561] Public Opinion and General Opinion have been discussed in the first volume of Political Ethics.

[263658] χαλεπὰ τὰ καλά. May we not add καὶ καλὰ τὰ χαλεπά?

[263710] We may also mention as a want of union, the fact that unanimity of all the states was required for all the most important measures, such as taxation and war

[263868] The author of the famous Oceana proposed a similar measure for England, as St. Just, “the most advanced” follower of Robespierre, did for France.

[264015] “The epitaph inscribed upon the tomb of Sardanapalus, ‘Sardanapalus, the son of Anacyndaraxos, built Anchiola and Tarsos in one day: eat, drink, and last; the rest is nothing,’ has been quoted for ages, and its antiquity is generally admitted.”—Layard's Nineveh, vol. ii. p. 478.

[264296] Constitutions, therefore, must not be changed too easily or too frequently; for, if a constitution be almost periodically changed, by the sovereign power of the people, it is obvious that the absolute power of the people in a degree enters as an element of government. Absolutism, therefore, is approached. Parliament is theoretically omnipotent in a political sense; the people, with us, are politically omnipotent; and if the people enact new constitutions every five or ten years, the convention sits, in reality, as an omnipotent parliament.

[264843] I have expressed my view on this subject in an address to a graduating class. I copy the passage here, because I believe the truth it contains important

[264997] “Remember how often I have endeavored to impress upon your minds the truth, that there is no great and working idea in history, no impu'se which passes on through whole masses, like a heaving wave over the sea, no yearning and endeavor which gives a marking character to a period, and no new institution or new truth, which becomes the substantial addition that a certain age adds to the stock of progressive civilization—that has not its own caricature and distorted reflection along with it. No Luther rises with heroic purpose, without being caricatured in a Carlstadt. The miracle wrought by Him to whom it was no miracle, is mimicked in toyish marvels for easy minds. The communists are to the dignity of labor what the hideous anabaptists were to the Reformation, or tyrannical hypocrites in England to the idea of British liberty in a Pym or Hampden. There was a truth of elementary importance conveyed in the saying of former ages, however irreverent it may appear to our taste, that Satan is the mimicking and gumacing clown of the Lord. I will go farther, and assert, that no great truth can be said to have fairly begun to work itself into practice, and to produce, like a vernal breath, a new growth of things, if we do not observe somewhere this historic caricature. Has Christianity itself fared better? Was the first idea, which through a series of errors led to the anchorites and pillar saints, not a true and holy one? Does not all fanaticism consist in recklessly carrying a true idea to an extreme, irrespective of other equally true ones, which ought to be developed conjointly, and under the salutary influence of mutual modification? There is truth in the first idea whence the communist starts, as much so as there is truth in the idea which serves as a starting-post for the advocate of the ungodly theory of divine right; but both carry out their fundamental principle to madness, and, ultimately, often run a muck in sanguinary ferocity. Do not allow yourselves, then, to be misled by these distortions, or to be driven into hopeless timidity, which would end in utter irresolution, and a misconception of the firmest truths.”

[267152] The following is taken from a late (1852) French paper. It is of sufficient symbolic interest to find a place in a note:

[267274] In 1790, on the 14th of July, the anniversary of the taking of the Bastile was celebrated by what was called the Fète of the Universal Federation of France. Delegations were sent to it by every department, city, town, and village in the country, all eager to manifest their enthusiasm for the revolution of 1789. Every hundred of the National Guards was represented by six members; and there were also six deputies from every regiment of infantry, and four for every regiment of cavalry. These “confederates,” as they were styled, were all entertained by the inhabitants of Paris, who are said to have rivalled each other in hospitality. In order to afford facilities to the immense number of spectators who were expected on the Champ-de-Mars, over twelve thousand workmen were employed to surround it with embankments. Fears, however, being still entertained that the work would not be completed in time, all Paris turned out to assist. Men, women, and children, the National Guard, priests even, and sisters of charity, all took part in it. The Abbè Sieyès and Viscount Beauharnais were seen tugging together at the same wheelbarrow. At the entrance to the field was erected an immense triumphal arch; while in the centre was raised an altar, called the Altar of the Country, at which officiated Talleyrand, then bishop of Autun. A bridge of boats was stretched across the Seine, near the Champ-de-Mars, where since has been erected the bridge of Jena.

[268730] In 1791, on the 18th of September, there was a splendid Fète for the publication of the constitution, and for receiving the oath of fidelity to it from Louis XVI.

[268894] In 1792, on the 15th of April, the Fète of Liberty was celebrated. The centre of attraction was an enormous car, in which was placed a statue of Liberty, holding a liberty-cap in one hand, and in the other a club. To such an extent was the principle of freedom carried on this occasion, that there was not a single policeman present to preserve order. The master of ceremonies was armed only with an ear of corn: nevertheless, there is said to have been no disorder.

[269362] In 1793, there was a fête in honor of the abolition of slavery. On the 10th of August of the same year, there was a fête for the acceptance of the constitution of 1793. The president of the convention received eighty-three commissioners from the departments; after which the registers upon which were inscribed the votes of the Primary Assemblies were brought to him, and he deposited them upon the “Altar of the Country,” amid the firing of cannon, and the rejoicing of the people, who swore to defend the constitution with their lives. On the 2d of December following, the Fête of Victories took place, in celebration of the taking of Toulon. On this occasion the Altar of the Country was transformed, by the poet-painter David, into a temple of immortality.

[270124] In 1794, on the 21st of January, the anniversary of the death of Louis XVI. was celebrated by all the principal authorities going to the Altar of the Country and renewing their oath of hatred to royalty. On the 9th of June of the same year, the Fête of the Supreme Being commenced at the Tuileries, and was terminated on the Champ-de-Mars. In the centre of the plain a “Mountain” was thrown up, surmounted by an oak. On the summit of the mountain were seated the representatives of the people; while near them were a number of young men, with drawn swords in their hands, in the act of striking a symbolical figure of the “monster fanaticism.”

[270769] In 1796, on the 21st of January, the anniversary of the death of Louis XVI. was again celebrated. All the public functionaries renewed once more their oath of hatred to royalty, and the people spent the day singing the Marseillaise, Çà ira, and various patriotic songs. On the 30th of March following, the Fête of Youth took place, on occasion of arming all the young men over sixteen years of age; and on the 30th of April, on the proposition of Carnot, the Fête of Victories was celebrated.

[271263] In 1798, on the 20th of March, was the Fête of the Sovereignty of the People. On the tenth Vendémiaire, there was a funeral fête in memory of General Hoche. On the tenth Messidor, the Fête of Agriculture took place, with a great display of chariots, cattle, fruits, etc. During the five supplementary days of the revolutionary year, there was a series of fêtes, with an exposition of all the products of French industry, on the Champ-de-Mars.

[271707] In 1801 there were fêtes in memory of the foundation of the Republic, and in celebration of general peace, which were attended by the First Consul.

[271856] In 1804, on the 10th of November, Napoleon, then emperor, repaired to the Champ-de-Mars, and there received the oath of fidelity and obedience from deputations representing all the corps of the army.

[272057] In 1814, on the 7th of September, the government of the Restoration distributed colors to the National Guard of Paris. The object of this distributior was to efface, if possible, even the memory of the eagles of the empire and of the tri-colored standard of the revolution. An altar, glittering with gold and costly drapery, was erected near the military school, and in front was placed the throne, occupied by Louis XVIII., who was accompanied by the Count of Artois, the Duke of Angoulême, and the Duke of Berri. Mass was celebrated by the archbishop of Paris, M. Talleyrand-Périgord, uncle of the bishop of Autun, who, as we have seen, officiated at the Fête of Federation in 1790. The National Guards defiled before the throne, while the band played Vive Henri IV and Charmante Gabrielle.

[272851] In 1815, on the 1st of June, there was a fête in celebration of the return of the emperor. Napoleon appeared on the throne with his three brothers. A mass was performed; the constitution was acclaimed with enthusiasm; and the air was rent with cries of Vive Napoléon! The oath was taken with enthusiasm. Napoleon addressed the soldiers from the throne in the following words:

[273228] “Soldiers of the National Guard of Paris; soldiers of the Imperial Guard; I confide to you the imperial eagle, with the national standard. You swear to defend it with your lives, if need be, against the enemies of the country and this throne. You swear never to rally under any other banner.”

[273522] During the restoration, the Champ-de-Mars was used chiefly for reviews of the National Guard; the most notable of which was the last one passed by Charles X., when the citizens manifested that hostility to the king which was a prelude to the revolution of 1830.

[273785] In 1837 there was a grand fête in honor of the marriage of the Duke of Orleans, on which occasion the crowd in the Champ-de-Mars was so great that twenty-four persons were suffocated or crushed to death. During most of the reign of Louis Philippe, however, the principal gatherings in the Champ-de-Mars were on occasion of military reviews and horse-races.

[274143] In 1848, on the 22d of May, the Fête of Concord was celebrated with great pomp. The Moniteur alluded to the occasion thus:

[274267] “This solemnity was celebrated with an éclat enhanced by the magnificent weather. Under so clear a sky, and surrounded by so many joyful countenances, how was it possible to experience any feelings but those of love, conciliation, and harmony? What struck us, especially, was the attitude, so full of enthusiasm and confidence, of the vast concourse of people that crowded the Champ-de-Mars; cries, a thousand times repeated, of Vive la République! Vive la République Démocratique! Vive l'Assemblée Nationale! broke out, in formidable chorus, every instant, as if to proclaim the respect of the people for the institutions which they have adopted, and their invincible repugnance to every retrograde or reactionary idea.”

[274990] To the foregoing must be added the gigantic military fête on the 10th of May, 1852, called the Fête of Eagles, that is, the distribution of eagles to all the regiments of the army. A cock had been adopted as symbol of the first republic, owing either to an etymological misconception of the word Galha, or to an intended pun on it. The emperor adopted the Roman eagle; the Bourbons brought back the three fleurs-de-lys; and in 1830 the cock was restored. Louis Napoleon, when president for ten years, restored the imperial eagle. It must be owned, the cock looked very much as our turkey would have looked had we adopted Franklin's humorous proposition of selecting our native and respectable turkey, instead of our fine native eagle.

[275726] What feast will be celebrated on the same spot next? Whatever it may be, probably it will be nothing intrinsically different from the last.

[275867] The Dictionary of the Academy gives, as the last two meanings of the word Peuple—unenlightened men, and men belonging to the lowest classes. Trench, in his Lessons in Proverbs, quotes the French Jesuit Bonhours, who says: Les proverbes sont les sentences du peuple, et les sentences sont les proverbes des honnêtes gens. (But there are very wicked proverbs.) Honnête means, indeed, frequently something like the Latin honestus, and not exclusively our honest, but even with this addition the English term People could never have been contradistinguished from honnêtes gens. To these remarks we must add the mischievous error of giving the dignified name the people to some people gathered together in the street. We find, in the French papers and other publications, at the time of the first revolution, constant use of the term in such manner, as: le peuple has hanged a baker, etc., when the murder was committed by a labble of a few. This confusion of a few lawless people with the people, for whom the sovereign power was claimed, and, in turn, the arrogation of the sacred name by a few Parisians, may be observed throughout the history of the revolution.

[277029] Aristocratic as England is in many respects, it is nevertheless true that there is no nobility in the continental sense. The law knows of peers, hereditary lawgivers, but it does not know even the word nobleman. The peerage is connected with primogeniture, but there is no English nobility in the blood. The idea of mésalliance has, therefore, never obtained in England. There is no doubt that the little disposition of the English shown at any time to destroy the aristocracy is in a great measure owing to this fact, as doubtless the far more judicious spirit of the English peers to yield to the people's demands, if clearly and repeatedly pronounced, has contributed much. Mr. Hallam has very correct remarks on the subject of English equality of civil rights, where he speaks of the reign of Henry III.

[277838] It was the time when Haller wrote his Restoration of Political Sciences, in which he endeavors to excel Filmer, and does not blush to hold up uncompromising absolutism, although a native of Switzerland. Having secretly become a Catholic, he passed into the service of the Bourbons. The student of political science, desirous of making himself acquainted with the political literature of the European continent of this period in its whole extent, is referred to a German work of a high order, Robert von Mohl's History and Literature of the Political Sciences, 3 vols., large 8vo, Erlangen, 1855 to 1858, (containing 2052 pages.) The comprehensive erudition and liberal judgment of the author, as well as the patient research in the literature of the day and the past and of all civilized countries, make this work a storehouse of historical and critical knowledge concerning political literature, for which every scholar of this branch must feel deeply indebted to him.

[278809] The very etymology, with its present meaning, is significant.

[278872] There are persons among us who have fallen into this error; and it will always be found that they proportionately disregard our institutions, or are not imbued with esteem for institutional government. I lately received a pamphlet in which the author wishes for a confederacy embracing America from Greenland to Cape Horn. “Universal governments” were the dream of Henry IV., and again pressed into service by Napoleon. I am not able to answer the reader, why that confederacy should comprehend America only. There is no principle or self-defining idea in the term America. America is a name. The water which surrounds it has nothing to do with principles. Water, once the Disso-ciabile Mare, now connects. Polynesia ought to be added, and perhaps Further Asia, and why not Hindostan? Our oath of allegiance might be improved by promising to be faithful to the United States et cetera, as Archbishop Laud's famous oath bound the person who took it upon an Et Cetera.

[279840] The same phenomenon may be observed in the more philosophical division of history. People begin to divide the history of a nation by the monarchs, or by any other labelling. When they penetrate deeper, they divide history by the rise and fall of institutions, of classes, of interests, of great ideas. To divide the history of England by George I. and George II. is about as philosophical as if a geologist were to color a chart, not according to the great layers that constitute the earth, but by indicating where the people walking upon it wear shoes or sabots, or walk barefooted.

[280425] We ought to compare the repeated advice of the greatest of Americans, to beware of alliances, with the contents of such works as Raumer's Diplomatic Dispatches of the Last Century. It is for this reason that the present publicity of diplomacy has such vital importance.

[280696] The cyclopean walls in Greece and Italy, built before the memory even of the ancients, and many of which still stand as firm as if raised in recent times, have their strength in the irregularity of the component stones, and the close fitting of one to the other, so that no interstices are left even for a blade of grass to grow. An irregular polygonal stone was placed first; sheets of lead were then closely fitted to the upper and lateral surfaces. When taken off, they served as the patterns according to which the stones to be placed next were hewn. It was this sheet and this mode of proceeding which was called the Lesbian canon or rule, while the canon or rule which the architect laid down alike for all stones of an intended wall was called a general canon. See On the Cyclopean Walls, by Forchhammer, Kiel, 1847. Now, Aristotle compares the general law, the nomos, to the general canon, but the particular law, the psephisma, ought, as he says, to be made by the Lesbian canon. Ethica ad Nicomachum, 5, 14. It is inelegant, I readily confess, to use a figure which it is necessary to explain, but I am not acquainted with any process in modern arts similar to the one used as an illustration by the great philosopher, except the forming of the dentist's gold plate according to a mould taken from nature itself. I naturally preferred the simile of the philosopher, even with an explanatory note, to the unbidden associations which the other simile carries along with it. Nor would I withhold from my reader the pleasure we enjoy when a figure or simile is presented to us so closely fitting the thought, like the Lesbian canon, and so exact that itself amounts to the enunciation of an important truth, well formulated. This is the case with Aristotle's figure.

[282470] In my Political Ethics, first published in 1838.

[282520] I do not know that this opinion was ever more strikingly symbolized than lately, when Lord John Russell, the leader of the administration in the commons, moved an address of congratulation to the queen on the birth of a prince, and Mr. Disraeli, the leader of the opposition in the same branch, seconded the motion, while a similar motion was made in the lords by Lord Aberdeen, the premier of the administration, seconded by the Earl of Derby, the premier of the lately ousted administration, and very bitter opponent to the present ministry. What the queen is, in this respect, in England, the constitution, or rather the Union, is in the United States. Our feelings of loyally centre in these, but not in our president, any more than an Englishman's loyalty finds a symbol in his prime minister.

[283320] Mr. Emil Giraidin, who has been referred to several times. He is an unreserved writer, who knows how to express his ideas distinctly, and who is a representative of very large numbers of his countrymen. In connection with the expression of Mr Girardin given in the text, the dictum of the Emperor Napoleon III. about the time of his elevation to the throne, may be given. He said: In crowning me, France crowns herself. The reader will find at the end of this work a similar expression of the emperor, when he opened the restored Louvre, namely, that France, in building palaces for her kings, built them to honor herself and to symbolize her unity. Unfortunately, Louis XIV. sorely repented on his death-bed his passion for building, and expressed it in warning counsel to Louis XV.

[284105] Lord Brougham, in his Political Philosophy, speaks in terms of high praise of the elective government of the former Germanic empire. Native and contemporary writers have not done so. It was only after the expulsion of the French, and when the German people instinctively longed for German unity and dignity, that, at one time, a poetic longing for the return of the medieval empire was expressed by some. If there be any German left who still desires a return to the elective empire, he must be of a very retrospective character.

[284636] Machiavelli—tanto nomini nullum par elogium—says in his Prince, “But in the new government lies the greatest difficulty.” This depends upon circumstances. He undoubtedly had in mind the difficulty of uniting Italy, or rather of eliminating so many governments and establishing one Italian state. For there has been no noble Italian, since the times when Dante called his own Italy, Di dolor ostello, that does not yearn for the union of his noble land, and look for the realization of his hopes as fervently as he believes in a God. Machiavelli was one of the foremost among these true Italians. But he had not lived through our times. There are times when the people throw themselves into the arms of any one that possibly may save them from impending or imaginary shipwreck, or promises to do so. Wearied people will take a stone for a pillow, and no persons deceive themselves so readily as the panic-stricken. On such occasions it is easy to establish a new government, especially if cumbersome conscience is set aside. The reverse of Machiavelli's dictum then takes place, and the greatest difficulty lies in maintaining a government. This applies even to administrations and ministries. All is pleasant sailing at first. A new power charms like a rising sun; but the heat of noon follows upon the morning.

[285949] Harris, in his Oceana, St. Just, in the first French revolution, and many former and recent writers, might be mentioned.

[286071] These differences between antiquity and modern times, all of which are more or less connected with Christianity and the institution, are:

[286210] 1. That in antiquity only one nation flourished at a time. The course of history, therefore, flows in a narrow channel, and the historian can easily arrange universal ancient history. In modern periods, many nations flourish at the same time, and their history resembles the broad Atlantic, on which they all freely meet.

[286533] 2. Ancient states are short-lived; modern states have a far greater tenacity of life.

[286620] 3. Ancient states, when once declining, were irretrievably lost. Their history is that of a rising curve, with its maximum and declension. Modern states have frequently shown a recuperative power. Compare present England with that of Charles II., France as it is with the times of Louis XV.

[286912] 4. Ancient liberty and wealth were incompatible, at least for any length of time; modern nations may grow freer while they are growing wealthy.

[287057] 5. Ancient liberty dwelt in city-states only; modern liberty requires enlarged societies—nations.

[287156] 6. Ancient liberty demanded disregard of individual liberty; modern liberty is founded upon it.

[287253] 7. The ancients had no international law. (Nor have the Asiatics now. The incipiency of international law is, indeed, visible with all tribes, for they are men. The Romans sent heralds to declare war, and the Greek, advised to poison his arrows, declines doing so, “for,” Homer makes him say, “I fear the gods will punish me.”)

[287582] Indeed, the enormous treasures occasionally met with in Asia are indications of her comparative poverty.

[287688] A London journal said some years ago, with great bitterness, yet with truth; A Russian czar is a highly assassinative substance.

[287818] Nowhere, I believe, can the views of a large class of Frenchmen on this subject be found more distinctly enounced than in the different works of Mr. Louis Blanc. They are many, and, in my opinion, as may be supposed, often very visionary; but Mr. Blanc is the spirited representative of that French school Which believes that liberty is power, that the owners are the people, that wealth consists in the largest possible amount of currency, and money is a deception, and that communism is the most perfect political phase of humanity.

[288354] This, it will be observed, is very different from the English maxim, the parliament is omnipotent. Unguarded and extravagant as it is, it only weans that parliament has the supreme power. But parliament itself is a vast institution, and part and parcel of a still vaster institutional system, which is pervaded by the principle of self-government. Parliament has often found that it is not omnipotent when it has attempted to break a lance with the common law. It is as unguarded a maxim as that the king can do no wrong, which is true only in a limiting sense, namely, that because he can do no wrong, some one else must be answerable for every act of his. Besides, there is the marginal note of James II. appended to this maxim, which never has been understood to mean what the ancient French maxim meant: In the presence of the king, the laws are silent; or what was meant by the famous “bed of justice,” namely, that the personal presence of the monarch silenced all opposition, and was sufficient to ordain anything he pleased.

[289388] Mr. Burke, in 1788.

[289409] He spoke of Wilkes's expulsion.

[289442] Raumer gives the dispatches from Mitchell, the English minister near the court of Frederic. The minister reports many complaints of the king, of this sort. But Frederic is not the only one who thus complained. General Walsh, that native Frenchman, who became minister of Spain, did the same. See Coxe's Memoirs, mentioned before. So when Russian statesmen desire to show the superiority of their government, they never fail to dwell on the low position of an English minister, inasmuch as he depends upon a parliamentary majority, or, as an English minister expressed it, must be the minister of public opinion. See Mr. Urquhart's Collection. I believe it will always be found that, where absolute governments come in contact with those of freemen the former complain of the instability of the latter. They consider a change of ministry a revolution

[290293] One of the past statesmen of France, and renowned as a publicist, said to me, in 1851, when we discoursed on the remarkable extinction of former French royalty: “There is but one thing to which all Frenchmen cling with enthusiasm, almost with fanaticism, and that is absolute unity.” Those statesmen who have not unconditionally joined this sentiment, such as Mr. Guizot, are considered unnational.

[290693] The Contrat Social was the bible of the most advanced convention men. Robespierre read it daily, and the influence of that book can be traced throughout the revolution. Its ideas, its simplicity, and its sentimentality had all their effects. Indeed, we may say that two books had a peculiar influence in the French, revolution, Rousseau's Social Contract and Plutarch's Lives, however signally they differ in character. The translation of Plutarch by Amyot in the sixteenth century—it was the period of Les Cents Contre Un—and subsequent ones, had a great effect upon the ideas of a certain class of reflecting Frenchmen. We can trace this down to the revolution, and during this struggle we find with a number of the leading men a turn of ideas, a conception of republicanism formed upon their view of antiquity, and a stoicism, which may be fitly called Plutarchism. It is an element in that great event. It showed itself especially with the Brissotists, the Girondists, and noble Charlotte Corday was imbued with it. A very instructive paper might be written on the influence of Plutarch on the political sentiment of the French ever since that first translation.

[291861] The idea of the populus vanished only at a late period from the Roman mind; that of liberty had passed away long before. Fronto, in a letter to Marcus Aurelius, (when the prince was Cæsar,) mentions the applause which he had received from the audience for some oration which he had delivered, and then continues thus: “Quorsum hoc retuli? uti te, Domine, ita compares, ubi quid in cœtu hominum recitabis, ut scias auribus serviendum: plane non ubique et omni modo, attamen nonnunquam et aliquando. Quod ubi facies, simile facere te reputato, atque illud facitis, ubi eos qui bestias strenue interfecerint, populo postulante ornatis aut manumittitis, nocentes etiam hominess aut scelere damnatos, sed populo postulante conceditis. Ubique igitur populus dominatur et præapollet. Igitur ut populo gratum erit, ita facies atque ita dices.“—Epist. ad Marc. Cæs., lib. i. epist. 1.

[292738] Not unlike the conduct of the powers surrounding Poland, before they had sufficiently prepared her partition. The government of Poland was certainly a very defective one, but it was the climax of historical iniquity in Russia, Austria, and Prussia to declare, after having used every sinister means to embroil the Polish affairs and stir up faction, that the Poles were unfit to be a nation, and as neighbors too troublesome.

[293165] The idea which I have to express would have prompted me, and the Latin word Cæsareus would have authorized me, to use the term Cæsarean Sovereignty. It is unquestionably preferable to imperatorial sovereignty, except that the English term Cæsarean has acquired a peculiar and distinct meaning, which might even have suggested the idea of a mordant puri. I have, therefore, given up this term, although I had always used it in my lectures. It will be observed that I use the term sovereignty in this case with a meaning which corresponds to the sense in which the word sovereign continues to be used by many, designating a crowned ruler. I hope no reader will consider me so ignorant of history and political philosophy, as to think me capable of believing in the real sovereignty of an individual. If sovereignty means the self-sufficient primordial power of society, from which all other powers are derived—and unless it mean this we do not stand in need of the term—it is clear that no individual ever possessed or can possess it. On the other hand, it is not to be confounded with absolute power. My views on this important subject have been given at length in my Political Ethics, as I have said before.

[294374] Sec paper on Elections, in the Appendix.

[294416] A sepulchral inscription in honor of Masaniello had an allusion conceived in a similar spirit. I give it entire, as it probably will be interesting to many readers.

[294582] Eulogium Thomæe Aniello de Amalfio Cetario mox Cesareo Honore conspicuo qui Oppressa patria Parthenope cum Suppressione nobilium Combustione mobilium Purgatione exulum Extinctione vectigalium Proregis injustitia Libtrata Ab his quos liberavit est peringrate occisus Ætatis suæ anno vigesimo sebtimo, imperii vero Decennio Mortuus non minus quam vivus Triumphavit Tantæ rei populus Neapolitanus tanquam immemor Posuit.

[295001] The History of the East Mongols, by Ssanang Ssetsen Changsaidshi, translated into German by I. J. Schmidt. I owe this interesting passage to my friend the Rev. Professor J. W. Miles, who directed my attention to the work.

[295224] As the words stand above, I own, they may be variously interpreted; but it would evidently lead me too far, were I to attempt a full-statement of the sense to which I take them, which indeed I have done at length in my Political Ethics.

[295462] The reader sufficiently acquainted with history will remember that the consul Manlius, when the Galatians, a people in Asia Minor, urged that they had given no offence to the Romans, answered that they were a profligate people deserving punishment, and that some of their ancestors had, centuries before, plundered the temple of Delphi. Justin, the historian, says that the Romans assisted the Acarnanians against the Ætolians because the former had joined in the Trojan war, a thousand years before. But this principle does not act, even to a degree of caricature, in politics only. What cruelties have not been committed Pro majore Dei gloria!

[296109] That absolutism and imperatorial sovereignty go hand in hand, was neatly acknowledged by an inscription over the sub-prefecture of Dunkerque, when the imperial couple passed it, in 1855. It was to this effect: À l'héritier de Napoléon, la ville de Louis XIV.

[296369] Mr. Michel, on the 10th of November. I quote from the French papers, which gave detailed reports. Mr. Michel, to judge from his own speech, seems to have been the oldest of the defending advocates.

[296568] This error broke forth into full blaze at the indicated time, but it had of course been long smouldering, and, as is customary, had found some fuel even in our country. In the year 1841, during the presidential canvass, a gentleman—who has since become the editor of a Catholic periodical, and has probably changed his views—published a pamphlet in which he attacked individual property, and fell into the same error which is spoken of in the text above.

[297024] The author of the pamphlet, which was very widely distributed, found it of course impossible to draw the line between the workmen and those who are not “working,” and I recollect that he did not even allow the superintendent of a factory to be a workman. I have treated of these subjects in detail in my Essays on Labor and Property, and believe that a Humboldt is a harder “working man,” not indeed than the poor weaver who allows himself but five hours' rest in the whole twenty-four, but certainly a far harder working man than any of those physically employed persons who want to make their class a privileged order. The fact is simply this, that there is no toiling man, however laboriously employed in a physical way, that does not guide his efforts by an exertion of the brain, and no mentally employed man that is not obliged to accompany his labor by some, frequently by much, physical exertion. To draw an exact line between the two, for political purposes, is impossible. All attempts at doing so are mischievous. The hands and the brain rule the world. All labor is manual and cerebral, but the proportion in which the elements combine is infinite. So soon as no cerebral labor is necessary, we substitute the animal or the machine. In reading some socialist works, one would almost suppose that men had returned to some worship of the animal element, raising pure physical exertion above all other human endeavors. Humanity does not present itself more respectably than in the industrious and intelligent artisan, but every artisan justly strives to reach that position in which he works more by the intellect than by physical exertion. He strives to be an employer. The type of a self-dependent and striving American artisan is a really noble type. The author hopes to count many an American operative among his readers; and, if he be not deceived, he takes this opportunity of declaring that he believes he too has a very fair title to be called a hardworking man, without claiming any peculiar civil privileges on that account

[299068] The idea that God speaks through the voice of the people, familiar to the middle ages, is connected with the elections of ruder times by general acclaim. It reminds us also of the Dieu le veut, at Clermont, when Peter the Hermit called on the chivalry and the people to take the sign of the cross. And again it reminds us of the disastrous décrets d'acclamation of the first French revolution. That the government is the true representative of the people has been often asserted in recent times in France, and Napoleon I., in one of his addresses, delivered in the council of state, said: The government, too, is the representative of the people.—Miot de Melito, in his. Memoirs.

[299749] See the Paper on Elections, in the Appendix.

[299795] Mr. de Morny is the frère adultérin of Louis Napoleon, on the mother's side, Queen Hortense. He aided his half-brother very actively in the overthrow of the republic, and the establishment of the empire. Mr. de Morny lost the ministry at the time when L. Bonaparte despoiled the Orleans family of their lawful property, and, it was believed, because the minister could not in his conscience sanction an act at once so unlawful and ungrateful.

[300239] When the question of the new imperial crown was before the people of France, Count Chambord, the Bourbon prince who claims the crown of France on the principle of legitimacy, wrote a letter to his adherents, exhorting them not to vote. The leading government papers stated at the time that government would have permitted the publication of this letter, had it not attacked the principle of the people's sovereignty. The people were acknowledged sovereign, yet the government decides what the sovereign may read!

[300753] There are psychological processes which indicate suspicious intentions—the adoption of a new and scientifically sounding term for an old and common offence, as Repudiation for declining to pay what is due; and of mystifying, high-sounding abstractions in statesmanship. The latter is carried to a degree, in the following address of Napoleon, which is rare even in France. Louis XIV., according to the present emperor of the French, the great representative of French unity and glory, when he had ruined France by the building of Versailles, warned, on his death-bed, his successor to beware of wars and of building. There are so many points of French politics tersely put in the speech of Napoleon III., when in September of 1857 he opened the Louvre, that its record may be considered a historical document. We give it therefore entire.

[301593] The ceremony of opening the Louvre was simple but imposing. The ministers, marshals and generals, the senators and great functionaries, assembled in the hall of the Louvre. The emperor and empress arrived at two o'clock with a vast retinue. The business began by the presentation of an address to the emperor from M. Fould, briefly describing the origin and completion of a work which, begun in 1852 and finished in 1857, unites the Louvre and the Tuileries. The emperor next distributed the legion of honor to the professional men who have distinguished themselves during the election of the building; making some commanders, some simple knights. Having distributed all the honors, the emperor delivered the following address:

[302322] “Gentlemen—I congratulate myself, with you, on the completion of the Louvre, I congratulate myself especially upon the causes which have rendered it possible. In fact, it is order, restored stability, and the ever-increasing prosperity of the country, which have enabled me to complete this national work. I call it so because the governments which have succeeded each other have made it a point to do something towards the completion of the royal dwelling commenced by Francis I. and embellished by Henry II.

[302833] “Whence this perseverance, and even this popularity, in the building of a palace? It is because the character of a people is reflected in its institutions as in its customs, in the events that excite its enthusiasm as well as in the monuments which become the object of its chief interest. Now France, monarchical for so many centuries, which always beheld in the central power the representative of her grandeur and of her nationality, wished that the dwelling of the sovereign should be worthy of the country; and the best means of responding to that sentiment was to adorn that dwelling with the different masterpieces of human intelligence.

[303479] “In the middle ages, the king dwelt in a fortress, bristling with defensive works; but soon the progress of civilization superseded battlements, and the produce of letters, of the arts and sciences, took the place of weapons of war. Thus the history of monuments has also its philosophy as well as the history of events.

[303801] “In like manner as it is remarkable that at the time of the first revolution, the committee of public welfare should have continued, without being aware of it, the work of Louis XI., of Richelieu, of Louis XIV., giving the last blow to the feudal system, and carrying out the system of unity and centralization, the constant aim of monarchy—in like manner is there not a great lesson to learn in beholding the idea of Henry IV., of Louis XIII., of Louis XIV., of Louis XV., of Louis XVI., of Napoleon, as regards the Louvre, adopted by the ephemeral power of 1848? One of the first acts, in fact, of the provisional government, was to decree the completion of the palace of our kings. So true is it that a nation draws from its antecedents, as an individual derives from his education, ideas which the passions of a moment do not succeed in destroying. When a moral impulse is the consequence of the social condition of a country, it is handed down through centuries, and through different forms of government, until the object in view is attained.

[304851] “Thus the completion of the Louvre, towards which I thank you for your cooperation, given with so much zeal and skill, is not the caprice of a moment, but is the realization of a plan conceived for the glory and kept alive by the instinct of the country for more than three hundred years.”

[305142] In the evening some hundreds of persons engaged in the work—workingmen, artists, men of letters, journalists—were entertained at dinner by the minister of state in a gallery of the Louvre. Of course the speaking was ultra-loyal.

[305372] No one will charge the author, he trusts, with political iconoclasm, that has read his chapter on monuments in his Political Ethics.

[305506] The Age of Great Cities, or Modern Society viewed in its Relation to Intelligence, Morals and Religion, by Robert Vaughn, D.D., London, 1843.

[305649] This manifests itself in all spheres. Paris leads in fashion, art, science, language, etc. England has her Oxford and Cambridge.

[305779] The title of Walker's Critical Pronouncing Dictionary has these words: “likewise Rules to be observed by the Natives of Scotland, Ireland and London, for avoiding their respective Peculiarities,” as indicating part of the contents. This is strikingly English. The pronunciation and “peculiarities” of the Parisians, even as they change from time to time, are the very standard of French pronunciation.

[306182] Similar remarks may be made regarding the courts. The court of Versailles dictated in every sphere at the time when Horace Walpole, the whig, wrote that the English court was not fashionable, and was considered little better than a number of Germans kept there for some useful practical end.

[306475] According to the latest news, even the dead are under the control of government, not in the sense of Sydney Smith, by paying taxes, but no one can any longer be buried in Paris except by a chartered company, standing under the close inspection of the police department.

[306746] Churchmen and laymen, as is well known, vie with each other on such occasions. The blasphemous flattery offered by some dignitaries of the church to Napoleon I. was revolting. We have seen the same when there seemed to be a question who could bid highest in burning incense to the present new Cæsar. The Lord's Prayer was travestied. The following “proclamation” is taken from the “Concorde de Seine et Oise,” of October, 1852, for the very reason that it is not one of the worst:

[307228] “Town of Sèvres. Proclamation of the Empire.

[307274] “Inhabitants—Paris, the heart of France, acclaimed on the 10th of May for its emperor him whose divine mission is every day revealed in such a striking and dazzling manner. At this moment it is the whole of France electrified which salutes her savior, the elect of God, by this new title, which clothes him with sovereign power: ‘God wills it,’ is repeated with one voice—‘vox populi vox Dei.’ It is the marriage of France with the envoy of God, which is contracted in the face of the universe, under the auspices of all the constituted bodies, and of all the people. That union is sanctified by all the ministers of religion, and by all the princes of the church. These addresses, these petitions, and these speeches, which are at this moment exchanging between the chief of the state and France, are the documents connected with that holy union; every one wishes to sign them, as at the church he would sign the marriage-deed at which he is present. Inhabitants of Sèvres, as the interpreter of your sentiments, I have prepared the deed which makes you take part in this great national movement. Two books are opened at the Mairie to receive your signatures: one of them will be offered in your presence to him whom I from this day designate under the title of emperor. Let us hope that he will deign to accede to the supplications which I shall address to him in your name, to return to the palace of St. Cloud through our territory, by the gate of honor which we possess. The other book, which I shall present for the signature of the prince, will remain in your archives as a happy souvenir of this memorable epoch. Let all the population, without distinction, come, therefore, and sign this document; it sets forth that which is in your heart and in your will.”

[309043] This document is accompanied by a formal proclamation, appropriately signed—”Ménager, mayor.”

[309138] Plain dealing, however, obliges us to remember, along with such extravagances of foreigners, the repulsive flattery in which some individuals indulged when Kossuth was among us. Nor must we wholly forget the language of certain daily journals at the time of General Jackson's administration. But these were erratic acts of individuals, and, however disgusting, were not officially received by government.

[309544] Mr. Chevalier.

[309560] St. Luke, xxiii. 13, 21.

[309586] Sir Wm. Hamilton begins the third paragraph, page 770, of The Works of Thomas Reid on the Universality of the Philosophy of Common Sense, in this way:

[309738] “1.—Hesiod thus terminates his Works and Days:

[309786] “The Word proclaimed by the concordant voice Of mankind fails not; for in Man speaks God.”

[309878] “Hence the adage?—Vox Populi, vox Dei.”

[309919] It is well the learned sage added the query, for, historically at least, the V. P. V. D. certainly does not come from Hesiod.

[310046] For many years I was under the impression that I had found this fact when studying the times of Abelard; but I must confess that all my attempts to recover it, when I came to write on this subject, have been fruitless. Sanderson, whom Mr. Hallam calls the most distinguished English casuist, treats of the maxim in his work De Conscientia. I copy from the London Notes and Queries, Nov. 19, 1853, the following passage, which was elicited by the preceding portion of this note:

[310525] “The earliest known instances of the use of the saying are, by William of Malmesbury, who, speaking of Odo yielding his consent to be Archbishop of Canterbury, A.D. 920, says, Recogitans illud Proverbium, ‘Vox Populi, vox Dei;’ and by Walter Reynolds, Archbishop of Canterbury, who, as we learn from Walsingham, took it as his text for the sermon which he preached when Edward III. was called to the throne from which the people had pulled down Edward II The reader is farther referred to Mr. G. Cornewall Lewis's Essay on the Influence of Authority in Matters of Opinion, (pp. 172, 173, and the accompanying notes,) for some interesting remarks upon it.”

[311182] It may, however, be mentioned, as a historical fact, that even fashion has been shrewdly drawn within the sphere of public action and influence, by the Emperor Napoleon III., through his graceful empress.

[311388] It has been calculated that several millions of human beings have been sacrificed by witch-trials in modern times. [!] An article in the Westminster Review, January, 1859, shows that the belief in witches is yet causing occasional disorder and crime in England. Indeed, if the famous Quod omnibus, etc., could ever be applied to any subject, it is to this. It has existed and still exists in all the coiners of the earth, and with tribes wholly insulated. There has been always whipping in the armies, until Always ceased; there was always slavery until it ceased; a multitude of gods was always worshipped; ghosts were always believed in; oracles were always believed in; to take interest from the borrower was always declared a crime; it was always believed that the earth is flat or that the sun moves; it was always believed that Jews poisoned the wells, or that some general distemper whose causes could not be explained arose from poisoned wells; people always believed that governments must answer for famines; gold was always believed to have some mysterious power, physical as well as psychological; the stars were always believed to influence the character of individuals; kings were always believed to have a peculiar healing power; it was always believed that wealth consists in money, and that therefore as one country gets rich others must needs get poorer, or that in the same degree as one roan increases his wealth so he deprives others of it; it was always believed that the security of the state requires the masses to be ground down; it was always believed that the eastern continent was all the land of the earth, and the suspicion that there might be another continent was even declared heretical; it was always believed that great cleanliness was not conducive to the health of children; it was always believed that indicted persons ought to be tortured, if they would not confess otherwise; it was always believed that persons accused of treason or witchcraft ought not, on account of the “heinousness of their crimes,” to have that protection which was granted to other indicted prisoners—until the Always and Everywhere ceased. These errors, most of which have caused commotions, risings, and bloodshed, were certainly the opinion of the people; they were the opinion of our whole race, but assuredly not the vox Dei.

[313733] Wherever a Semper et ubique exists, such as it is, and if not artificially produced, there must be some adequate reason for it, but it need not be a good one, or founded in truth. When the semper et ubique is urged, in order to prove a thing, it has already ceased to be semper, etc. On the other hand, the maxim ought indeed to prevail unless there is good reason for the contrary opinion.

[314125] Dii laneos habent pedes.

[314151] The doctrine Vox Populi Vox Dei, is capable of development. In November, for, 1857, some female, addressing a crowd in the city of New York, said: The voice of the working-men is the voice of God.

[314349] Which might lead to this syllogism:

[314386] The subject of Mobs has been enlarged upon in the Political Ethics.

[314455] The Paris journal, Le Pays, informed the public, at the time the present empire was established, that it had been raised to the dignity of an official paper to the imperial government. The announcement is made in that proclamatory and sententious style so much relished by the French, and in one of the paragraphs, standing by itself, it offers, with a naïveté which, surpasses anything the writer can remember, this comforting assurance:

[314895] “In approaching power more closely, we shall not cease to have opinions.”

[314970] The facts that it is the “journal of the empire,” that the whole article is short, that every sentence seems to be well weighed by the editor, a writer of note, and that the declaration was made on a very important occasion, give to the whole a character which entitles us to take it as something more than a passing newspaper sentence.

[315308] When the maxim Vox populi vox Dei prevails, and governments change in rapid succession, it is a necessary result that there are hosts of turncoats. The French published in 1826, or thereabouts, a bitter satire on this held of politicians, consisting of a work called Dictionnaire des Girouettes—literally translated, Dictionary of Weathercocks; but Anglicized, Dictionary of Turncoats. The names which headed the biographies in the book were succeeded by a number of symbolical weathercocks equal to the number of political somersets of which the respective persons could boast. There was a fearful row of hiero-glyphical vanes after some names. But in reading this droll and bitter account relating to a foreign nation, let us not forget St. Luke, vi. 41.

[316066] There is no other term in our language, although it is obvious that these processes cannot be properly called elections. Votings would be more correct.

[316219] This has been well pointed out in the case of Louis Napoleon, by the Hon. A. P. Butler, United States senator for South Carolina.

[316350] In the time of the late French so-called republic, it occurred in the little commune Saint-André (department of Nord) that in a new church one of three altars remained without a patron saint. There were three candidates: St. Joseph, St. Roch, and St. Cecilia. The priest believed that the question had best be left to the people. All voted, even women and children of discretion. St. Cecilia carried the election by a majority of seventeen votes. The old Icelanders sometimes decided by vote whether Christ or the old gods should be worshipped.

[316896] This knowledge of the vote which an elector will give does of coarse not affect the result. Each elector represents a majority and a minority, but his vote can only be cast for one candidate. Nevertheless, that which is called the popular vote indicates a proportion between the presidential candidates very different from that which appears from the official votes of the electors. For instance, the popular vote at the last presidential election stood:

[317352] and the votes of the electors stood

[317389] So that the popular vote stood:

[317422] But the votes of the electors:

[317454] Such men as Benton, McDuffie, Calhoun, Huger, Pickens, of N. Carolina, have recorded their opinion in favor of giving the election of the president to the people.

[317618] [Schömann, Gr. Alterth., i. 398, considers that 6000 was the number necessary to be cast against any one person, following in this the corrected Schol. on Aristoph. Eq. 852, (855.) Plutarch, not a first-rate authority, is a clear witness on the other side. He says that the archons counted the mass of votes, and if in all there were not 6000, declared that nothing had been done. This seems on the whole most probable. It is not clear that a plurality out of 6000 decided the ostracism of one who had been voted upon.]

[318139] See the Laws of New Plymouth, published by Authority, Boston, 1836, pp 41 and 128.

[318223] In Letter VIII. of Silas Steadfast (believed to have been George S. Hillard) en the proposed change of the constitution of Massachusetts, it is said: “In point of fact, no governor of Massachusetts was ever chosen by a majority of all the existing votes.“

[318480] In November, 1853, when great excitement about the new constitution existed in Massachusetts, the vote for governor (who was voted for at the same time) stood thus:

[318646] which resembles closely the vote of 1851.

[318689] In dividing by four I reduce the number of qualified voters in the United States too much, as will appear from the following table, abstracted from the American Census of 1850, and kindly furnished me by Mr. De Bow, at present superintendent of the census:

[318947] This gives an average ratio of 3.784. But this table shows the proportion of white males of twenty years and upwards, while a person acquires the right of voting with his twenty-first year only. It will be, therefore, pretty correct, if I take one-fourth of the whole white population. In several states colored persons go to the polls. If they were counted, it would reduce the proportion of actual voters to the number of qualified voters; but I am willing to take one-fourth only.

[319432] I am aware that, apparently, Votare has not been used in Low Latin for voting. Du Cange says that Votum was used in the middle ages for suffrage, but Votare for Vovere, Spondere. As it is, however, no uncommon case in the English language to have a noun and an adjective which is not derived directly from the former but from an intermediate though “missing” verb, which would be derived from the noun, did it exist, I feel sure the reader will permit me to use the term Votant, in a language in which brevity is often considered to cover logical and etymological sins.

[320003] See the preamble to the constitution proclaimed by Louis Napoleon

[320070] On the 10th of December, 1848, when the first French president, for four years, was voted for:

[320166] France contained, in the year 1846, 35,400,486 inhabitants; consequently, in 1848 there were about 9,000,000 of authorized voters; and 7,327,345 having voted, about 80 in 100 went to the poll, according to this statement. Yet it must be supposed that the eagerness to go to the ballot-box was, in that year, much greater than after the coup d'état.

[320516] The reader cannot fail to remember here the constitution proposed by Mad. de Staël for France, after the Restoration, and which was to consist of two paragraphs only, namely, of one declaring all Frenchmen to be government officers, and of another, providing that every government officer should have a salary.

[320828] An inaccuracy of terms has in the case of the veto power created much confusion. The ancient tribune had the privilege of vetoing, and, a so-called vetoing power being ascribed to the chief magistrate of modern constitutional states, people are apt to confound the two, and attack or defend them on common grounds. Yet the two differ materially. The Roman tribune [could prevent the passage of a law and of a decree of the senate by his intercession or veto, and he could by his auxilium, as the magistrate originally of the plebs, obstruct acts of magistrates judged by him to be adverse to the interests of the plebs, (and afterwards of the populus,) even to the extent of arresting them. This last was their original power, in aid of which their inviolability was of importance.] But the modern veto has nothing to do with the law once passed; it amounts to nothing more than the withholding of one necessary ingredient to pass a bill into a law. In governments where the crown has the concurrent or sole initiative, either house, whose consent is necessary in order to make a law, may be said to have the veto power against the crown with the same propriety with which we call the power, in our president, of withholding his approval a vetoing power. The president can never interrupt the operation of a law once made a law. In the case of pardoning, however, the power actually amounts to a tribunitial veto. There the executive, or whoever may possess the pardoning privilege, actually stops the ordinary operation of the law. A man has been laboriously tried and sentenced according to the course minutely laid down by the law, and another power steps in, not according to a prescribed course or process of law, but by a pure privilege left to his own individual judgment, and says: I prohibit; and the due and regular course of law is interrupted accordingly. This is vetoing power in its fullest sense. See on the Veto, in chap. xvii. pp. 200, 201, 202, of this work.

[322806] Voyage en Perse, London, 1686-1715.

[322843] Demosthenes against Timocrates.

[322876] Cicero in Verrem 7.

[322897] Des Lois Pénales.

[322916] Crimes and Punishments, chap. 46, on Pardons; English Translation, 1807

[322989] At the beginning of 1858 it appeared from certain documents published in California, that a petition to the governor, numerously signed by citizens of Monterey, to pardon one Jose Anastasia, under the sentence of death, claimed the pardon on the ground that Jose was the only fiddler in Monterey that understood properly to play for dancing.

[323332] Lord Mansfield is reported justly to have remarked to George HI., who wished to save the Rev. Dr. Dodd from the gallows, to which he had been sentenced for forgery: “If Dr. Dodd does not suffer the just sentence of the law, the Perreaus may be said to have been murdered.” Holliday's Life of Lord Mansfield, London, 1797, p. 149. The Perreaus were apothecaries of very high standing, but had been hanged for forgery, in spite of the most weighty petitions.

[323790] This unhallowed abuse has been raised into a law by Sir George Grey's Expatriation Law, passed in 1847, according to which convicts who behave well shall be pardoned after the lapse of two-thirds of the imprisonment to which they had been originally sentenced, provided they will leave the country.

[324090] Translated, with many additions, by Francis Lieber, Philadelphia, 1833.

[324163] While these sheets are passing through the press, the papers report that the governor of a large state has pardoned thirty criminals, among whom were some of the worst character, at one stroke, on leaving the gubernatorial chair. What a legacy to the people! Lord Brougham said that the only aim of counsel for the prisoner was to get him clear, no matter what the consequences might be. If all the lawyers acted on this saying, and all the executives as the mentioned governor, Justice might as well shut up her halls, and the people save the expenses which they incur for the administration of justice. It is paying too dear for a farce, which is not even entertaining.

[324836] In some of the worst governments, as those of Charles II., James II., and Louis XV., pardons were sold, but not by the pardoning ruler. It was the mistresses and courtiers who carried on the infamous traffic, though the monarchs knew about it.

[325081] House of Representatives, of Massachusetts, 1846, No. 63.

[325140] While the work was passing through the press, a document, published by the Massachusetts convention to amend the state constitution, reached the writer. It contains “A List of Pardons, Commutations and Remissions of Sentence, granted to Convicts by the Executive of the Commonwealth for the ten years including 1843 and 1852.” Unfortunately, this important paper, which contains the names of the persons, sentences, number of years sentenced, number of years remitted, and the crimes, does not give any classifications, summings-up, or comparisons with the number of sentences and unremitted punishments. It only exhibits the following recapitulation for 10 years from 1843 to 1852:

[325824] This paper will doubtless be made the basis of very instructive statistical calculations, and it is greatly to be desired that other states would follow. As it is, I am incapable of giving at this moment any other information. It would require other documents, which I have not about me. My remarks are not intended to reflect on the gentleman who has drawn up the paper; for it appears that the convention ordered the paper on the 18th of June, and on July 5th it was handed in. There was then no time to collect the materials for comparisons such as I have alluded to. What is now most important to know is the sum total of what sentences for what crimes were chiefly remitted or pardoned; for what reasons, what proportion pardons, &c, bear to unremitted sentences; for what crimes and what duration these sentences were inflicted; of what countries the pardoned, &c., convicts were; and what proportion the pardoned, &c., short sentences bear to pardoned, &c., long sentences or death.

[326815] A few examples may illustrate the truth too often forgotten: No farmer can determine the fitness of a given climate for the culture of a certain plant from the mean heat of the summer or the mean cold of the winter; for the mean heat does not indicate whether the weather is uniform or violently changeable; the mean interest at which money may have been obtainable in the course of the year does not indicate the truth, unless we know that it has not been pecuhaily low at some periods and extraordinarily high at others; the general criminality of a community cannot be calculated from the percentage of crime, unless we know that there has not been a peculiarly disturbing cause: for instance, one man who has murdered half a dozen of people in a comparatively small com munity; and the mischief produced by pardons cannot be calculated by the average percentage alone, if we do not know that among these pardons there were not some peculiarly arbitrary or peculiarly hostile to the ends of justice. A wholesale pardon may be warranted by the truest principles, and a single arbitrary pardon may shock the whole community.

[327942] The Constitution of the late French Republic of 1848 has this provision:

[328016] “Art. 55. He (the president of the republic) shall possess the right of pardon, but he shall not have the power to exercise the right until after he has taken the advice of the council of state. Amnesties shall only be granted by an express law. The president of the republic, the ministers, as well as all other persons condemned by the high court of justice, can only be pardoned by the national assembly.”

[328426] I do not consider it desirable that the pardoning power be given or imposed upon a political body already existing for other purposes, as in this case to the council of state; but I have cited this provision to show that the French at that time did nut consider the limitation of the pardoning power in the executive unfavorable to popular liberty.

[328776] A remarkable proof of this fact seems to have been afforded by the late constituent assembly of the state of New York; for, so far as we are aware, there was no debate on the question whether the pardoning power ought to be left uncontrolled in the hands of the executive. We can very well imagine that, after a discussion of this subject, a majority might have decided, erroneously in our opinion, that the pardoning privilege ought to remain where it was; but we cannot imagine that a large number of men could have possibly been from the beginning so unanimous upon so important a subject, that not even a discussion was elicited, had the pardoning been made a subject of any reflection at all. This is impossible in the nature of things. Men will differ in opinion upon almost any point, and would certainly have differed upon so weighty and delicate a subject, had their minds been directed to it.