WORK: Select Letters  (slug: unknown-select-letters-73fa24)

CHAPTER: 01-select-letters



[327110] But perhaps you ask me again how you are to accomplish this, involved as you are in the great distresses of this world. Be earnest in prayer and say to God the words you find in the Psalm, Bring thou me out of my distresses, a for then are these distresses ended when those desires are overcome. He who has answered your prayers and our prayers for you and has delivered you from the many great dangers of the warfare in which men visibly risk their bodies, in which the stake is but this life that must sooner or later come to an end, while the soul escapes destruction unless it be held in captivity by evil desires—He will Himself also answer your prayer for an invisible and spiritual victory over your inward and invisible foes, that is these same desires, and help you to use this world as not abusing it, b so that with its good things you may do good, instead of becoming evil. For these things are good in themselves and are not given to men save by Him Who has power over all things in heaven and in earth: and on the one hand they are bestowed upon the good, so that they may not be thought to be evil; on the other, they are bestowed upon the evil, so that they.may not be thought to be the great or supreme good; and likewise they are taken away from the good, in order to try them, and from the evil, in order to punish them.

[328451] Who is so ignorant, who so foolish, as not to see that the health of this mortal body and the strength of its corruptible members, and victory over men who are our foes, and honour and temporal power and all other earthly blessings, are bestowed upon both the good and the evil and are taken away from both the good and the evil? But the health of the soul, along with the immortality of the body, and the strength of righteousness and victory over the desires that are our foes, and glory and honour and peace for evermore, are bestowed upon the good alone. These things, then, love and desire and seek by every possible means. To secure them and hold them fast, give alms, pour forth prayers, practise fasting as much as you can without harming your body; but love not those earthly blessings, however much you may abound in them. Make such use of them that you do many good deeds by them and no single evil deed because of them. For all such things will pass away, but good deeds do not pass away, even those which are done with the aid of the good things that pass away.

[329527] If you had not a wife, I should tell you what we said to you already at Tubunae, that you should live in the holy state of continence; to that I should add what we then forbade you to do, namely, that you should withdraw from your military labours as far as is possible without endangering the peace of mankind, and obtain the leisure to follow that quiet life you then expressed your desire to follow, in the community of the holy, where the soldiers of Christ a contend in silence, not with the purpose of taking men's lives, but of conquering principalities and powers and spiritual wickedness, a that is, the devil and his angels. b For these are the enemies whom the holy vanquish, enemies they cannot see; and yet they vanquish the enemies they cannot see by vanquishing the objects of their senses. But to that kind of life I am prevented from urging you, for your wife stands in the way, and without her consent you cannot adopt a life of continence; because, although you had no right to marry her after what you said at Tubunae, yet she became your wife in all innocence and single-mindedness, knowing nothing of your declaration. Yet would that you could persuade her to continence, so that with nothing in your way you could render unto God what you know you owe Him! But if you cannot arrange that with her, preserve at least your conjugal chastity and ask God, Who can bring you out of your distresses, to grant that you may be able to do sooner or later what you find impossible now. But yet, in order to love God, you must give up loving the world; in your warfare (if you have still to be engaged in it) keep the faith and ensue peace; use this world's goods to do good deeds, and to obtain this world's goods do not do evil deeds—in these duties a wife is not a hindrance, or ought not to be.

[331339] I have written thus to you, my beloved son, at the bidding of the love wherewith I love you, not in the way of this world, but in God's way. And when I recall to mind the words of Scripture, Reprove a wise man and he will love thee; reprove a fool and he will hate thee more, c I had to think of you as surely not a fool, but a wise man.

[331678] Brother Paul has arrived back safely; he reports that his affairs have been considered favourably; the Lord will grant that this may be the last of them. He sends you hearty greetings and gives us the joyful news about Gavinianus, that having secured deliverance, by God's mercy, from that case of his, he is now not only a Christian but has become a very admirable member of the Church,b having received baptism last Easter, and professing in his heart and with his mouth c the grace that was bestowed on him. I could never express the greatness of my longing for him, but you know how dear he is to me. The town physician,d Dioscurus, has also become a Christian and joined the Church, having received grace at the same time. I must tell you how it came about, for one so stiff-necked and sharp-tongued could have been subjugated only by a miracle.

[332530] His daughter, an only child, the pride of his life, was ill, and she reached a point when the recovery of her bodily health was quite despaired of, and her own father gave her up. The story goes (and its truth is vouched for by the fact that even before the return of brother Paul it was told me by Count Peregrinus,a an admirable man and a thorough Christian, who received baptism at the same time as they did)—the story goes then that the old man finally turned to implore the pity of Christ and bound himself by a vow to become a Christian, if he saw her out of danger. That prayer was granted, but in spite of that he neglected to fulfil his vow. But his hand was still high. b For suddenly he is smitten with blindness and it immediately occurred to him why that had happened. He cried out. confessing his fault, and made another vow that, if he received back his sight, he would fulfil his earlier vow. He received it back, he fulfilled his vow. And still his hand was high.5 He had not memorized c the Creed, or perhaps had refused to memorize it, and had offered the excuse that he could not. Let God be judge. But just after the completion of the ceremony of his admission, he fell into a paralytic seizure affecting many, if not all, of his members. Then, being warned in a dream, he confessed in writing that he had been told this had befallen him for the reason that he had failed to repeat the Creed. After that confession the use of all his limbs was restored to him. saving only his tongue. Yet he confessed on paper that in spite of that seizure he had learned the Creed and still retained it in his memory. And thus was destroyed in him all the scurrility which, as you know, was a great blemish on his natural kindness and made him. when he mocked Christians, a very sacrilegious man. What shall I say save Let us sing a hymn to the Lord and highly exalt Him for ever a? Amen.

[334426] From my holy brethren and fellow-bishops Urbanus and Novatus c I have learned of your character and high position; one of them had the good fortune to make your acquaintance in the town of Hilari near Carthage and recently at Sicca, the other at Sitifis. Through them it has been brought about that I too cannot regard you as unknown to me. For the fact that my bodily weakness and the twofold cold, of winter and of old age, does not permit me to have converse with you face to face, has not prevented me from seeing you, for one of these friends, when present with me on a visit he was good enough to make, revealed to me the countenance of your heart, if not of your body, and the other did so by letter, so that I have all the greater pleasure in seeing the more inward man. This countenance of yours both you and I, by God's favour, behold with joy in the Holy Gospel, as in a mirror, where the words are written that were uttered by Him who is truth: Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God. a

[335461] Those men are indeed great and they have their own honour who as warriors display not only great courage but also (what is the source of more genuine praise) great fidelity, and by their toils and perils, with the assistance of God's protection and aid, subdue foes before invincible, and procure peace for the state and for the tranquillized provinces. But it is a greater glory to slay war with a word than men with the sword and to gain and maintain peace by means of peace, not by means of war. For even those who fight are certainly seeking peace, if they are good men, but seeking it by the shedding of blood, while you have been sent to prevent the seeking of anyone's blood. Others are therefore under the necessity of taking life, while you have the felicity of sparing it. Wherefore rejoice, my deservedly illustrious and most distinguished lord and son warmly cherished in Christ, in the great and genuine blessing that is yours and enjoy it in the Lord to Whom you owe it that you are what you are and that you have undertaken the task it is yours to accomplish. May God " strengthen that which He hath wrought for us through you"a! Accept this my greeting and be good enough to repay it with one from you. As I am informed by the letter of my brother Novatus, he has taken steps to make your learned Excellency acquainted with me also in my writings. If, then, you have read the works he gave you, I too have become known to your more inward perceptions, nor would you, I imagine, find me very unsatisfactory, if your reading has been done with greater inclination to love than to harshness. It is not asking very much, but it will be very much appreciated, if in return for my writings, both this one and those others, you send me a single letter. I greet too with all due affection the pledge of peace,b whom you have been happy enough to receive by the favour of the Lord our God.

[337359] You wanted a reply from me as evidence that I have received your letter with joy, so, see, I send you one. And yet in a reply, be it this one or any other, it is impossible for me, whether writing briefly or at great length, to make that evident, for neither a few words nor many can be evidence of what words cannot make evident at all. And for my part, though I have the gift of copious expression, I have only a limited power of se]f-expression; yet I would certainly not admit that any man, however gifted with the power of expression, could describe in a letter, no matter how good or how long, the feelings awakened in me by your letter; it is quite beyond my power, and he cannot observe them within me as I do myself. It only remains for me, then, to give you the evidence you wanted to have in such a way that in my words you may feel evidence of what they cannot express. So what shall I say but this, that I was very, very pleased with your letter? The repetition of that word is not so much a repetition as a constant utterance, but since the perpetual utterance of it is quite impossible, I have done the only thing possible by at least repeating it. In this way, perhaps, things, may be uttered that completely defy utterance.

[338601] At this point, if anyone were to ask what after all it was in your letter that pleased me so very much, if it was its eloquence, I shall say No; he will perhaps reply, Then it was the praise of yourself, and to that too I shall say No; not for the reason that your letter was without these, for it was eloquent enough very notably to reveal the fact that your natural endowments are of the finest quality and that your training in the literary disciplines has been good; and, further, your letter was full of praises of myself. And so, someone may say, things of that kind give you no pleasure? It is the other way round, for, as someone has remarked, my heart is not made of horn, a that I either do not feel such things or feel them without pleasure. I do take pleasure in even such things as these, but, alongside that which made me, as I said, very pleased, what are such things after all? Your eloquence does give me pleasure, so gravely sweet and so sweetly grave it is: with the praise of myself. however, though certainly I neither find pleasure in every kind nor from every man. but only in such as you consider me worthy to receive and from men such as you are, who for Christ's sake love His servants—even with the praise of myself contained in your letter I cannot deny that I was very well pleased.

[339914] Let serious-minded and experienced men consider what opinion they should form of the well-known Themistocles a (if I remember his name aright), who at a banquet, on refusing to play on the lyre, a usual practice among the distinguished and learned men of Greece, and being on that account deemed a less cultured person, and scorning all that kind of amusement, is said, when asked what he did take pleasure in hearing, to have made answer, My own praises. Let such men consider what they think the aim and intention of this remark was or what was the intention of the speaker. He was. indeed, a very high-minded man, in the eyes of this world, for when the further question was asked him, What then do you know? he replied, How to make a small state great. For myself, however, I hold that the saving of Ennius that All mortal men are eager to be praised. b is partly to be approved of, partly to be taken as a warning. For just as truth is to be sought after, as being without a doubt the only thing deserving of praise, even if praise be withheld, so is the easily and furtively developing pride in the praise of men to be shunned. And that is the case when, on the one hand, those good qualities that are worthy of being praised are thought not worth possessing unless a man is praised by his fellows, or, on the other hand, when a man desires great praise for things which are worthier of either slight praise or even censure. Hence Horace was much more cautious than Ennius in saying a:

[341407] Swell you with lust for praise? Then read thrice o'er Some book whose charms are potent to restore.

[341508] You see he thought that the swelling arising from the lust for human praise was to be, as it were, charmed away, like some serpent's bite, by healing words. The Good Master has accordingly taught us by His apostle not to live right and do right with the object of being praised by men, that is. not to make the praise of men the motive of our doing right, and yet He has taught us for men's sake to seek men's praise. b For when good men are praised, the praise confers a benefit on those who bestow it, not on those who receive it. For as far as concerns the good, the fact that they are good is sufficient, but the others, whose interest it is to imitate the good, are to be congratulated when they bestow praise on the good, since by doing so they show' that they are pleased by those whom they praise in sincerity. So the apostle says in a certain passage, If I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ, c and he says in another passage, Please all men in all things, even as I please all men in all things d; but he adds the reason, Not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many that they may be saved. See what he sought in men's praise, of which he says further, Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report: if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things. Those things, which ye have both learned and received and heard and seen in me. do; and the God of peace shall be with you. a So the other things he mentioned above he included under the word virtue, saying, If there be any virtue; what he meant by the words, Whatsoever things are of good report, he followed up by the single, appropriate phrase, If there be any praise. So his words, If I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ, are to be understood in this way, as if he had said, If I were doing the good I do with the motive of receiving human praise, I should be ' swelling with the lust for praise.' " The apostle wanted therefore to please all men, and found joy in pleasing those whom he edified in Christ by receiving their praise, not those whose praise made him swell within himself. Why should I not therefore find pleasure in being praised by you, when you are (unless I am mistaken in you) a good man and bestow your praise upon the things which you admire and which it is profitable and wholesome for you to admire, even if they be lacking in me? This benefits not only you, but me too, for if they are lacking in me, it is wholesome for me to be shamed and inflamed with desire to acquire them. And so the qualities I recognize in your praises as my own I rejoice in possessing and in having you love them and me for their sake; those on the other hand that I fail to recognize as mine I yearn to acquire, not only in order to possess them for myself, but also to keep those who have a genuine love for me from being deluded when they praise me.

[344554] See how much I have said, and I have not yet said what it is in your letter that delighted me far more than your eloquence, far more than your praise of myself. What else do you think it is, honoured Sir, than this, that I have gained the friendship of a man of your character, even without seeing you—if I ought to use the words without seeing you, when I have seen your mind, if not your body, in your letter; in it I gained an impression of you not, as before, from the testimony of my brethren, but for myself. Already, indeed, I had been told what manner of man you were, but I had not experienced what kind of man you were towards me. But I am sure that from this friendship of yours even my praises (which delight me in a way I have already sufficiently spoken of) will redound all the more richly to the profit of the Church, since you possess and study and admire and commend even my labours in defence of the Gospel against the remnant of ungodly demon-worshippers to such an extent that, in proportion to your high station. I gain all the greater reputation; illustrious yourself, you add lustre to their lowliness, and celebrated yourself, you celebrate them, and wherever you see that they can do good, you will certainly not allow them to remain unknown. If you ask me how I know that, it is as such that you have shown yourself to me in your letter. See now from this how great delight your letter was able to give me, if, with your good opinion of me, you think how delighted I am by gains for Christ. And when you inform me that you yourself, who have had the good fortune, as you say in your letter, to acquire Christian rights from your parents, your grandparents, and even your remotest ancestry, were yet helped by my efforts in the contest with pagan rites as by nothing else, can I think it a small matter, the amount of good that through your commendation and circulation my writings can bestow on others, and they numerous and famous, and through them easily and profitably on other people in need of some such message? Or with that thought in mind can I be imbued with the satisfaction of joys that are only slight or commonplace?

[346712] Since then I could not express in words the extent of the delight your letter gave me. I have spoken of that in it which was the source of my delight, and now I leave you to conjecture for yourself what I have been unable sufficiently to tell, that is, the delight it gave me. Take then, my son, take, excellent Sir, Christian that you are not on the surface only, but with Christian love—take, I repeat, those books of my Confessions that you asked for; in them behold me. so that you praise me not beyond what I am; in them give your belief to me, not to others who speak of me; in them observe me and see what I was of myself, by myself, and if anything in me gives you pleasure, join me in praising for it Him Whom I desired to have praise from me, and not myself; for He hath made us and not we ourselves a—indeed we had destroyed ourselves, but He Who made us, re-made us. And when in them you find me, pray for me that I may not suffer defeat,b but may be made complete; pray, my son, pray. I realize what I am saying; I know what I am asking; let it not seem to you unfitting and beyond your merits; you will deprive me of great assistance, if you do it not. Pray for me, not only you, but all others who have learned to love me from your lips; inform them of this my request, or rather, if you esteem me highly, consider that my request is a command; in any case, grant my request or carry out my command: pray for me. Read God's letters and you will find that the apostles themselves, the leaders a of the flock, requested this from their children or enjoined it on their hearers. For myself, since you make the same request from me for yourself, He Who answers prayer sees to what extent I am doing it, and saw to what extent I was doing it even before; but in this matter do you show me an equal return of love. We are your overseers, and you are God's flock. Reflect and see that our dangers are greater than yours, and pray for us (for this profits both us and you) that we may render a good account of you to the Chief Shepherd b and Head of us all and that we may likewise escape this world's allurements, more dangerous than its afflictions, unless when its peace makes for that for which the apostle warned us to pray, that is, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. c For if godliness and honesty be wanting, what is quietness and peaceableness from those and the other evils of the world but an opportunity for self-indulgence and destruction, either by inviting to it or by assisting towards it? So, then, that we may obtain this " quiet and peaceful life in all godliness and honesty " which my prayers ask for you, let your prayers ask it for me, wherever you are, wherever we are; for He is everywhere, Whose we are. d

[349491] I am sending other books as well, though you did not ask for them; I did not want to do only what you asked and nothing more. They are On Faith in Things Unseen. On Patience. On Continence, On Providence, and a bulky book On Faith, Hope and Charity. If you read all these while in Africa, send me your opinion of them; either send it to me or send it to a place from which it can be sent to me by my lord, the Senior Aurelius. a Yet wherever you are, I hope to receive letters from you and to send some to you while I am able. I have been very glad to receive the materials you were kind enough to send to the assistance both of my health, though it is only of the body, since you want me to suffer no impediment in the devotion of my time to God, and also of our library,b so that we may have the means of either preparing books or repairing them. May the Lord recompense you, both in this life and in the life to come, with those blessings He has prepared c for such as He has willed that you should be! I beg you to convey my greetings once again, as you did before, to the pledge of peace d entrusted to you and very dear to us both.

[350630] If perchance those who are Catholic Christians among you have sent me a letter of this kind, my only surprise is that it was in the name of the municipal senate a instead of their own. But if, in very truth, you all or almost all of the municipal senate have deigned to write to me, I am surprised that you have written the words To Father Augustine and Salutation in the Lord; for to my great grief I am well aware of your superstitious devotion to idols, against which idols it is easier to close your temples b than your hearts, or rather those idols are more enclosed in your hearts than they are in your temples. But perhaps you have at last given wise consideration and thought to that salutary life which is in the Lord and in which you wanted to give me salutation. For if it be not so, I ask you, praiseworthy lords and well-beloved brethren, what harm have I done to your Benevolences, what offence have I given, that you should think fit to mock at me by the superscription of your letter instead of honouring me?

[351656] For when I read the words you wrote, To Father Augustine, eternal salutation in the Lord, I was suddenly uplifted with such hope as to believe that you had already turned to this Lord and this eternal salvation, or were through my ministry desirous of turning. But when I read the rest, my spirit was chilled; I inquired, however, from the bearer of the letter whether you were already Christians or were anxious to become so. After learning from his answer that you were in no way changed, I was the more deeply grieved that you thought fit not only to spurn from you the name of Christ to which you see the whole world already in subjection, but even to make mock of it in my person. For I was unable to think of any other Lord in whom a bishop could be addressed by you as Father, except the Lord Christ; and if there were any doubt on this point about the meaning of the words you used, it would be removed by the closing sentence of your letter, in which you plainly put the words, We pray, my lord, that always in company with your clergy you may rejoice in God and His Christ for many years. After reading it all and pondering it, what else could I, what else can any man, think than that it was written either as a genuine expression of the writers' mind or with an intention to deceive? But if what you wrote is a genuine expression of your mind, who has barred your way to this truth? Who has strewn it with sharp thorns? Who has out of enmity set up steep rocks against you? Who, finally, has shut the church door in your face when you sought to enter, that you refuse to be partakers with us of that same salvation in that same Lord by whom you gave us salutation? But if it was with the intention to deceive and to mock that you wrote what you did, is that indeed the way in which to lay upon me the conduct of your affairs, not exalting with due honour the name of Him through Whom it is possible for me to do anything, but having the effrontery to bandy it about with insulting flattery?

[353660] You must understand, my dear friends, that it is with unspeakable quaking of the heart on your account that I say this to you, for I realize how much greater will be the seriousness and the doom of your case before God, if what I say to you has no effect. There is nothing that has happened to the human race in past times and has been recorded and handed down to us by our ancestors, nothing either that we experience and hand down to our posterity, that Holy Scripture has not spoken of, as far as it pertains to the seeking and the holding of true religion; everything comes to pass exactly as it was foretold it would come to pass. You plainly see the Jewish people torn from their abode and dispersed and scattered throughout almost the whole world; the origin of that people and its development and the loss of its realm and its dispersion everywhere—everything has happened just as it was foretold. You plainly see that the word of God and the law that came forth from that same people through Christ (Who was miraculously born of them) has laid fast hold upon the faith of all the nations; all these things, as we may read, were predicted just as we see them. You plainly see many cut off from the root of the Christian society, which through the sees of the apostles and the succession of bishops is spread abroad in unmistakable diffusion throughout the world, who yet boast, under cover of the Christian name, of the mere outward likeness they bear to their origin, like withered branches, which we term heresies and schisms; it was all foreseen, foretold and put down in writing. You plainly see some of the temples of idols fallen into ruin and not restored, some cast down, some closed, some converted to other uses,a and the idols themselves either smashed to pieces or burned or destroyed; and you see how the powers of this world, who at one time for the sake of their idols persecuted the Christian people, are vanquished and subdued by Christians who did not take up arms but laid down their lives, and have now turned their attacks and their laws against the very idols for whose sake they were in the habit of slaying Christians; and you see the most eminent dignitary of this noble Empire lay aside his crown and bow in supplication before the tomb of the fisherman Peter. a

[355958] All these things were long, long ago foretold to be coming to pass by the testimony of Holy Scripture, which has now come into the hands of everyone: all of them have happened, to our joy and to the greater strengthening of our faith as we find the Holy Scripture foretold them with a more imposing authority. Are we then, I ask you, to imagine that it is God's judgement alone, which those same Books foretell to their readers as deciding between the believing and the unbelieving—are we then to imagine that this judgement of God's alone will not come about, when all those other things came about just as they were foretold? Yea, verily, just as they all came about, so it too will come. Nor will there be any man of our times who at that judgement will be able to put forward any defence for being an unbeliever, when the name of Christ is on every man's lips: the righteous invokes it for justice, and the perjurer for deceit and the king for rule and the soldier for battle and the husband for establishing his authority and the wife as a sign of her submission and the father for his commands and the son for his obedience, the master for his lordship and the servant for his service, the humble man for piety and the proud man for ambition, the rich man when he gives away and the poor man when he receives, the drunkard in his cups and the beggar at the gate, and the good man that he may do good and the bad man that he may deceive, both the Christian worshipper and the pagan time-server—all repeat the name of Christ, and with what purpose and what lips they repeat it, to that same Christ, whose name they repeat, they shall most assuredly render an account. a

[357633] There is an invisible something from which, as a creator and first cause, all that we see derives its being, supreme, eternal, unchangeable and inexpressible save only to itself. There is a something by which that supreme majesty utters and declares itself, the Word, not inferior to its begetter and utterer, by which He Who begets the Word reveals Himself. There is a certain holy thing, the sanctifier of everything that is begotten in sanctity, which inseparably and undividedly unites that unchangeable Word, through which the First Principle utters itself, with the First Principle, which utters itself in the Word which is its equal. Who could contemplate with perfectly tranquil and pure mind this whole, which I have attempted to express without expressing it and by expressing it not to express, and from that contemplation draw blessedness, and lose and forget self in that object of contemplation, and press forward to that which, once seen, makes man hold himself as nothing—which means to be clothed with immortality and to lay hold upon that eternal salvation, in which you think fit to give me salutation—who could do this, save he who, confessing his sins, has laid low all the empty swellings of his pride and prostrated himself in meekness and humility to receive God as his teacher?

[358937] Since then we have first to be reduced from the vanity of pride to humility, so that rising thence we may acquire real exaltation, it was impossible for us to have communicated to us this spirit (the more glorious for its very gentleness) whereby our ungovernableness is subdued by persuasion instead of by force, had not this Word—through Whom God the Father reveals Himself to the angels,a Who is His strength and wisdom, Whom the human heart, blinded by the desire for things visible, was unable to perceive—condescended to act out His part in human form and exhibit His being in such a way as to make mankind more afraid of being uplifted by the pride of man than of being brought low by the example of God. So the Christ Who is preached throughout the world is not a Christ Who is adorned with an earthly kingdom, nor a Christ rich in earthly possessions, nor a Christ shining with any earthly splendour, but Christ crucified. b This was a matter for ridicule at first by proud nations and still is to a remnant, but it was a matter for faith first to a few, now to nations, for then according to the faith of the few and in spite of the ridicule of the nations, when Christ crucified was preached, the lame walked, the dumb spoke, the deaf heard, the blind saw, and the dead rose again. c Thus at last conviction was brought to the pride of the world that nothing in the world itself was more potent than divine humility, so that under the protection of that divine example the most wholesome human humility may find shelter against the scornful assaults of pride.

[360509] Awake at last from your slumbers, ye men of

[360554] Madaura, my brethren and my fathers! a This opportunity of writing to you has been furnished me by God. As far as was possible, I stood by and gave my assistance, as God willed, in this affair of brother Florentius, who brought your letter to me; but the affair was such that even without my aid it could very easily have been carried through, for almost all the men of that family who are at Hippo know Florentius and deeply lament his bereavement. But your having sent a letter to me made it not presumptuous in me to write to you and, availing myself of the opportunity you provided, to say something to idol-worshippers about Christ. But I beseech you, if your naming of Him in your letter was not a vain gesture, that what I have written to you may not be in vain. If you wanted to make mock of me, fear Him Who on being at first condemned was made mock of by the proud world, which now awaits Him in subjection as Judge. For my heart's desire for you, expressed as well as I could in these pages, will be a witness against you at His judgement, when He will confirm those who believe in Him and confound those who do not. May the one true God free you from all the vanity of this world, my praiseworthy lords and well-beloved brethren, and turn you to Himself.

[361822] What you are to do with those who refuse to comply requires more consideration than how you can show them that what they are doing is unlawful. But at present the letter of your Holiness has found me extremely busy and at the same time the bearer's great haste to return has not allowed me either to make no reply to you or to give an adequate answer to the problems on which you asked my advice. Still, I should not like you to make any over-hasty decision about the forbidding of ornaments of gold or finery, except that those who are neither married nor desirous of being married ought to be thinking how they may please God. For that class of people think of worldly things, how they may, if they are husbands, please their wives, or if wives, please their husbands b; the one exception is that it is not becoming in women, even in those who are married, to uncover their hair, since the apostle bids them cover the whole head. c But as for painting the face d so that it may appear ruddier or fairer, this is immoral deceit.

[362853] I am quite sure that even their own husbands do not want to be so taken in, and they are the only people for whom women should be allowed to adorn themselves, and that as a concession, not as a command. For not only is lying paint no real adornment of Christian men and women, nor yet is the ostentation of gold and finery; but a good character is.

[363203] It is an accursed superstition to wear amulets,a among which must be reckoned also the earrings b that men wear on the top part of the ear on one side; they are employed not to please men, but to do homage to devils. Who could expect to find in the Scriptures individual prohibitions of every kind of ungodly superstition, when the apostle says in general terms, I would not that ye should have fellowship with devils, c and again, For what concord hath Christ with Belial?,d unless in naming Belial and forbidding in general terms fellowship with devils, he perchance allowed Christians to sacrifice to Neptune, because we do not read that any prohibition was made of Neptune specifically. e

[363897] Meanwhile, let those unhappy people be warned that if they refuse to comply with these more wholesome counsels, they must at least refrain from defending their acts of irreverence, from fear of involving themselves in greater guilt. Yet what are we to do with them, if they are afraid to put off their earrings and are not afraid to receive the body of Christ while wearing the devil's badge?

[364291] I cannot accept responsibility for the ordaining of one who was baptized in the Donatist party; it is one thing to do it if you are compelled, and another thing to advise you to do it.

[364477] On the problem of Fate and Chance, which is seriously perturbing your mind, as I noticed when I was with you and am now assured in a more gratifying and definite manner by your letter, I ought to reply to you at considerable length; the Lord will enable me to furnish you with such an explanation as He knows will be best suited for you and for your spiritual welfare. For it is no slight evil that perverted opinions not only induce men by the allurement of pleasure to commit sin, but lead them away from the remedy of confession to a defence of their sin.

[365037] Let me, however, at once and in a word assure you of this, that all legislation and all rules, all repressions, all commendations, censures, exhortations, menaces, rewards, punishments, and all other things by which the human race is controlled and governed, are utterly overthrown and subverted and left devoid of any particle of justice, if the cause of sinning is not the will. How much more legitimate and right, therefore, is it for us to reject the errors of the astrologers,a than to be forced to condemn and repudiate the divine laws or even the supervision of our own households. The astrologers themselves do not do so, for when one of them has sold his silly horoscopes to wealthy persons and turns his eyes away from the ivory tablets to the management and supervision of his own household, he immediately reproves his wife, not with objurgations only but even with blows, if he finds her not to say engaged in fro ward dalliance, but even looking too much out of the window. Yet if she were to say to him: Why do you beat me? Beat Venus, if you can, for it is the influence of her planet that makes me do this, his concern then is not what empty jargon he can concoct for the deception of strangers, but what just lashes he can inflict for the correction of his own household. b

[366330] When a man, then, upon receiving censure, throws the responsibility on Fate and therefore declines to accept the blame on the ground that it was under the compulsion of Fate that he did the action which is condemned, let him come to himself again and observe this same principle in dealing with those attached to him; let him refrain from chastising a servant who steals; let him utter no complaint of an abusive son and no threats to an offensive neighbour. Would he be acting justly in doing any of these things, if all those who do him some injury are driven to perform such actions, not by any fault of their own, but by Fate? If, however, from his personal rights and his responsibility as the head of a household, he exhorts to good those persons who for the time being are under his authority, deters them from doing evil and commands them to carry out his will, honours those who obey his nod, punishes those who set him at naught, renders thanks to the obliging, and hates those who are ill-disposed—shall I expect him to argue against Fate, when I find him proclaiming, not in words but in deeds, such convictions as to make him almost appear to be breaking with his own hands all the tables of the astrologers over their own heads?

[367574] So then, if these few remarks do not appease your thirst for information and you desire on this subject a book that will take a longer time to read, you must await with patience until I have a free interval, and ask God to be pleased to grant me both the leisure and the ability to satisfy your mind on this question. Yet my eagerness will be increased, if your charity does not grudge to write often and remind me, and also to reply informing me what you think about this letter.

[368056] The girl about whom your Holiness wrote to me is so minded, that if she were once of full age, wise nor ought I to do otherwise), so far was he from being reluctant to agree to it that he actually expressed his delight, but he regretted that they had no written instructions on the matter, as their friendly relations not unreasonably entitled him to expect. For perhaps the girl's mother will come forward, though she has not come forward as yet, and her wishes about the handing over of her daughter naturally have, in my opinion, precedence over all others, unless the girl is by that time of an age to have a more legitimate claim to choose for herself what she wants. Take this point too into consideration, my true friend, that if supreme and undivided power over her marriage were entrusted to me and she herself, if of age and desirous of marrying, left me free, with God as my Judge, to give her hand to the one I desired, then I declare, and declare with sincerity, my satisfaction with the condition you suggest, provided that, because of God my Judge, I should not be repudiating a better one; but whether a better one will turn up, is naturally uncertain. So your Charity will see how many considerations conspire to make it quite impossible for me at present to promise her to anyone.

[369356] I have torn myself away from my many preoccupations (or rather have slipped away and, so to speak, stolen myself away from them) in order to write to you, my oldest friend; and yet I did not really have you as a friend until I clove to you in Christ. You know, to be sure, the definition of friendship given by Tully, the greatest master of the Roman tongue, as he has been called a; he said, and said very truly, Friendship is agreement, with kindliness and affection, on things human and divine. b At one time, my dear friend, you were in agreement with me about things human, when it was my wish to enjoy them as the common people do, and by your encouragement you stretched my sails to the eager pursuit of things whereof I am now ashamed—or rather, along with the rest of my admirers of that time (and you were among the chief of them) you filled the sails of my ambitions with the breeze of praise. On the other hand, our friendship was defective on the side of things divine, of which at that period no gleam of truth had come to me, though they form the more important half of that definition; it included only the human things, not those as well that are divine, although it was agreement with kindliness and affection.

[370586] And after I abandoned those desires, you with persistent kindliness desired that in earthly welfare I should do well and be successful with that material prosperity which the world is wont to wish for one, and so, because of this, you still to some extent shared with me this kindly and affectionate agreement on things human. So, now, how can I explain in words the joy I have of you, when he who was so long my friend in some kind of way, is at last my friend in a genuine way? For there has been added the agreement in things divine as well, since you, who formerly spent this temporal life with me in the most charming kindness, have now begun to be with me in the hope of life eternal. Now, indeed, even on things human there is no disagreement between us, for we weigh them in the knowledge of things divine, so as not to concede to them more than their measure most justly demands, nor yet to slight their Creator, the Lord of things heavenly and earthly, by throwing them away with undeserved contempt. It is on these grounds that those friends who are not in agreement about things divine cannot be in complete and genuine agreement about things human either; for of necessity one who has a contempt for things divine must hold a different opinion from what he should hold about things human, and anyone who does not love Him Who made man has not learned to love man aright. Hence I do not say that now you are more completely my friend, instead of being, as you were before, only partially so; but, as far as reason can show, you were not even partially so before, since the friendship you cherished with me then was not even genuine in things human: for, assuredly, you were not yet my comrade in those things divine by which the human things are rightly weighed. Partly it was that at that time I had no interest in them myself, partly that after I began to have a taste (however slight) for them, you still entertained for them a strong aversion.

[372547] I do not want you to feel annoyed or to think it absurd that at that time, when I was aflame with desire for this world's empty show, you were not yet my friend, although you seemed to have a great affection for me; for then I was not even a friend to myself, but an enemy instead. For I loved iniquity, and that saying that is written in the Holy Books is true, because divine: He that loveth iniquity hateth his own soul. a Hating then my own soul as I did, how could I have a true friend in one who wished me those things in which I was suffering myself to be my own enemy? But after that the kindness and love of God our Saviour b dawned upon me, not according to my merits, but according to His mercy, how could you, when you were a stranger to it, be my friend? That which could give me happiness was quite unknown to you, nor did you love me in that wherein I had already been made a friend (however poor) unto myself.

[373474] Thanks be therefore to the Lord, that He is good enough to make you a friend of mine now at last; for now we have that agreement, with kindliness and affection, about things human and divine c in Christ Jesus our Lord, Who is our real peace. In two commandments He has summed up all God's injunctions, saying: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul and with all thy mind and thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself; on these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets. d In the first of these is " agreement, with kindliness and affection " about things divine, in the second, about things human. If you are with me in holding these two commandments with tenacity, our friendship will be genuine and everlasting and it will join us not merely to each other but also to the Lord Himself.

[374306] That this may be so, I exhort you, my wise and honoured friend, now also to partake of the Sacraments available for those in full communion, for this would become one of your age a and be appropriate, in my opinion, to your character. Remember your remark to me when I was on the point of leaving you; you recalled that verse from one of Terence's comedies, but still, though from a comedy, very apposite and proper:

[374724] To-day now introduces a different life and demands a different character. b

[374801] If you were sincere in quoting it, as I have no right to doubt you were, you certainly are living now in such a way as to be worthy of receiving through the saving rite of baptism the remission of your past sins. There is none other at all, save the Lord Christ, to whom the human race can say:

[375097] Under Thy guidance, whatso tracks remain Of our old wickedness, once done away, Shall free the earth from never-ceasing fear. c

[375226] Virgil confessed to adopting this thought from the Cumaean, that is, the Sibylline, prophecy, and perhaps that seer too had had some message to her spirit about the only Saviour, which she had of necessity to confess.

[375445] This, my lord deservedly honoured and brother cherished in Christ and longed for, be it little or be it perchance much, I have at any rate written you, though in one way and another extremely engrossed in business. I long to receive a reply from you and to learn at any moment that you have entered your name among the candidates for baptism or are on the point of doing so. May the Lord God, in Whom you have put your trust, keep you, my lord deservedly honoured and brother cherished in Christ and longed for, both here and in the world to come!

[375994] After reading your Reverence's letter and asking its bearer the questions that remained to be asked, I have been very greatly grieved that you chose so to act towards your husband that the edifice of chastity which had already begun to be built up in him has, through his failure to persevere, toppled to the pitiful downfall of adultery. If after making to God a vow of chastity and already undertaking its observance in deed and in disposition, he had returned to his wife's body, his case would have been deplorable enough; but how much more deplorable is it now that he has plunged to deeper destruction, with such precipitate collapse into adultery, furious towards you, injurious to himself, as if his rage at you would be the more violent if he accomplished his own ruin! This great mischief has come about because you failed to treat him with the moderation you ought, for although by agreement you were no longer coming together in carnal intercourse, vet in all other things you ought to have shown the subjection of a wife to your husband in compliance with the marriage-bond, especially as you were both members of the body of Christ. b Indeed, if you, a believer, had had a husband who was an unbeliever, it would have been your duty to conduct yourself with submissiveness, as the Apostles enjoined, so as to win him to the Lord.

[377339] I leave out of account the fact that I know you took this chastity upon yourself before he consented, which was not according to sound doctrine, for he should not have been defrauded of the debt you owed him of your body, before his will too joined with yours in seeking that good which is above conjugal chastity. But perhaps you had not read or heard or meditated upon the apostle's words: It is good for a man not to touch a woman; nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife and let every woman have her own husband. Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence; and likewise also the wife unto the husband. The wife hath not power of her own body, but the husband; and likewise also the husband hath not power of his own body, but the wife. Defraud ye not one the other, except it be with consent for a time, that ye may give yourselves to prayer; and come together again that Satan tempt you not because of your incontinency. a According to these words of the apostle's, even if he had desired to practise chastity and you had not, he would be bound to render you due benevolence, and God would give him credit for chastity, since he would have been granting you marital intercourse through regard not for his own weakness but for yours, so as to prevent you from falling into the damnable sin of adultery. How much more fitting was it that you, who ought to have been in greater subjection, should give way to his desire in the rendering of this benevolence, so that he might not be led by the devil's tempting into adultery, since your desire for chastity would have been acceptable to God, as you were unable to carry it out for fear of driving your husband to destruction! I leave this fact, as I said, out of account, because after you had refused to consent to render him this conjugal benevolence he consented to the same bond of continence and lived for a long time in the greatest continence with you; and by consenting he absolved you from your sin in denying him carnal benevolence. So now in this problem of yours the question is not involved whether you ought to return to intercourse with your husband; for what you both with one consent vowed unto God, you both ought to have persevered unto the end in paying; even if he has fallen away from your resolution, do you at least persevere in it with the utmost fidelity. I should not be urging you to this course unless for the fact that he gave you his consent to that plan; for if you had never obtained his assent, no lapse of years would excuse you, but had you consulted me, however long afterwards, I should have made you no other answer than the saying of the apostle: The wife hath not power of her own body, but the husband. a By this power of his he had already allowed you to practise continence and undertook to practise it with you himself.

[380194] But this is the point which I am grieved you did not observe more carefully: you were bound to give way to him in your private conduct with all the greater humility and submission, since he had so devotedly followed your example and conceded you so much. For he had not ceased to be your husband because you had both agreed to abstain from carnal intercourse; instead of that, the tie that bound you to each other as husband and wife remained all the more holy because of the greater holiness of the resolutions you were with one accord carrying out. You had no right, therefore, to do anything with your garments, anything with your gold or silver or money or with any of your earthly property, without his approval, for fear of scandalizing a man who had joined you in vowing more important things to God and had continently refrained from what he had lawful authority to demand from your body.

[381092] Finally, it came about that when scorned he burst the bond of continence with which he had girt himself when loved, and from anger with you, did not hesitate to harm himself. For, as the bearer of your letter informed me, when he learned that you had given away everything, or nearly everything, that you possessed to two passing monks,a of some kind or other, as if it were alms you were giving to the poor, then he cursed them and you together, and thinking that they were the kind of men who creep into other people's houses, and not servants of God, and that they had led you captive b and plundered you, he was provoked to throw off the holy obligation he had undertaken along with you. For he was weak, and therefore, since you seemed the stronger in your common resolution, he required to be supported by your love and not disquieted by your obstinacy; even if he happened to be slower in being moved to greater generosity in giving those alms, he could have learned even that from you, had he not been exasperated by your unlooked-for extravagance, but won over to it by the compliance he expected from you; so even this that you did of yourself so indiscreetly, you would in harmonious affection have done together with much more deliberation, much more orderliness and more decency, and no blasphemy would have been directed at servants of God (if that is what those men really were, who accepted such large sums from a woman they did not know, another man's wife, in the absence of her husband and without his knowledge) and praise would have arisen to God from your works. In them your companionship would have been so trustful that you would jointly have embraced not only the strictest chastity, but also glorious poverty.

[382830] Now, however, by your ill-advised haste see what you have done. For although I were to think the best about those monks by whom he complains you were not edified but robbed, and were not readily to take the part of a man whose eye was confused by anger a against those who were perhaps God's servants, is the good you have done in refreshing the bodies of the poor by your over-generous alms as great as the evil you have done in subverting your husband's mind from his virtuous resolution? Or ought anyone's temporal welfare to have been more precious to you than his eternal welfare? Would not God have credited you with still richer alms, if, meditating a wider sphere of mercy, you had postponed the distribution of your wealth to the poor in order to avoid putting a stumbling-block in your husband's way and making him die to God? So, if you recall what you gained when you won your husband to the service of Christ with you in holier chastity, you can understand how much weightier is the loss with which you have been smitten through your almsgiving, which overturned his heart, than is the gain which you thought you were laying up in heaven. For if the breaking of bread for the hungry a has a great place there, how great must we believe to be there the place of the compassion by which a man is snatched from the devil, as a roaring lion seeking whom he may devour b!

[384211] Now, by this I do not mean that if our good works put a stumbling-block in anyone's way, we should imagine that we must cease from them; but the case of strangers differs from that of those bound to us by any tie: that of the believer differs from that of the unbeliever, that of parents towards their children from that of children towards their parents, and finally the case (which in the present circumstances must be particularly considered) of a husband and a wife, where the married woman has no right to say, I shall do what I like with what is my own. She is not her own, but belongs to her head, that is, her husband,c for after this manner, as the apostle Peter reminds us,d the holy women also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in subjection unto their own husbands, even as Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him lord; whose daughters, he says, though he was speaking to Christian not to Jewish women, ye have become.

[385149] And was it surprising that a father refused to have the son of both of you stripped by his mother of the means of supporting this life, when he did not know what career he would pursue when he came to be a little older, whether he would undertake the vows of a monk or service in the Church or the tie of marriage relations? For although the children of holy parents should be prompted and trained for better things, still every man hath his proper gift of God, one after this manner, and another after that a; unless indeed a father is to be blamed who exercises foresight and caution about such things, though the apostle says, But if any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith and is worse than an infidel. b But when he speaks of almsgiving, he says, I mean not that other men be eased, and ye burdened. c Together, you should deliberate on all matters, together you should apportion what treasure you should lay up in heaven and what you should leave as a sufficiency in this life for yourselves and your household and your son, so that " other men " should not be eased and ye burdened. And in the ordering and doing of this, if any better plan happened to occur to you, you should have suggested it to your husband with deference and with obedience submitted to his authority as that of your head. In this way all sensible people to whom the report could come of this good thing in you would rejoice at the fruitfulness and peace of your household, and your adversary would be put to shame, having nothing to say about you that was amiss.

[386749] Further, if in the matter of alms-giving and bestowing your property upon the poor—a good work and important, about which the Lord has given such unmistakable commandments—it was your duty to take common counsel with your husband, a Christian and observing with you the holy vow of continence, and not to scorn his wishes, how much more necessary w-as it for you, not to change or to adopt against his will anything in the way of attire or dress—a thing about which there are no divine orders for us to read. It is, indeed, written that women should have modest apparel, and " the wearing of gold " and " the broidering of the hair"a and other suchlike things, usually employed either for empty show or to give allurement to the body, are deservedly condemned. But there is a kind of matronly dress, befitting a person's station, distinct from the garments of a widow, which may become Christian wives without affronting Christian decorum. If your husband did not wish you to put that aside,so that you should not vaunt yourself as a widow while he was still alive,b I am of opinion that on this point he should not have been driven to the scandal of quarrelling with you, for the harm done by your disobedience was greater than the good you did by any of your self-repression. For what is more preposterous than a wife's domineering over her husband about a humble garment, when it would be more becoming in you to yield him compliance in shining deeds than to contend with him about gloomy clothes? Even if a nun's dress pleased you, you would have been happier in assuming even it when you had shown due regard for your husband and received his permission, than in presuming to don that other, without asking his advice or paying him any respect. And if he altogether refused to allow it, wherein would your resolution have been the loser? Far be it from us to imagine you would dis- please God by wearing, while your husband was still alive, not the dress of Anna, but of Susanna. a

[388737] Nor even if he had wished you to put on the dress of a matron and not of a widow, would he who had already begun with you to observe the great virtue of continence, have been driving you also to adopt adornment that was unbecoming; even had he compelled you to it by some galling condition, you could have had a humble heart beneath your haughty finery. Surely, in the time of the patriarchs, Queen Esther feared God, worshipped God and obeyed God, and yet in submission served the foreign king, her husband, who did not worship the same God as she did. At a time of the utmost danger, not to herself alone but to her race as well, who were then God's chosen people, she prostrated herself before God in prayer, and said in her prayer that she regarded her royal adornment " as a menstruous rag"b; and so her prayer was immediately heard and answered by Him that pondereth the heart, c Who knew that she was speaking the truth. And yet her husband was a man with many wives and worshipped strange, false gods. But you, if your husband had persevered in the resolution he had undertaken with you and had not fallen into sin on provocation from you, you had a husband who was not only a believer and a worshipper with you of the true God, but was also practising continence, and who undoubtedly, recollecting your common resolution, even if he did compel you to wear matronly dress, would nevertheless not have compelled you to wear proud ornaments.

[390186] I have written this to you, since you thought fit to ask my advice, not in order to undermine your righteous design by any words from me, but because I am grieved at what your husband has done as a result of your irregular and imprudent conduct. It is your duty most earnestly to think how he may be restored, if your wish to belong to Christ is sincere. Put on therefore humility of mind, and in order that God may keep you while you persevere, do not you scorn your husband while he perishes. Pour forth for him devoted and constant prayers; offer the sacrifice of tears as though they were the blood of a stricken heart, and write him an apology, begging his forgiveness for that you sinned against him in doing with your property what you thought should be done, without asking his advice and consent; not that you should repent of having given to the poor, but of having refused to let your husband share and direct your good deeds. Promise for the future, with the help of the Lord, that, if he repents of his evil conduct and returns to the continence he had abandoned, you will be subject to him, as it is fitting you should be, in all things, if peradventure God will give him repentance and that he may recover himself out of the snare of the devil, by whom he is taken captive at his will. a And as for your son, who does not know that, since you got him in lawful and honourable wedlock, his father has greater authority over him than you have? So he cannot be denied him, when he learns his whereabouts and claims him by law. Hence, in order that he may be nurtured and trained, as you would have him, in the wisdom of God, it is essential for him too that you both should be in harmony.

[391888] Your devotion, my holy brethren, to our Lord Jesus

[391940] Christ, well known to me and often tested, has given me, though absent, reason to place reliance in that wherein I have been wont to rejoice when present: in spirit I am always with you, not only because the great sweetness of the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ ever continueth its fragrance, but also because you do not suffer me, who am your servant in the Gospel, to endure any hardship. Now, our brother Fascius was being pressed for payment of a debt of seventeen solidi b by the tribute-gatherers and found for the moment no way of escape from his entanglement; wherefore, so as not to suffer bodily injury, he fled to the protection of Holy Church. c And as those tax-collectors were compelled to take their departure and so were unable to grant him a respite, they heaped on me the most grievous abuse, declaring that I ought to hand him over to them or to furnish the means where from they could receive the debt which they proved was owing them. I made the offer to Fascius to speak to you, holy brethren, about his needs, but, deterred by shame, he implored me not to do it. So I myself, under pressure of greater needs, accepted seventeen solidi from our brother Macedonius,a and these I immediately handed over on his behoof, while he promised that on a certain day he could meet the repayment, and agreed that if he was not able to meet it, an appeal should be made for him to that compassion of yours, which it is your habit to display as a brotherly feeling for our brethren.

[393433] Wherefore, now that he is absent, it remains for you to give your backing, not to him, for no one can apply compulsion to him in his absence, but to my promise, for with you my good name and fame are always present. For already the day on which he promised he would meet the debt, is past and gone, and I find no reply to make to him who gave me the amount on trust, save to do what I promised I would do. But since I had no information about this matter on the day of Pentecost, so that I might have made an appeal when the crowd at Church was greater than usual, I ask you to be good enough to take this letter as my voice, while in your hearts Our Lord and God speaks warning and exhortation; in Him you have put your trust, and He never leaves us so long as we fear and honour His name; in Him I too am united with you, although in body I seem to have departed from you; from Him comes the promise of the harvest of eternal life from this seed of good works, for the apostle says: And let us not be weary in well-doing, for in due season we shall reap if we faint not. As we therefore have opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who are of the household of faith. a Since then he is of the household of faith, a member of the Christian Church, a Catholic brother of our own, for the satisfaction of whose needs I ask you to do what the Lord bids you do, do it without grudging, without complaint, and with gladness and cheerfulness; for your trust is in God, not in man, and He has promised that you will lose nothing of the things you do in mercy, but will receive them on that day with eternal usury. b And since the apostle himself says, But this I say, He which soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly, c you should understand that now is the time for us, while we are still in this life, to purchase with haste and cheerfulness the gift of eternal life: for when the end of the world comes, it will be given only to those who through faith have bought it for themselves before it was possible for them to see it.

[395483] I have written to the priests as well that, if there be any deficiency after the offering made by you, my holy friends, they should make it up from the Church's store, provided that you have all made cheerful offering, each man as he will; for whether the gift come from you or from the Church, it is all God's, vet your devotedness will be far more acceptable than the treasures of the Church, as the apostle says, Not because I desire a gift, but I desire that fruit may abound. d Gladden my heart, then, for I wish to have joy of your fruits;. for you are God's trees which even through my ministry He deigns to water with unceasing showers. e May the Lord keep you from all evil, both in this world and in the world to come, my well-beloved lords and much longed for brethren.

[396265] So important is the ceremony to which your brotherly affection invites me, that I should drag my poor body to you with willingness, were it not detained by weakness. I might have come, had it not been winter; I might have scorned the winter, had I been young; for either the glow of youth would have endured the rigour of the season, or else the glow of summer would have allayed the chill of age. As it is, my saintly lord, my holy and revered brother and fellow-priest, in winter I cannot bear so lengthy a journey since I must bear with me the frigidity of great age. I return the greeting that I owe to your merits: my own welfare I commend to your supplications, while beseeching the Lord myself that peace and prosperity may follow upon the dedication of so great a building.