WORK: Select Letters  (slug: unknown-select-letters-73fa24)

CHAPTER: 01-select-letters



[218258] Examine the Holy Scriptures and scrutinize them to the best of your ability, and see if at any time any one of the righteous and the faithful took this course, although they endured such great sufferings at the hands of those who sought to impel them to everlasting destruction, not to everlasting life, to which you are being forced. I have heard that you have said that the apostle Paul indicated that self-immolation was lawful, in the words, Though I give my body to be burned, a on the supposition that, as he was there enumerating all the good things that are of no avail without charity, such as the tongues of men and of angels, and all mysteries, and all knowledge and all prophecy and all faith that could remove mountains, and the bestowal of one's property on the poor,b he intended among these good things to count even self-immolation. But observe carefully and notice in what sense the Scripture says that a man may give his body to be burned: certainly not that he may throw himself into the fire when he is harassed by a pursuing enemy, but that when the proposal is made to him that he should do wrong or else suffer wrong, he should choose not to do wrong rather than not to suffer wrong and so give his body over to him who has power to slay it, as did those three men who were compelled to worship the golden statue, when he who applied the compulsion threatened them with the fiery furnace if they did not comply. c They refused to worship the image; they did not cast them- selves into the fire, and yet it was written even of them that they yielded their bodies that they might not serve nor worship any god except their own God. a That is the sense in which the Apostle said, If I give my body to be burned.

[219992] Notice, however, what follows: If I have not charity, it profiteth me nothing. b To that charity you are summoned; by that charity you are withheld from perishing, and yet you think that to throw yourself headlong to destruction does to some degree profit you, although even if you suffered death at the hands of another person while you are still a foe to charity, that would profit you nothing; indeed, as long as you remain outside the Church and severed from the fabric of unity and the bond of charity, you would be punished with everlasting chastisement, even if you were burned alive for Christ's sake. That is what the Apostle means when he says, Though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing. Bring back your mind, then, to sane reflection and sober thought; consider carefully whether it is to error and impiety that you are being summoned, and endure any troubles you like for truth's sake. But if you rather are living in error and in impiety, and truth and piety rather exist in the place to which you are summoned, for the reason that there are to be found Christian unity and the charity of the Holy Spirit, why do you keep on trying to be your own worst enemy?

[221206] It was with this end in view that God in His mercy provided your bishops and us with an opportunity of meeting at Carthage in a crowded and well-attended conference c and of reasoning together in the most orderly manner about this very question of separation. The minutes were written down; further, our signatures are on record. Read them, or have them read to you, and choose then which you prefer. I have heard you have stated that you could have some discussion with us about those minutes, if we leave out the words of your bishops, in which it is said, One case does not compromise another case, nor one person another person. a You want us to leave these words out, which truth itself spoke through them, though they knew it not. But you will say that in this point they were mistaken and through lack of foresight fell into a false opinion; we say that what they said was true, and we very easily prove this by referring to yourself. For if you refuse to allow those bishops of yours, chosen by the entire Donatist party to represent the whole body in such wise that whatever they did, the rest should take as satisfactory and acceptable, to prejudice your case by what you hold to be a rash and incorrect statement on their part, by this refusal you admit the truth of their statement that one case does not compromise another case, nor one person another person. And at this point you ought to grant that, if you refuse to allow the person of so many of your bishops as represented in those seven b to compromise the person of Donatus, priest of Mutugenna,a all the less ought the person of Caecilian, even if some degree of evil had been detected in him, to compromise Christian unity, which is not confined to the single village of Mutugenna, but is spread abroad throughout the world.

[223005] But see, we shall do as you have desired; we shall treat with you as if your bishops had not said, One case does not compromise another case, nor one person another person. Do you find out what they ought to have replied to that point, when the objection was made to them of the case and person of Primianus,b who although he joined the others in anathematizing those who had anathematized him, nevertheless received back with their former honours those whom he had anathematized and cursed, and chose rather to recognize and accept, than to abolish and breathe scorn upon,c the baptism given by dead men (for of them it was said in that famous decree a that the shores were full of dead men), and so gave a complete denial to that argument which you are wont to deduce from a wrong interpretation of the words, He that washeth himself after touching a dead body, what availeth his washing? b If then your bishops had not said, One case does not compromise another case, nor one person another person, they would have been held to share the guilt in the case of Primianus; but in making that assertion they secured the Catholic Church, as we contended, from any guilt in the case of Caecilian.

[224200] But read all the rest and examine it well. Notice whether they have succeeded in proving any evil against Caecilian himself, from whose person they attempted to compromise the Church; notice whether they have not rather achieved much in his favour and altogether confirmed the soundness of his case by the comparatively large number of extracts they produced and recited to the detriment of their own position. Read those, or have them read to you; consider the whole matter, give it a further careful investigation, and choose which you will follow, whether you will share our joy in the peace of Christ, in the unity of the Church Catholic, in brotherly affection, or, in the cause of wicked discord, the Donatist party and sacrilegious schism, will endure still further the importunity of our love for you.

[225011] I hear that you often quote and draw attention to the fact recorded in the Gospels that seventy disciples withdrew from the Lord and were left to their own choice in this wicked and undutiful desertion, and that to the other twelve who remained it was said, Will ye also go away? a But you neglect to draw attention to the fact that then the Church was just beginning to sprout with new shoots and that as yet that prophecy had not received fulfilment in her: All kings shall fall down before him, yea, all nations shall serve him b; it is in proportion to the more complete fulfilment of that prophecy that the Church enjoys greater authority, so that she not only invites, but actually compels, men to goodness. This is what our Lord intended in that incident to indicate, for although He possessed great authority, He chose rather to give the example of humility. This too He taught clearly enough in that parable of the feast, in which, after a message had been sent to the invited guests and they had refused to come, the servant was told, ' Go out into the streets and lanes of the city and bring in hither the poor and the maimed and the halt and the blind.' And the servant said to his lord, ' It is done as thou hast commanded, and yet there is room.' And the lord said to his servant,' Go out into the highways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.' c Just notice the phrase used of those who came first: bring them in, not the phrase, compel them to come in; that symbolized the incipient stage of the Church, still developing to the point where it would have the strength to compel men to it. Accordingly, since it was right that when it had grown stronger in power and extent men should actually be compelled to the feast of everlasting salvation, the words were afterwards added: It is done as thou hast commanded, and still there is room. And the lord said, ' Go out into the highways and hedges and compel them to come in.' Wherefore, if you were walking quietly outside this feast of the Church's holy unity, we should find you, so to speak, in the highways; but as it is, you are, so to say, full of thorns and sharpness, by reason of the many cruel sufferings you inflict on our people, so we find you, as it were, in the " hedges " and compel you to come in. He who is compelled is forced to go where he has no wish to go, but when he has come in, he partakes of the feast right willingly. So curb your hostile and rebellious spirit, that you may find the feast of salvation within the true Church of Christ.

[227572] I was young when I began my work on the Trinity,b the supreme, true God; I am old now when it is published. I had indeed abandoned the task, after learning that someone had stolen it from me or at least stolen a march on me before I could finish and revise it and give it the final touch I had intended. For I had decided not to publish the books separately but all together, for the reason that the later books are linked up with the earlier in a progressive inquiry.

[228042] Seeing, then, that my intention was prevented from being carried out because of those persons who were able to have access to some of the books before I wanted them to, I broke off my dictation and abandoned it, thinking to voice my complaint in some other work of mine, so as to let those who could, know that those same books were not published by me, but were taken out of my hands before they seemed to me fit for publication by me. But compelled by the most urgent demands of many of my brethren and most of all by your command, I have taken the trouble to bring to completion, with the help of God, a work on which I have expended so much effort, and now by our son and dear fellow-deacon I am sending them to your Grace, and handing them over for anyone to hear, read, or copy, corrected as well as I could, not as well as I would, in case they might differ too much from those copies which were stolen from me and are already in circulation. If I could have stuck to what I intended in them, they should have contained the same opinions, but should certainly have been much less obscure and more easy to read, as far as the difficulty of explaining such weighty matters and my own ability allowed it. Now there are some people who possess the first four or rather five books without the introductions and the twelfth without the last portion, which is of a fair length; but if this edition happens to come to their notice, they will be able to make all the corrections, if they have the wish and the ability. I beg you by all means to give instructions for the placing of this letter at the head of those books, but apart from them. Pray for me.

[229697] I would not for anything venture to cherish resentment that I have not been honoured with letters from your Holiness; for it is better for me to believe that you, my saintly lord and deservedly revered brother, were without anyone to convey them, than to harbour the suspicion that your Grace was scorning me. But now, as I have learned that Luke, the servant of God by whom I am sending this letter to you, is going to return very shortly, I shall give hearty thanks to the Lord and to your Benignity, if you have the kindness to visit me by letter. As for Pelagius, our brother and your son, to whom I hear you show much affection, I suggest that the affection you show him be such that the people who know him and have carefully listened to him may not imagine that your Holiness is being deceived by him.

[230507] Some of his disciples, indeed, young men of very noble birth and education in the liberal arts,b gave up their worldly prospects at his persuasion and betook themselves to the service of God. When, however, they gave evidence of certain theories at variance with sound doctrine as contained in the Gospel of the Saviour and declared in the words of the apostles—that is, when they were discovered to be arguing against the grace of God, by means of which we become Christians and in which we through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith, a and were beginning to reject their errors under my strictures, they gave me a book which, they said, was by the same Pelagius, asking me instead to reply to him. After I saw that it was my duty to do so in order the more thoroughly to drive that wicked error from their hearts, I read it and composed an answer.

[231378] In that book he declares the grace of God to be only nature, in which we are created with free-will. As for that grace, however, which Holy Scripture commends to us in countless texts, teaching that it is by it that we are justified, that is, made just, and assisted, by God's mercy, in doing or completing every good work (as is shown too very clearly by the prayers of the holy, in which those things are sought from the Lord which have been enjoined by the Lord)—this grace, then, he not only passes over in silence, but advances many statements opposed to it. (For he asserts and urgently argues that through free-will alone human nature can be sufficient to do the works of righteousness and keep all God's commandments. From that anyone can see, on reading the same book, what an attack is made upon the grace of God, of which the apostle says, O wretched man that I am! Who shall deliver me from the body of this death? The grace of God through our Lord Jesus Christ, b and how there is no place left for that divine assistance because of which it is our duty to say, when we pray, Lead us not into temptation c; further, the Lord seems to have had no reason for saying to the apostle Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, a if all this receives its fulfilment in us without any help from God, but by the power of our will alone.

[232734] So these perverted and sacrilegious arguments not only give the lie to our prayers, in which we ask the Lord for anything that we read and believe that the holy have asked, but also are in conflict with the benediction we give, when over the people we utter the prayer and petition to God that He will make them to increase and abound in love one towards another and towards all men, b and grant them according to the riches of His glory to be strengthened with might by his Spirit, c and fill them with joy and peace in believing and make them to abound in hope and in the power of the Holy Spirit. d Why do we ask these things for them which we know the apostle asked from the Lord for the nations, if even now our nature, created with free-will, can provide all of them for itself by its own will? And why does this same apostle say too, For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God, e if we are led by the spirit of our nature to be made the sons of God? And why does he likewise say, The Spirit helpeth our infirmities, f if our nature is created such that it does not need any help from the Spirit to do the works of righteousness? And why does Scripture say, But God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it, g if we have been created such that by the strength of our freewill we are able to overcome all temptations by simply enduring them?

[234230] Why need I dilate upon the point to your Holiness, when I already realize that I am wearying you, especially as you listen to my letter through an interpreter?a If you love Pelagius, may he too love you, or rather deceive himself and not you! For when you hear him confessing God's grace and God's help, you think he means the same as you do, who understand them in the light of the Catholic rule of faith, because you are unacquainted with what he has written in his book. For this reason I have sent the book itself and the reply I wrote to it; from these your Reverence may see what grace or help of God he speaks of, when the objection is made to him that he is speaking of something opposed to the grace and help of God. Open his eyes then by teaching and exhorting him and praying for the salvation he ought to have in Christ, so that he may confess that grace of God the saints are proved to have confessed, when they sought those things from the Lord which He commanded them to seek, for those things would have not been commanded unless to the end that our will should be revealed, nor would they be asked for, unless to the end that the weakness of our will should have the help of Him who commanded them.

[235447] Let the question be openly put to him whether he approves of praying the Lord that we fall not into sin. If he disapproves of it, let the apostle be read in his ears, in the words, Now I pray to God that ye do no evil b: but if he does approve of it, let him openly preach that grace which assists us, so that he himself may be kept from doing much evil. For it is by this grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord that all those who are delivered, are delivered, since no one can be delivered in any other way than through it.

[235977] For that reason it is written, For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive, a not that no one will be damned, but that no one will be delivered in any other way; for just as all those who are children of men are so through Adam, so all those who are children of God are so through Christ. So all children of men are able to become such only through Adam, and all of them who have become children of God, only through Christ. Let him therefore openly express his views on this further point, whether he accepts the fact that even little children, who have not yet reached the stage of willing righteousness or of refusing it, yet because of one man, by whom sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. b are delivered by the grace of Christ—whether even for them, because of original sin, he believes that the blood of Christ was shed, which was, to be sure, shed for the remission of sins. c About these points in particular I am anxious to know what he believes and holds, what he definitely confesses and preaches. In the other points, however, that are raised against him, even if he be proved to be in error, none the less until he accepts correction, it is more tolerable to bear with him.

[237257] Further, I beg you to have the kindness to send to me the minutes of the Church council d which declare him to be cleared of the charge of heresy. This I beg at the desire of many bishops who have, like me, been troubled by the indefinite rumour about this; I have written, however, asking this in my own name for the reason that I did not want to miss the opportunity of the messenger, who is in a position, I understand, to return to us speedily. In place of these minutes Pelagius has already sent us not indeed any portion of the minutes, but a kind of defence of himself, written by his own hand, in which he says he has answered the objections of the Gauls. a In it, to leave other matters out, he replied to the objection made to him that he had said man could live without sin and keep God's commandments if he wished to; his words are: I maintained that this power was conferred upon him by God; I did not maintain that any person would be found who had never committed a sin from his infancy to his old age, but that after turning from sin by his own effort and with the help of God's grace he can live without sin, and that the fact of having sinned does not prevent a man from turning from it at a future date.

[238481] In this reply of Pelagius your Reverence can discern that he has confessed that a man's earlier life, that is in infancy, is not without sin, but that he can be turned by his own effort, assisted by the grace of God, to the sinless life. Why then, in the book I have replied to, does he allege that Abel lived a life that was completely without sin? These are his words about this point: This can with justice be said of those of whose good deeds and evil deeds alike Scripture has no record; but it would assuredly have recorded the sins of those whose righteousness it records, if it had perceived that they had sinned at all. But granted, he says, that in other ages the great throng of men made Scripture neglect to weave an account of the sins of every one: right at the very beginning of the world, when there were only four people in existence, what reason, he asks, can we give for its failure to mention the sins of every one? Is it because of the great number of people? There was as yet nothing of the kind. Is it because it remembered only those who had committed sin, and was unable to remember the one who had not committed any? To be sure, he says. in the first age of the world there were Adam and Eve. from whom were born Cain and Abel—four people only are mentioned as existing. Eve sinned; the Scripture has revealed that to us; Adam also sinned: the same Scripture does not omit to mention it, and that Scripture has testified too that Cain sinned as well, and it points out not only their sins, but also the nature of their sins. If Abel too had sinned, that too would have been mentioned by Scripture; but it is not mentioned, so he did not sin. a

[240152] I have culled from his book these words, which your Holiness will be able to find in the volume itself, so that you may understand what manner of credence you should afford him when he denies the other points as well; unless perhaps he says that Abel himself committed no sin, but that he was not therefore without sin and could not therefore bear comparison with the Lord. Who alone in mortal flesh was without sin, since in Abel there was original sin inherited from Adam, not committed by himself in his own person (I wish he would at least make this assertion, so that we might for the present obtain from him a definite expression of opinion about infant baptism); or unless he says perhaps, since he has used the words from infancy to old age, that Abel did not sin because he is shown not to have lived to old age. This is not what his words indicate: he said that from the beginning the earlier period of life was given to sin, but that the later could be sinless; for he declares he did not state that anyone would be found who from infancy to old age had not committed sin, but that after turning from sin by his own effort and with the help of God's grace, he could live without sin. For when he says turning from sin, he shows that the earlier part of life was lived in sin. Let him then admit that Abel did sin, since his early life was lived in the world, and it, according to his admission, is not without sin; and let him take another look at his own book, where it is quite plain he did make the statement which in this defence he denies having made. a

[241723] But if he asserts that this book, or this passage in the book, is not from his pen, I on my side have adequate witnesses, men of honour and reliability and undoubted friends of his own, and I can acquit myself by their testimony that they handed this same book to me containing that sentence and that they declared it was from the pen of Pelagius; that evidence at any rate is sufficient to deter anyone from saying that it was written or fabricated by me. Now among these let each man choose whom to believe. It is not my business to discuss the matter at any greater length. I ask you to convey to him by a sure hand, if he denies that those are his opinions, the points to which objection is taken as being in conflict with the grace of Christ. So plausible is his defence, indeed, that we shall rejoice with exceeding joy if he has not deceived your wise Holiness, unacquainted as you are with his other writings, by any ambiguous statement. For the rest we care not overmuch whether those perverted and impious opinions were never his, or if at last he has renounced them.

[242802] I had already written my reply to your Charity, but when I was looking for an opportunity of transmitting my letter, my beloved son Faustus arrived on his way to your Excellency. After receiving the letter which I had already composed for conveyance to your Benevolence, he intimated to me your strong desire that I should write something to you that would build you up unto that eternal salvation of which your confidence is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And although I was busily occupied, he urged me with that instancy which, as you know, is proportioned to his affection for you, not to postpone the writing of it. To meet his haste, then, I have chosen rather to write something in haste than to keep your holy desire in suspense, my noble and justly distinguished lord and honourable son.

[243595] All then that lean say in the short time I have is this:

[243653] Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul and with all thy strength, and love thy neighbour as thyself. a These are the words in which the Lord while upon earth summed up everything, saying in the Gospel: On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets. b In this love therefore make daily progress by both prayer and good deeds, so that by the help of Him who enjoined it upon you and granted you to possess it, it may find nourishment and increase, until being perfect it makes you perfect. For that is the love which, in the words of the apostle. is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us c; it is that love which he also describes as the fulfilling of the law d; it is that by which faith worketh, of which he says again, Neither circumcision availeth anything nor uncircumcision, but faith, which worketh by love. e

[244537] In this love all our holy fathers and patriarchs and prophets and apostles pleased God; in it all true martyrs contended against the devil even unto blood,f and because in them it neither waxed cold nor failed, they won the day; in it all good believers make daily progress, seeking to attain not unto an earthly kingdom, but unto the kingdom of heaven, not unto a temporal, but unto an eternal inheritance,g not unto gold and silver, but unto the incorruptible riches of the angels, not unto any of this world's good things, which make life full of fear and which no one can take with him when he dies, but unto the vision of God. h His sweetness and delight transcend all beauty of form not only in earthly things, but even in heavenly, transcend all loveliness of souls however righteous and holy, transcend all the comeliness of angels and powers above, transcend not only everything that language can express about Him, but also everything that the mind can imagine. And let us not despair of the fulfilment of a promise so great, since it is great indeed, but rather let us have faith that we shall obtain it, since He is great Who made the promise; as the blessed John the apostle says, Now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that, when He shall appear, we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is. a

[245900] Do not think that it is impossible for anyone to please God while engaged in military service. Among such was the holy David, to whom the Lord gave so great a testimony, and among such were also many righteous men of that dispensation; among such too was that centurion who said to the Lord, I am not worthy that Thou shouldest come under my roof, but speak the word only and my servant shall be healed; for I am a man under authority, having soldiers under me, and I say to this man, Go, and he goeth, and to another, Come, and he cometh, and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it, and of whom the Lord said, Verily, I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel. b Among such too was that Cornelius to whom an angel said, Cornelius, thine alms are accepted, and thy prayers are heard, c by which words he signified that he should send to the blessed apostle Peter and hear from him what he should do; to which apostle he sent a godly soldier, asking him to visit him. Among such too were those who came to be baptized by John, the holy forerunner of the Lord and the friend of the bridegroom, about whom the Lord Himself said, Among them that are born of women there hath not arisen a greater than John the Baptist d; they asked of him what they should do, and he made answer to them: Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your wages. a To be sure, when he commanded them to be content with their military wages, he did not forbid them to serve as soldiers.

[247417] They have a greater place before God, who abandon all these worldly employments to serve him with the strictest self-discipline and chastity; but everyone, as the apostle says, hath his proper gift of God, one after this manner and another after that. b There are some, then, who by praying for you fight against your invisible foes, while you by fighting for them are striving against the visible barbarians. Would that there were one faith in all, for there would be less of striving and the devil with his angels would be more easily overcome! But as it is necessary in this world that the citizens of the kingdom of heaven should be harassed by temptations among erring and irreverent men so that they may be exercised and tried as gold in the furnace,c we ought not before the appointed time to desire to live with the saints and righteous alone, so that we may deserve to receive this blessedness in its own due time.

[248342] Think, then, of this point first of all when you are arming for battle, that your strength, even that of the body, is a gift from God; in this way you will not think of using God's gift against God. For when faith is pledged, it is to be kept even with the enemy against whom you are waging war; how much more with the friend, for whose sake you are fighting! You ought to have peace as the object of your choice and war only as the result of necessity, so that God may deliver you from the necessity and preserve you in peace; for peace is not sought in order that war may be aroused, but war is waged in order that peace may be obtained. So then be a peace-maker even when warring, that by overcoming those whom you conquer, you may bring them to the advantages of peace, for blessed are the peace-makers, says the Lord, for they shall be called the children of God. a Yet if human peace is so sweet for procuring the temporal salvation of men, how much sweeter is peace with God for procuring the eternal salvation of the angels! So let it be your necessity and not your choice that slays the enemy who is fighting against you. Just as violence is the portion of him who rebels and resists, so mercy is the due of him who has been conquered or captured, especially when a disturbance of the peace is not to be feared.

[249664] Let your character be adorned by chastity in the marriage-bond, adorned by sobriety and moderation, for it is a very disgraceful thing that lust should overcome one whom man finds unconquerable, and that wine should overwhelm one whom the sword assails in vain. If you lack earthly riches, let them not be sought in the world by evil works; but if you possess them, let them be laid up in heaven by good works. The manly Christian spirit ought neither to be elated by their accession nor depressed by their departure. Let us rather keep in mind what the Lord says, Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also, b and certainly when we hear the exhortation to lift up our hearts, we ought unfeignedly to make the response which you know we do make. c

[250424] In such matters as this, however, I know that you are very zealous, and I take great delight in your reputation and greatly congratulate you in the Lord upon it. This letter, then, may rather serve as a mirror to you, in which you can behold what manner of man you are, rather than as a lesson to you what manner of man you ought to be. And yet, whatever you find either in this letter or in Holy Scripture that you still lack for a good life, be instant in prayer and in deeds, so that you may acquire it; and from what you have, render thanks to God as the fount of goodness, from Whom you have received it, and in all your good deeds ascribe the glory to God and the humility to yourself, for, as it is written, Every good and perfect gift is from above and cometh down from the Father of lights. a Yet whatever progress you make in the love of God and of your neighbour and in genuine godliness, do not imagine that you are without sin, as long as you are in this life, concerning which we read in Holy Writ, Is not the life of man upon earth a life of temptation? b And so, since it is necessary for you, as long as you are in this body, always to say in prayer what the Lord taught us, Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors, c remember quickly to forgive anyone who has sinned against you and has asked for pardon, so that you may be able to pray with sincerity and succeed in obtaining pardon for your own sins.

[251854] I have written these exhortations to you, my dear friend, in haste, as the haste of the bearer compelled me, but I render thanks to God that I have in some degree been able to comply with your holy desire. May the mercy of God always be your protection, my noble lord and deservedly distinguished and honourable son!

[252172] Since the letter your Grace sent by the hands of our holy brother, the priest Firmus, reached Hippo during my absence, and on my return I had the chance to read it only after the bearer of it had taken his departure, this first opportunity of replying (and it is a very welcome one too) is afforded by our well-beloved son, the acolyte Albinus. b Your letter, addressed to Alypius and myself together, came at a time when we were not together, so in consequence you receive a letter from each of us, not one in the common name of us both, for the bearer of this letter, having left me, will on his way pass by my revered brother and fellow-bishop, Alypius, so that he may write one for himself in reply to your Holiness; that letter of yours, after reading it, I sent on to him by the same bearer. As for the great joy with which your letter filled me, why should one attempt to utter feelings that defy utterance? Indeed, I am not sure that you have any adequate conception yourself of the amount of good you have done to us in writing as you did, but take our word for it; for just as you can bear witness to your own soul, so we can to ours, of the extent to which we have been moved by the very transparent sincerity of your letter. For if we transcribed with exulting joy and with great fervour read to all we could that very short letter of yours on this same problem that you sent by the acolyte Leo a to our most saintly Senior, Aurelius—a letter in which you expounded to us your views about that most pernicious doctrine, and, on the other hand, about the grace of God bestowed by Him upon small and great, to which that doctrine is violently opposed,—how great do you think was the exultation with which we read that lengthier statement from your pen, and how great the care with which we have had it read by all we could offer it to and can still offer it to? For what more welcome document could be read or heard than so faultless a defence of the grace of God against its enemies, uttered by one whom those same enemies boasted of as an influential supporter of their cause? Or is there anything that should make us more abundantly grateful to God than this, that His grace is so well defended by those to whom it is given, against those to whom it is either not given or by whom it is so ungraciously received when given, since by the secret and righteous judgement of God it is not given them to accept it graciously?

[254607] Wherefore, my venerable lord and holy brother cherished in the love of Christ, although you do an excellent service in writing on this question to the brethren before whom its supporters are in the habit of boasting of your friendship, yet this larger duty awaits you of not only having punishment of wholesome severity administered to those who dare with over-much freedom to rave about that error which is such a dangerous challenge to the name of Christ, but also for the sake of the Lord's weaker and more simple-minded sheep of employing with all the vigilance of a pastor the most careful safeguards against those who, though in a stealthier and more covert manner, still do not cease to whisper it, creeping into houses, a as the apostle says, and with practised ungodliness doing the other things that he goes on to mention. Nor should those be overlooked who under the restraint of fear conceal their opinions under the deepest silence, but yet do not cease to cherish the same perverted opinions. Some, indeed, of their party may have attracted your attention before that pestilence was denounced by the most explicit condemnation of the Apostolic See itself, and may now, as you can see, have suddenly become silent, so that it is impossible to ascertain whether they have been cured of it unless they not only refrain from uttering those false doctrines, but actually take up the defence of the contrary doctrines with the same fervour they showed in propounding error. These, however, surely call for milder treatment: what need is there to terrify them, when their very silence shows that they are terrified enough? At the same time, they are not to be passed over and spared remedial attention, as though they were quite sound, because their sore is hidden. For while they are not to be terrified, yet they ought to be taught, and, in my opinion, this process is easier while the fear they have of severe measures assists him who teaches them the truth. In this way, after they have learned through the Lord's assistance to understand and love His grace, they may by their utterance refute the errors which they no longer dare to utter.

[256760] I was far away when the clerk Projectus brought the letters your Holiness sent to me at Hippo, yet as soon as I returned and read them and realized that I was in your debt, I was awaiting a chance of paying my debt, when lo! the unexpected departure from us of our well-beloved brother, the acolyte Albinus, has provided a most welcome opportunity. Rejoicing, therefore, in your good health, which is the object of my earnest desire, I return your Holiness the salutation I was owing you. But I always owe you love, the only debt which, after being repaid, still keeps one a debtor. For it is repaid when it is expended, but is still owing even if it has been repaid, since there is no time when it does not require to be expended. Nor is it lost when it is repaid, but rather by repayment it is multiplied, for it is repaid by retaining it, not by getting quit of it. And since it cannot be repaid unless it be retained, so it cannot be retained unless it be repaid—nay rather, when a man repays it, it increases in him, and the more lavishly he expends it, the more of it he gains. But how can that be refused to friends which is owing even to enemies? To enemies, however, it is paid out with hesitation, while to friends it is paid back with confidence. Nevertheless, it makes every possible effort to recover what it has expended, even from those to whom it renders good for evil. For we desire to have as a friend the man whom we truly love as an enemy, because we do not love him unless we wish him good, and that cannot be the case unless he gives up the evil of enmity. a

[258342] Love, then, is not expended like money, for in addition to the fact that money is diminished by expenditure and love is increased, they differ in this too, that we give greater evidence of good-will towards anyone if we do not seek the return of money we have given him; whereas no one can sincerely expend love unless he tenderly insist on being repaid; for when money is received, it is so much gain to the recipient but so much loss to the donor; love, on the other hand, is not only augmented in the man who demands it back from the person he loves, even when he does not receive it, but the person who returns it actually begins to possess it only when he pays it back.

[259018] Wherefore, my lord and brother, I willingly repay to you, and gladly receive back from you, the love we owe each other, and that which I receive back, I still claim; that which I repay, I still owe. For it is our duty in all teachableness to hearken to our one Master, before Whom we are fellow-pupils, when He speaks through His apostle and bids us owe no man anything but to love one another. a

[259416] I have long been disappointed that, after writing several times, I have not had the honour of receiving any reply from your Excellency. Now quite unexpectedly I have received three letters from your Benignity, one of them, not exclusively to me, by the hands of my fellow-bishop Vindemialis,c and not long afterwards two by the hands of my fellow-priest Firmus. d That holy man, with whom I have ties of the most intimate and affectionate nature, as you may have heard from him, talked at length to me about your Excellency and gave me such a true conception of you, as he found you in the tender mercies of Christ, e that he outdid not only the letters brought to me by the afore-mentioned bishop or by himself, but even those I was complaining of not receiving. And his account of you was all the more pleasant in that he told me those things which, for fear of becoming addicted to singing your own praises (which Holy Scripture forbids a), you yourself cannot write back tome even when I pointedly ask them. In fact I myself am afraid to compliment you on them when I write to you, my distinguished and justly renowned lord and well-beloved son in the love of Christ, in case I incur the suspicion of flattering you.

[260638] So you can just imagine what a pleasure and delight it was to me to hear your praises in Christ, or rather the praises of Christ in you, from one whose own truthfulness prevents him from deceiving me and whose friendship with you provides him with a knowledge of them. Yet others too have furnished me with other information, which though not so full or so sure, was still worth hearing: how sound and catholic your faith is, how godly your hope of the world to come, what love you have towards God and towards the brethren, how humble-minded you are amid your high honours, and how your hope is not placed in the uncertainty of riches but in the living God,b how abounding you are in good works, and what a rest and consolation your home is to the holy and what a terror to the ungodly, what zeal you exhibit to keep any who skulk under the cloak of the name of Christ, whether they be His old or His newer enemies, from laying snares for the members of Christ; and yet how-careful you are to procure the salvation of these same enemies, while opposing their errors. These and such-like things, as I said, I am in the habit of hearing from others too, but now I have had much fuller and surer testimony to them through the above-mentioned brother.

[261888] Further, about your conjugal continence, what information could I have to be in a position to praise and love that too in you, save from someone intimately familiar with you, who knew your life not on the surface, but within? So, since you are thus, by God's blessing, good possessing,a I too take pleasure in talking with you more intimately and at rather greater length. I know I shall not weary you if I send you something comprehensive, the reading of which will keep you all the longer in my company. For I have learned too that among your many arduous duties you are ready and glad to read my little books, and take considerable delight in them, when they happen to come into your hands, even if they are addressed to others; how much greater should be your pleasure in receiving one addressed to yourself, in which I speak to you as though you were present, and how much more thorough the attention you kindly bestow upon it! From this letter, then, pass on to the book that accompanies it; why it was written and why it was especially sent to you, your Reverence will more conveniently find out from the opening chapter.

[263018] I have received your Excellency's letter, in which you ask me to write to you. This you would not desire, did you not believe that what you thought I would write to you would be acceptable and pleasant

[263221] —in other words, if you longed for the vanities of this world while they were unknown to you, you scorn them now they are known, for the charm in them is illusory, the toil unrewarded, the anxiety unremitting, the uplifting dangerous; man seeks them at first without reflection and abandons them at last with remorse. So it is with all the things that are sought in the tribulation of this mortal life with more eagerness than reflection, but it is far different with the hope of the godly; different with the reward of their toil, different too with the outcome of their perils. For in this world fear and grief, toil and peril, are unavoidable, but it is of the utmost importance for what cause, with what hope, and to what end a man endures those things. For my part, when I look upon those who love this world, I know not at what moment wisdom can most opportunely undertake the healing of their souls, for when things apparently are prosperous with them, they scornfully disdain her wholesome warnings and deem them but a kind of old wives' song; but when they are in the pangs of adversity, they rather think of escaping the source of their present pangs than of seizing the things that may provide a cure and a haven of refuge, in which their pangs will be completely prevented. At times, however (though these are less frequent in prosperity and more frequent in adversity), some of them turn the ears of their heart a to apply them to the truth, yet these are few, for so it was foretold. b Among them I desire you to be, my noble and most distinguished lord and son much longed for, because I love you truly. Let this counsel to you be my answer to your letter, for, though I should not wish you to endure henceforward such sufferings as you have endured in the past, my wish is yet greater that you may not have endured them without some change of your life for the better.

[265107] First of all I pay my tribute of congratulation to your merits that the Lord our God has placed you in that apostolic chair with (as we are informed) no division among His people. In the next place, I lay before your Holiness the state of affairs with us,-so that you may come to our assistance not only by praying for us, but also by giving us your counsel and assistance,c for I am writing to your Holiness under deep affliction: by my lack of foresight and caution I have brought a great disaster upon certain members of Christ in our neighbourhood, though I had intended only their benefit.

[265703] Fussala d is the name of a small town not far from the district of Hippo; formerly there was never a bishop there, but along with the adjoining country it belonged to the diocese a of the church of Hippo. Of Catholics that region had but few; all the other congregations there, located among a fairly dense population, were under the wretched influence of the Donatist error, so that in this town there was no Catholic at all. In the mercy of God it came about that all those districts became attached to the unity of the Church; it would take too long to tell you what toil and danger that involved us in, such that the priests there, who were originally appointed by us to gather them b together, were robbed,beaten,maimed,blinded, and killed; yet their sufferings were not ineffectual or unfruitful, for by them unity was there securely achieved. But since the aforesaid town is forty miles distant from Hippo, and in the superintendence of the people and the gathering together of the remnants, however small, of the wandering bands, composed of both sexes, who were no longer threatening others but fleeing for their own safety, I saw myself drawn farther afield than was fitting, and unable to exercise that careful oversight which I perceived and was thoroughly convinced should be exercised, I arranged that a bishop should be ordained and appointed there.

[267069] For this purpose I needed a man fitted and suitable for the place, one, too, possessing a knowledge of Punic, and I had in my mind a priest ready for the post, for whose ordination I wrote asking the holy Senior who at the time held the office of Primate of Numidia to make the long journey to us, and he agreed. When he was already with us and the minds of all were exalted in expectation of the solemn cere- mony, at the last minute a the man who had appeared to me to be ready left me in the lurch by absolutely opposing our plans. As the event proved, I ought certainly to have postponed a matter fraught with such dangers, instead of hurrying it on; however, not wanting the very eminent and holy Senior, after being at the trouble of coming all the way to us, to go back home without accomplishing the purpose for which he had made such a long journey, I put forward, without waiting to be asked, a certain young man Antoninus, who was with me at the time. He had been brought up by me in the monastery from his earliest years, but beyond holding the office of reader, he had no experience of any of the ranks or labours of clerical life; yet those unfortunate people, not knowing what lay before them, very dutifully acquiesced in my offer of him. Why say more? The deed was done; he began his career as their bishop. b

[268397] What am I to do? I do not want to charge before your Reverence one whom I gathered in and fostered, nor do I want to abandon those for whose in-gathering I travailed with anxiety and pain; and how I am to do both I cannot discover. The matter has indeed come to such a scandalous pass that those who yielded to my wish to have him undertake episcopal office, in the belief that it was to their own best interest, have approached me here and laid charges against him. Among these charges the most serious offence of gross immorality made against him, not by those over whom he was bishop, but by certain others, was found to be quite unproved, and, apparently cleared of the most malicious of the imputations made against him, he was reduced to what we and others thought such a pitiful state that whatever complaint the town's-people and those of the district made about his intolerable tyranny, his rapacity and oppression and abuses of various kinds, seemed to me by no means so grievous that, because of it or of all of them put together, we should reckon it necessary to deprive him of his office as bishop; it seemed enough to make him restore the things that were proved to have been taken away.

[269600] In short. I so tempered my judgement with mercy that he was not deprived of office, although his faults were yet not left altogether unpunished; they were not of a kind either to be repeated by him in the future or held up to others as a model. In correcting the young man, we therefore left him his rank unimpaired, but as a punishment we limited his authority, so that he should no longer be over those whom he had treated in such a way that from justified resentment it might have been impossible for them to endure having him over them at all; they might perhaps show their impatience and resentment by breaking out into some misdeed fraught with danger to themselves and to him. That this was the state of their mind even at the time when the bishops were discussing his case with them appeared very clearly, although by now the eminent Celer,a of whose very influential interference against him he complained, exercises no authority either in Africa or anywhere else.

[270575] But why make a long story of it? I beseech you to lend me your assistance, my saintly lord venerable for your piety and holy father revered with all due affection, and give orders that all the documents sent you be read to you. See how he conducted himself in his office as bishop, how, when deprived of communion until after everything had been restored to the people of Fussala, he so far accepted our decision, then later set aside a sum in compensation for the things, quite apart from the legal decision, so that he might regain the privilege of communion; see too with what crafty persuasion he led the holy Senior, that very excellent man our Primate, to believe all his statements and to recommend him to the revered Pope Boniface as one in every way blameless. What need is there for me to rehearse all the rest, since the venerable Senior afore-mentioned will have reported the affair to your Holiness in all its details?

[271508] From the numerous minutes, however, that contain our judgement upon him, I should rather fear to appear to you less severe in judging him than I ought to have been, if I did not know that you are so prone to mercy as to reckon it your duty to spare the man himself and us as well for sparing him. But what we did, either from kindness or from carelessness, he is now trying to turn to account and employ as a legal objection. His cry is, Either I ought to be sitting in my own episcopal chair or else I ought not to be a bishop at all, as if he were now sitting in any chair a but his own. For it was for this very reason that those districts in which he was bishop before were set apart and set under his care that he might not be said to have been illegally transferred to another see contrary to the statutes of the Fathers. a Or should anyone be so extreme an advocate of severity or of gentleness as either to exact absolutely no punishment from those who do not seem to merit deprivation of the honour of the bishop's office, or on the other hand to deprive of the honour of that office those who have been judged to deserve some punishment? b

[272659] There are on record among the judgements given by the Apostolic See itself, or its confirmations of the judgements of others, precedents for not depriving certain bishops, tried for certain offences, of their episcopal rank, and yet for not leaving them altogether unpunished. Not to seek out examples that are far from our own day, I shall mention some of recent date. Hear the protest of Priscus,c a bishop of the province of Caesarea d: Either the office of Primate ought to be open to me too. or else I ought not to retain my episcopal office. Let the protest be heard of another bishop of the same province, Victor, who when left in the same fault as Priscus, is not allowed to receive communion from any bishop unless within his own diocese—let his protest, I repeat, be heard: Either I ought to communicate anywhere, or else I ought not to communicate even in my own district. Let the protest be heard of a third bishop of the same province, Laurentius, and heard indeed in the very words of Antoninus: Either I ought to sit in the see to which I was ordained, or else I ought not to be a bishop at all. But who would find fault with those sentences, except one who does not reflect that, on the one hand, all these offences must not be left unpunished, and on the other, that they are not all to be punished in the same way?

[273993] In his letter about Antoninus, addressed to his bishop, the saintly Pope Boniface, with the vigilance and caution of a true pastor, put the words, Provided that he has faithfully revealed the sequence of events to us. So now accept this statement of the sequence of events which he in his memorandum passed over in silence, and further, of what happened after the letter of that man of blessed memory was read in Africa; do you come to the aid of men who implore your aid in Christ's mercy more earnestly than did he, from whose harassment they seek deliverance. For threats are being made to the people, either by Antoninus himself or by oft-repeated rumours,a of legal processes and public officials and military attacks that are to enforce the decision of the Apostolic See: in consequence, those unfortunate people, though Catholic Christians, are in dread of heavier punishment from a Catholic bishop than what they feared from the laws of Catholic emperors when they were heretics. Do not let that be so, I implore you by the blood of Christ, by the memory of the apostle Peter who warned those placed in authority over Christian peoples not to lord it over their brethren. b For myself, I commend to the gracious love of your Holiness both the Catholics of Fussala, my children in Christ, and bishop Antoninus, my son in Christ, for both are dear to me. And I do not blame the people of Fussala for pouring into your ears their just complaint against me that I imposed upon them a man whom I had not tested and who was, in age at least, immature, to cause them such afflictions; nor do I wish any harm to Antoninus, whose vile greed I oppose all the more stubbornly because I hold him in such genuine affection. Let your compassion be extended to both—to them, so that they may suffer no harm, to him, that he may do none; to them, so that they may not hate the Catholic Church,a if Catholic bishops and especially the Apostolic See itself fail to come to their defence against a Catholic bishop; to him, so that he may not involve himself in such great wickedness as to alienate from Christ those whom he is striving to win for Him against their will.

[276154] As for myself, however, I must confess to your

[276202] Holiness that in the danger that threatens both I am racked by such great fear and grief that I contemplate retiring from the responsibility of carrying on my episcopal office and giving myself over to lamentation befitting my fault, if I see the Church of God despoiled through one whose election as bishop I supported through lack of foresight and even (which may God forbid) brought to destruction along with the destruction of the despoiler himself. For in remembrance of the Apostle's words, If we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged by the Lord, b I shall judge myself, so that I may be spared by Him Who shall judge the quick and the dead. c But if you secure the recovery of the members of Christ in that district from their deadly fear and sorrow and at the same time comfort my old age by administering justice tempered with mercy, He Who through you brings us deliverance in this trial and Who has set you in your See will recompense unto you good for good, both in this life and in the life to come.

[277226] The Lord is good 0 and everywhere His mercy is shed abroad, which comforts us with your love in Him. How greatly He loves those who believe and hope in Him and who love both Him and one another, and what blessings He stores up for them to enjoy hereafter, He shows most of all by this, that upon the unbelieving and the abandoned and the perverse, whom He threatens with eternal fire in company with the devil if they persist in their evil disposition unto the end,c He nevertheless in this present world bestows so many benefits, making His sun to rise on the evil and on the good and sending rain on the just and on the unjust. d That is a brief sentence, meant to suggest further thoughts to the mind, for who can count up how many benefits and unearned gifts the wicked receive in this life from Him whom they despise? Among these is this great blessing, that by the instances of intermingled tribulation with winch, like a good physician, He blends the charm of this world, He warns them, if they but pay heed, to flee from the wrath to come a and to agree, while they are in the way b (that is, in this life) with the word of God, which by their wicked lives they have made their adversary What, then,is not sent to men by the Lord God in His compassion, when even tribulation is a blessing sent by Him? For prosperity is God's gift when He comforts us, while adversity is God's gift when He is warning us. And if, as I said, He furnishes these even to the wicked, what does He prepare for those who wait for Him c? Among this number rejoice ye that by His grace you have been gathered, forbearing one another in love, endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. d For there will not fail to be occasion for your bearing with one another, until the Lord has borne you hence and " death is swallowed up in victory " and God shall be all in all. e

[279102] Yet in strife we ought never to take pleasure, though from time to time it is either born of love or puts love to the test. For who is easily found that is willing to endure reproof? And, what about f that wise man of whom it is said, Rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee g? Surely then we ought not to refrain from reproving and correcting a brother in case he go down to death in false security? It is a usual experience and a common occurrence for one who is reproved to be mortified at the time a and to wrangle and be recalcitrant, yet afterwards to reflect within himself b in silence, alone with God, where he is not afraid of displeasing men by being reproved, but is afraid to displease God by refusing correction, and thenceforward to refrain from doing the thing for which he was justly rebuked, and in proportion as he hates his sin, to love the brother whom he realizes to have been the enemy of his sin. But if he belongs to the number of those of whom it is written, Rebuke a fool and he will go on to hate thee, c the contention is not born of his love, but yet it tries and tests the love of his reprover, since he does not repay hatred with hatred, but the love which prompted his rebuke endures undisturbed, even when he who was rebuked requites it with hatred. If the reprover, however, choose to render evil for evil to the man who takes offence at being reproved, he was not fit to reprove another, but clearly fit to be reproved himself. Act upon these principles, so that occasions of provocation may either not arise among you, or, when they do occur, be immediately quenched in speedy peace. Strive more earnestly to disseminate harmony among yourselves than to encourage fault-finding, for just as vinegar corrodes a vessel if it remain too long in it, so anger corrodes the heart if it linger on to another day. d These things, therefore, do, and the God of peace shall be with you. e At the same time pray for us, that we may with cheerful mind carry out the good advice we have given you.

[281126] Just as severity is ready to punish the sins it discovers, so love is anxious not to discover sins to punish. That was the motive which withheld me from coming to you, when you besought my presence, not to rejoice in your peacefulness, but to increase your strife. For how could I have made light of your wrangling or left it unpunished, if even in my presence it had arisen to the same pitch as that which in my absence, though it was hidden from my eyes, yet assailed my ears with your clamour? Perhaps your rebelliousness would have been even greater in my presence, which it was necessary for me to withhold from you since you were demanding, to the detriment of sound discipline, things inexpedient for you and furnishing a most dangerous precedent. Thus I should not have found you such as I desire, and you would have found me such as you did not desire.

[281989] The Apostle writes to the Corinthians and says, I call God for a record upon my soul, that to spare you I came not as yet unto Corinth. Not for that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy. a I too say the same to you: to spare you I came not unto you; further, I spared myself, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow b from you, and preferred not to show my face before you but to pour out my heart to God for your behoof and to conduct this perilous case of yours, not by speech before you, but rather by tears before God,c lest He turn to mourning the joy wherewith I am wont to rejoice in you and to find some little comfort, amid the great offences with which this world everywhere abounds, in the remembrance of your large community and your chaste love and holy conversation and the more abundant grace of God that has been given you, whereby you have not only renounced carnal wedlock, but have also chosen to dwell with one accord in fellowship together under the same roof, to have " one soul and one heart " unto God. d

[283042] When I consider these excellences you show, which God did bestow, my heart is wont to find some sort of peace amid the many storms that arise through evils elsewhere to agitate it. Ye did run well; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the truth? This persuasion cometh not of God that called you. A little leaven e—what follows I prefer to leave unsaid, for it is rather my desire and prayer and exhortation that the leaven itself may return to something better, not that " the whole lump " may turn (as it had almost done already) to something worse. If then you have blossomed again into soundness of mind, pray that ye enter not into temptation, f nor fall once more into debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, tumults, whisperings. g For we did not so plant and water the garden of the Lord among you as to reap these thorns from you a; yet if your weakness still causes turmoil, pray to be delivered from temptation. Yet unless those sisters that trouble your peace reform b (if they still trouble it), they shall bear their judgement, whosoever they be. c

[284121] Consider what an evil thing it is that we should have to bewail internal discords in your monastery, when we are rejoicing over the Donatists d in unity. Be steadfast in the good purpose you have set before you and you will not desire to change your superior; steadfastly abiding in that monastery for so many years, she begot you not of the body, but of the soul, and you have grown both in numbers and in age. All of you, when you came to it, found her either doing service that was well-pleasing to the holy superior my sister, or else acting as superior herself and adopting you. Under her you received your training, under her you took the veil, under her you have been increased; and yet you demand with all this clamour that we should replace her for you, when you ought to be lamenting if we proposed to replace her for you. She is the one you have learned to know; she is the one to whom at first you came; she is the one under whom for so many years you have grown. No new official has been given you except the priest-superior; or if it be because of him that you seek some new thing and through jealousy for him that you have thus rebelled against your mother, why did you not rather ask to have him changed for you? But if you shrink from that (since I know with what reverence and affection you regard him in Christ), why not the more shrink from the other course? For in ruling you the efforts of the priest-superior are so thwarted by your dis-orderliness, that he himself is the rather minded to abandon you than to endure such an invidious reputation from you as to have it said that you would not have demanded another mother-superior, if you had not begun to have him as priest-superior. May God then calm and compose your hearts! May the work of the devil not gain the upper hand within you,a but may the peace of Christ rule in your hearts b! And do not rush headlong unto death, either from mortification that your desire is not granted or from the shame that you experience from desiring what you ought not to have desired. Rather by repentance renew your salvation, nor ought it to be the repentance of Judas the betrayer,c but rather the tears of Peter the shepherd. d

[286317] These are the rules we lay down for your observance, who have entered upon monastic life. e

[286410] Firstly, to fulfil the end for which you have gathered into one community, dwell together in the house as single-minded sisters, and have one mind and one heart f towards God. And call not anything your own, but let everything be common property; and let there be a distribution made to each of you by your superior of food and raiment, not in equal portions to all, since you are not all of equal importance, but to each one according as she has need. For in the Acts of the Apostles you read that they had all things common, and distribution was made to every man according as he had need. a Let those of you who had any possessions in the world before you entered the monastery willingly consent that they become common property; let those, on the other hand, who had none, not seek in the monastery for things they could not have outside it, but yet let what is needful be conceded to their weakness, even if their poverty, while they were outside, was such that they could not procure even the bare necessities of life. Nevertheless, let them not think themselves fortunate only because they have procured such food and raiment as they were unable to procure outside.

[287584] And let them not go about with head erect because they are associating with those whom they did not dare to approach outside, but let them lift up their hearts and not seek earthly goods, in case the monasteries become of service to the rich and not to the poor, while in them the rich are bowed down with humility and the poor in them puffed up with vanity. But again, let not those who in the world considered themselves something, hold in scorn their sisters who have come to that holy fellowship from poverty b; let them endeavour to take greater pride in the fellowship of their poor sisters than in the rank of their wealthy parents. And let them not exalt themselves, if they have made some contribution from their own resources to the common life, lest they grow more vain of their wealth because they are sharing it with the monastery, than if they were enjoying the use of it in the world; for every other kind of iniquity prompts the doing of evil deeds, but pride lurks even in good deeds to their undoing. And what does it avail to scatter wealth in alms to the poor and to become poor oneself, when the wretched soul is rendered prouder by despising wealth than it was by possessing it? Live, then, all of you, in singlemindedness and harmony, and in each other honour God, Whose temples you have become. a

[288906] Be instant in prayer b at the appointed hours and seasons. In the oratory let no one do anything but that for which it was made and from which it received its name, so that if any of you have leisure and wish to pray outside the appointed hours, you may not be hindered by others who think they should be doing something else in it. When you pray to God with psalms and hymns, meditate in your heart upon that which you utter with your voice, and do not sing anything unless what you read is to be sung; what is not written to be sung, is not to be sung.

[289462] Subdue your flesh by fasting and abstinence from meat and drink, as far as the health allows. When, however, anyone is unable to fast, let her not take any nourishment outside of the hour of repast, unless when ill. From the time of your coming to table until you rise from it, hearken without din and wrangling to what according to the custom is read to you; let not your mouths alone take food, but let your ears too hunger for the word of God.

[289910] If those who are of weaker health from their former mode of life are treated differently with regard to food, this ought not to be vexatious or to seem unfair to others whom a different mode of life has made stronger. And let them not imagine these weaker sisters more fortunate than themselves because they enjoy a fare which is denied to themselves, but let them rather congratulate themselves that they have strength which is denied to the others. And if they who have come to the monastery from a more delicate upbringing are granted any food, clothing, bedding, or covering, that is not granted to others who are stronger and therefore more fortunate, those to whom it is not granted should consider how great a descent the others have made from their sphere of life in the world to this one. even although they have been unable to attain to the severe simplicity of those who are stronger in body. Nor should they hanker after what they see others receiving (not as a mark of higher favour, but as a mark of patient long-suffering) to a greater degree than they do themselves, lest there arise the abominable travesty of monastic life whereby the rich, as far as possible, are to be compelled to toil, and the poor allowed to live in luxury. Certainly, just as those who are ill have of necessity to take, less food so as not to aggravate their disease, so after their illness they must receive such treatment as will help them to a speedier recovery, even although the worldly station from which they have come was one of the deepest poverty; just as if the illness they have just passed through had bestowed on them the privileges allowed to the wealthy because of their previous mode of life. But when they have made up their former strength, let them return to their own more fortunate mode of life, which is all the more befitting the handmaidens of God as it involves fewer wants; and let not their choice keep them, when they are well, in the privi- leged position to which necessity had raised them, when they were ill. Let those reckon themselves richer who in enduring frugality have been stronger; it is better to want less than to receive more.

[292074] Let not your apparel be conspicuous, and aspire to please, not by your attire, but by your conduct; let the covering of your head not be so thin that the nets appear under it. Do not let any part of your hair be uncovered, and, when you are outside the monastery, do not let it fly loose through carelessness or be arranged with fastidiousness. a When you go in procession, walk together; when you reach the place you are going to, stand together. In walking, in standing, in deportment, in all your movements, let nothing be done that might attract the desire of anyone, but let everything be in keeping with your holy character. Though your eyes may be cast upon anyone, let them be fixed upon no one; for when you are in procession, you are not forbidden to look upon men, but to desire to make approaches to them or to have them make approaches to you. It is not by touch only and by bearing that a woman solicits approaches or makes them, but by look as well. And do not say that you have chaste minds if you have unchaste eyes, because an unchaste eye is the messenger of an unchaste heart, and when unchaste hearts send messages to each other, even though the tongue is silent, by the exchange of a look and agreeably to the lust of the flesh find pleasure each in the other's ardour, the body may actually remain uncontaminated by any unclean violation and yet purity may take its departure from the character. And she who fixes her eye upon a man and takes delight in having his fixed upon herself, must not imagine that, when she does so, she is not observed by others; she assuredly is observed, and observed by those she wots not of. But just suppose she does escape detection and is not observed by any human being, what will she do about that observer from above, Whose detection nothing can escape? a Is He to be considered to observe nothing, because He observes with as much long-suffering as wisdom: Let each holy woman therefore cherish the fear of displeasing Him, so as to avoid the desire of sinfully pleasing man; let her keep in mind that He observes everything, so that she may avoid the desire of sinfully observing man. For it is fear of Him. and that in this self-same matter, that is commended to us by the passage, One that fixeth the eye is an abomination to the Lord. b So then, when you are together in church and in any place where men too are present, keep mutual guard upon your chastity, for in that way too God. Who dwelleth in you, c makes you His guards upon yourselves.

[294586] And if in anyone of your number you perceive this frowardness of eve of which I am speaking, at once admonish her, so that what has begun may go no farther, but may be remedied straightway. But if. even after admonishment, you notice her doing the same thing again on any other day, whoever has had the opportunity of noticing this should report her for treatment, as one afflicted with a sore, but not before she has been pointed out to a second or a third, so that she may be convicted from the mouth of two or three witnesses d and be punished with becoming severity. And do not judge yourselves to be acting from malice when you point out anything of this kind; for the truth rather is that you share the guilt if you allow your sisters to perish by keeping silence, when it lies in your power to correct them by pointing them out. For if your sister had a sore on the body that she wanted to conceal from fear of the surgeon's knife, would it not be cruel on your part to say nothing about it, and compassionate to point it out? How much rather, then, are you bound to expose her, so that she may not incur greater risk from the canker in her heart? But before she be pointed out to the others whose witness is to convict her if she deny her guilt, she ought first to be reported to the superior, if on being warned she has neglected to reform so that through the more private rebuke she may not escape the others' knowledge. If, however, she denies her guilt, then she should, on making this false assertion, be confronted with the others, so that in the presence of all she may be convicted by two or three witnesses, and not charged simply by one. After conviction she ought to be visited with corrective punishment at the discretion of the superior or the priest-in-charge; if she refuses to undergo that and does not of herself take her departure, let her be expelled from your community. This extreme step is taken not out of cruelty, but out of compassion, as a precaution against the destruction of many others through deadly contamination. And let my remarks about wanton looks be carefully observed, with love of the sinner and hatred of the sin,a in the discovery, prohibition, denunciation, trial and punishment of the other sins. But if anyone of you has gone to such lengths in sin that she is secretly receiving from a man letters or any kind of gifts, let her be pardoned and prayer be made for her, if she confesses it of her own accord; but if she is detected and it be proved against her, let more serious punishment be inflicted on her at the discretion of the priest-superior or the other priests in a body or even the bishop.

[297240] Keep your clothes under the care of one or two or as many as may be necessary to shake them out for protection against moths; and just as your food is supplied from one store-room, so let your clothing come from one wardrobe. And whatever is brought forth for you to wear according to the weather, let it not concern you, if you can attain this, whether each of you receives the garment she put off, or another that someone else had been wearing, so long as each is not denied what she needs. But if this gives occasion for strife and murmuring among you, and someone complains that she has received a worse garment than she was wearing before and considers herself too good to be clad in the same way as her sister was, let that be evidence to you how far deficient you are in that inward holy apparel a of the heart, when you quarrel about the apparel of the body. Nevertheless, if your weakness is so far indulged that you are granted the dress you had put off, let what you put off be, nevertheless, kept in one place in charge of the ordinary keepers of the wardrobe; thus no one will work at anything for her own use, whether it be clothing or bedding or underclothing or covering or head-dress; but let everything you make be for the common stock, with greater zeal and more cheerful urgency than if you were making anything for yourself. For the love about which it is written that it seeketh not its own b is to be understood as that which prefers the common good to personal good, not personal good to the common good. And so, the more attention you give to the common good in preference to your own, the more progress you will know you have made, so that the love which endureth a may be conspicuous in everything needed for the wants that pass away. It follows, then, that even what a man or woman bestows upon the inmates of the monastery, be they daughters or relatives, whether the gift be clothing or any other things that may be regarded as necessaries, must not be received in secret, but it must lie in the power of the superior to put it to the common stock and to hand it over to any inmate that needs it. b If anyone conceal a gift bestowed on her, let her be sentenced and condemned for theft.

[299458] Let your garments be washed, either by yourselves or by washer-women, at the discretion of the superior, so that excessive solicitude for clean raiment may not infect the soul with inward vileness. c Let the bathing of the body and the use of baths not be incessant, but be granted at the usual interval of time, that is, once a month. If, however, the need arising from any illness demands the washing of the body, let it not be too long postponed, and let it be done without murmuring for medical reasons; if anyone refuse, let her do at the command of the superior what needs to be done for health's sake. But if she wishes it and it does not happen to be for her good, she must not give in to her desire, for there are times when what is pleasant is thought to be beneficial, even though it really do harm. Finally, if a handmaid of God has some hidden pain in the body, and tells what ails her, she should be believed without hesitation; but still, if there be uncertainty whether that which pleases her is suitable for curing her pain, let the doctor be consulted. When they go to the baths, or wherever they have to go, let there not be less than three; and the sister who requires to go somewhere is not to go along with those she chooses herself, but with those the superior orders. The care of the sick, whether they be convalescing or be afflicted with some weakness, yet without fever, ought to be devolved upon someone, so that she herself may procure from the store-room what she sees to be needful for each. Further, the sister who has charge either of the store-room or the wardrobe or the library,a must serve her sisters without murmuring. Let the manuscripts be applied for at a fixed hour each day; outside that hour those who apply for them are not to receive them. As for clothes and shoes, whenever they are required for those in need, let those who have charge of them not delay to supply what is asked for.

[301391] You should either have no quarrels or put an end to them as speedily as possible, lest anger develop into hatred and make a beam out of a mote b and turn the soul to murder. For it is not only to men that the saying applies, He that hateth his brother is a murderer, c but the female sex too has received this commandment along with the male sex, which God created first. Whoever has injured a sister by taunt or abuse, or even by casting up faults, must remember to make amends at the first opportunity and heal the wound she has caused; and the injured sister must forgive her without further argument. But if they have caused mutual injury, they will require to grant mutual pardon because of your prayers, which from their frequency ought to be the holier. She who is often tempted by anger and yet hastens to beg for forgiveness from the sister whom she acknowledges she has hurt, is better than she who is slower to anger and is more stubborn in turning to seek for pardon. As for her who always refuses to seek for pardon or who seeks it without sincerity, she has no reason to be in the monastery, even if she is not expelled from it. Wherefore, refrain from harsh words; if they fall from your lips, do not think shame with the same lips that caused the hurt to utter words of healing. When, however, the needs of discipline compel the speaking of harsh words for the controlling of the younger inmates, you are not required to ask their pardon even if you feel that you have gone somewhat too far; otherwise, in observing too much humility towards those whose duty it is to be subject to you, you will undermine your authority in controlling them. But still you must seek pardon from the Lord of all, Who knows how great is the goodwill and love you have even for those whom you rebuke, perhaps, with undue severity. The love you bear each other ought, however, not to be carnal, but spiritual, for the things that immodest women do even to other women in low jests and pranks ought not to be done, not only by widows and chaste handmaidens of Christ following your holy way of life, but by Christians at all, be they married women or maidens destined for marriage.

[303568] Let the superior be obeyed like a mother, with all due honour, so that you offend not God through offending her; much more should you obey the priest who has charge of you all. Upon the superior particularly will fall the responsibility of seeing that all these regulations are carried out and, if anything is not carried out, of not carelessly passing over the offence, but of applying the remedy to heal and correct it; she may, further, refer to the priest-in-charge any matter that goes beyond her province or power. But let her think herself fortunate, not in having authority to rule, but in having the love to serve. a In honour in the sight of men let her be preferred to you; in the sight of God let her be beneath your feet. Towards everyone let her show herself a pattern of good works. b Let her warn the unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient to all. c Let her be cheerful in maintaining discipline and fearful to impose it; and although both are necessary, vet let her endeavour to be more loved by you than feared, always bearing in mind that she has to render an account of you to God. d Wherefore, by yielding her greater obedience, have compassion on her as well as on yourselves, because the higher her position is among you, the greater is the risk she runs.

[304873] May the Lord grant you to observe all these rules with love, as those whose affection is set upon spiritual beauty and who are fragrant with the sweet savour of Christ in your good conduct,e not as bonds women under the law, but as free women under grace. f In order, however, that you may examine yourselves in this treatise as in a mirror and may not neglect any point through forgetfulness, let it be read to you once each week, and when you find yourselves practising the things written in it, render thanks to the Lord, the giver of every good gift. But when any one of you perceives herself deficient in some point, let her lament the past and take precautions for the future, praying both that her trespass may be forgiven and that she may not be led into temptation. a

[305651] There have come to me two young men, Cresconius and Felix, declaring themselves members of your community, who have reported to me that there is some disturbance and dissension in your monastery because certain brethren are extolling grace to such an extent that they deny the freedom of the human will and, what is more serious, assert that on the day of judgement God will not render to every man according to his deeds. a But yet they have pointed out too that there are many of you who do not share these opinions, but confess that our free-will is aided by the grace of God so that we may think and do what is right, and that, when the Lord comes to render to every man according to his deeds, he will find our deeds good—deeds which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them. b Those who hold these opinions, hold right opinions.

[306499] I beseech you, therefore, brethren, as the apostle besought the Corinthians, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing and that there be no divisions among you. c For in the first place, the Lord Jesus, as is written in the Gospel of John the apostle, did not come to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved d; secondly, as the apostle Paul writes, God shall judge the world, e when He has come, as the whole Church confesses in the Creed, to judge the quick and the dead. f If then there is no grace of God, how does He save the world? And if there is no free-will, how does He judge the world? Wherefore, the treatise or letter of mine, which the afore-mentioned brethren brought with them to us, you are to understand in the light of that confession of faith, so that you neither deny the grace of God nor defend free-will in such a way as to sunder it from God's grace, as if without it we could by any means think or do anything well-pleasing to God—a thing which is utterly impossible. That is why the Lord, speaking about the fruits of righteousness, says to His disciples, Without me ye can do nothing. g

[307667] So you must know that the letter I have mentioned was written to Sixtus, a priest of the Roman Church, against the new heretics, the Pelagians, who declare that the grace of God is bestowed according to our merits; so that he who glories has to glory, not in the Lord, but in himself, that is, in man, not in the Lord. Now this is forbidden by the apostle, in the words, Let no man glory in man, and in another place he says, He that glorieth let him glory in the Lord. a But these heretics, imagining that they become righteous of themselves, as if it was they themselves and not God who granted this to them, consistently enough glory in themselves and not in the Lord. To such the apostle says, Who maketh thee, to differ from another?,b saying this on the ground that what makes a man to differ from that mass of perdition which had its origin in Adam and makes him a vessel unto honour and not unto dishonour,c is God alone. But since carnal man, swollen with empty pride, might, on hearing the question Who maketh thee to differ from another?, make answer either in thought or in word and say, It is my faith that makes me to differ; my prayers that make me to differ; my righteousness that makes me to differ, the apostle at once met these thoughts half-way and said, For what hast thou that thou didst not receive? Now, if thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory, as if thou didst not receive it? d For they glory just as if they did not receive it, those who imagine they are justified of themselves; they glory therefore in themselves and not in the Lord.

[309237] That is the reason why, in that letter that has come into your hands, I, the author of it,e have proved from passages of Holy Scripture, which you can examine in it, that our good works and our holy prayers and our right faith could certainly not have come into being within us, unless we had received them from Him of Whom the apostle James says, Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above and cometh down from the Father of lights. a This makes it impossible for anyone to say that it is for the merit of his own works or the merit of his own prayers or the merit of his own faith that the grace of God was bestowed upon him, and to imagine that what these heretics say is true, that the grace of God is bestowed according to our merits. This is utterly untrue; not because there are no merits—either good merits in the righteous, or evil merits in the unrighteous—otherwise how will God judge the world?—but because a man is converted by the mercy and grace of God. of which the Psalm says, As for my God. His mercy shall prevent me, b so that the unrighteous may be justified, that is, be made just instead of unrighteous, and begin to possess that good merit which the Lord will crown when He comes to judge the world.

[310472] There are many communications I wished to send you for your perusal: you would then have had more exact and detailed knowledge of the whole action that was brought against these same Pelagians by the councils of bishops. But the brethren who came to us from your company had to hurry away. By them I am sending you this letter, which is not a reply to any of yours, for they brought none to us from your Charity. Yet we received them, as their straightforwardness was sufficient evidence that they were incapable of fabricating anything. Their purpose in hurrying away is to spend Easter with you, so that so holy a day may, with the Lord's help, find you in peace, rather than in strife.

[311162] It will, however, be better for you to do what I earnestly beg you will do; send to me, if it will not trouble you, the brother who is said to have caused this dissension, for either he has misunderstood my book, or perhaps he has made himself misunderstood, in his attempt to elucidate and unravel a question which is very difficult and intelligible to few. It is no other than the question about God's grace, which has caused men of small intelligence to imagine that the apostle Paul says, Let us do evil that good may come. a With reference to this the apostle Peter says in his second Epistle, Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent, that ye may be found of Him in peace, without spot and blameless; and account that the long-suffering of our Lord is salvation; even as our beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given unto him, hath written unto you; as also in all his epistles, speaking in them in these things; in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, unto their own destruction. b

[312291] Take heed, then, to avoid what the great apostle describes so fearsomely, and when you realize that you do not understand, put your faith for the present in the inspired statements that in man there is both freewill and divine grace, without the aid of which freewill can neither be turned to God nor make any advance towards God; and pray that what you submissively put your faith in, you may come wisely to understand. And indeed it is for this very purpose that we have free-will, namely, that we may wisely understand, for unless we had freedom of will in understanding and practising wisdom, we should not be commanded in the words of Scripture, Under- stand now, ye simple among the people; and ye fools, at length be wise. a From the very fact, then, that we have been commanded and instructed to understand and be wise, it follows that our obedience is demanded, and it cannot exist unless through freewill. Yet if it were in our power of our own free-will to obey this precept to understand and be wise, without the assistance of grace, it would be useless to say to God, Give me understanding, that I may learn Thy commandments, b nor would it be written in the Gospel, Then opened He their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures c; nor would the apostle James say, If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, Who giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. d But the Lord is able to grant both to you and to us, to rejoice in the speedy tidings of your peace and holy concord. I greet you, not only in my own name, but also in the name of the brethren who are with me, and I beseech you to pray for us with one heart and with all instancy. The Lord be with you! Amen.

[314023] I could never find a more trustworthy man or one who could have easier access to your presence as bearer of my letter than the servant and minister of Christ, the deacon Paul,a a dear friend of us both, who has just now been provided for me by the Lord. I must say something to you, not with regard to the power and the honour you bear in this evil world, nor with regard to the preservation of your corruptible mortal body b (for it too is destined to pass away, and how long it may endure is always uncertain), but with regard to the salvation promised us by Christ. Because of it He was degraded and crucified here below, so that He might teach us rather to despise than to desire the good things of this world, and to set our affection and our hope upon that which He revealed in His resurrection; for He is risen from the dead and dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over Him. c

[314915] I know that you have no lack of friends who love you as far as your life in this world is concerned, and, so far as it is concerned, give you advice, sometimes useful, sometimes not; for they are only human and the highest wisdom they as such can have looketh only to the present hour, and they do not know what may happen on the morrow. But as far as God is concerned, it is not easy for anyone to give you advice that will prevent the destruction of your soul; it is not that you lack friends who would do this, but because it is difficult for them to find an opportunity of speaking of those subjects with you. I myself, indeed, have always wanted to do so, but I have never found the place or the time to deal with you as I ought to deal with one for whom I have a great affection in Christ. Yet you know what I was like when you saw me at Hippo, on the occasion of your gracious visit to me a: I was so worn out and weak in body that I could scarcely speak. But now, my son, hearken to me when I converse with you by letter at least; while you were in danger, I never had a chance of sending one to you. from apprehension of danger to the bearer and fear that m v letter might come into the hands of people whom I should not have wished it to reach. I beg you. therefore, for forgiveness, if you have the impression that I was more apprehensive than I should have been; vet I have stated that I was apprehensive.

[316334] Hear me, therefore: nay, hear the Lord our God through me. His feeble servant. Recall to mind what manner of man you were while your first wife, of hallowed memory, was still in the flesh, and how just after her death you took a horror of the vanity of this life, and how you longed to enter the service of God. b We know, we can testify. what you said in conversation with us at Tubunae c about your state of mind and your intentions, when brother Alypius and I were alone with you. Indeed, I do not think that the earthly cares which now engross you have so prevailed as to be able to wipe that conversation from your memory. You wanted, in fact, to abandon all the public business that engaged you and to retire to a holy retreat and to live the life lived by God's servants the monks. What was it that restrained you? Only the reflection, which we urged on you, of the great advantage the work you were doing would be to the churches of Christ, if you pursued it with the sole purpose of protecting them from the hostile attacks of barbarians,a so that they might live, as the apostle says, a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, b while you yourself would seek from this world nothing but what was necessary for the maintenance of your own life and that of your household, girding yourself with the chastest continence, and wearing along with the armour of the body the surer and stronger defence of the armour of the spirit.

[317784] When, in consequence, we were rejoicing in this design of yours, you sailed for Italy and you married a wife c; your sailing was an act of obedience, which you owed, according to the apostle, to the higher powers d; but you would not have married a wife if you had not been overcome by desire and abandoned the continence you took upon yourself. When I learned of this, I confess I was thunderstruck with amazement, yet in some measure I found consolation for my grief in the fact that I heard you had refused to marry her until she turned Catholic. But in spite of that, the heresy of those who deny the true Son of God has acquired such influence in your home that it was by them that your daughter was baptized. If the report that reached us was not untrue (and would to Heaven that it were!), that those same heretics have even re-baptized maidens consecrated to God, what fountains of tears we should need now to bewail such a calamity! Further, people say that you have not been content with your own wife, but have degraded yourself by having intercourse with some concubines or other. But perhaps this is lying gossip.

[318912] These evils, numerous and grave and known to everybody, have been perpetrated by you since your marriage, and so what am I to say? You are a Christian, you possess intelligence,a you cherish the fear of God. Consider for yourself the things I am unwilling to utter, and you will find how great are the evils for which you ought to do penance. I believe it is for that that the Lord is sparing you and delivering you from all dangers, so that you may do it as it should be done, but on condition that you hearken to the words, Tarry not to be converted to the Lord and put not off from day to day. b You maintain that your cause is just,c but I cannot judge of that, for I am unable to hear both sides; but whatever your cause be, and of that at present there is no need of inquiry or discussion, can you deny before God that you would not have fallen into these straits if you had not loved the good things of this world, which like a servant of God, as we knew you to be formerly, you ought entirely to have despised and counted as nothing? Accepting what was bestowed on you, you should have employed it to advance your godliness; that which was denied you or was entrusted to you to administer, you should not have sought after in such a way as to reduce yourself because of it to the present straits, in which, because of the love felt for vain things, evil things are done—few, indeed, by you, but many because of you, and since fear is felt for things which hurt for only a short time (if indeed they hurt at all), things are done which really hurt for all eternity.

[320486] To mention only one of these things: who can fail to see that many men cleave to you for the preservation of your power or your personal safety, who (assuming that they are all loyal to you and that you need not apprehend treachery from any one of them) yet desire through you to attain to those good things which they too love, not in order to please God, but from worldly motives? As a result, you, whose duty it was to bridle and check your desires, are compelled to satisfy those of others; and before that can be done, many things have to be done that are displeasing to God. Even so, such desires as theirs are not quite satisfied, for it is easier altogether to cut them off in those who love God, than ever to give them appeasement in those who love the world. That is why Holy Scripture says, Love not the world nor the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world passeth away, and the lust thereof; but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever, as God abideth for ever. a When, then, will you succeed with so many armed men whose desires have to be humoured and whose vindictiveness is to be feared—when, I repeat, will you succeed in bringing the desires of these men who love the world, not to actual repletion (for that is simply impossible), but to a moderate gratification, in order to avoid a universal destruction, if you do not do the things that God forbids and for which His vengeance will fall on the doers? And to afford them gratification, you see the havoc has been so widespread that now hardly anything, however small its value, can be found for them to plunder. a

[322290] And what shall I say about the devastation of

[322337] Africa that is being wrought by African barbarians? They meet with no opposition, so long as you are taken up with the difficulties of your own situation and take no measures to avert this calamity. After the appointment of Boniface as Count of the Household and of Africa with so great an army and such extensive authority—Boniface, who, while tribune, aided by a few confederates, quelled all those tribes by force of arms and the menace of his name,b—who would ever believe, who would ever be afraid, that those barbarians would be so daring, would encroach so far, would spread such devastation, seize so much plunder, make desolate so many places that were once crowded with people? Did not everyone declare that, as soon as you took over the authority of Count, the African barbarians would not only be subdued, but would actually be made tributary to the Roman Empire? And now you see how men's hopes have been dashed to the ground. On this subject I need not linger, for your own mind can suggest more to you than I can say.

[323371] But perhaps you reply to this with the defence that the blame must rather be laid upon those who have injured you, who instead of a fair reward for the virtues you displayed in office, rendered you the very opposite. The rights or wrongs of that I personally am unable to examine and decide; rather look at and look into your own case, not as it Res between you and any men, but as it lies, to your own personal knowledge, between you and God; for as you live in Christ as a believer, you ought to cherish fear of giving offence to Him. The cases that engage my attention are rather those of the world above, for it is to their own sins that men ought to attribute the fact that Africa is undergoing such calamities. Nevertheless, I do not want you to be of the number of those evil and unrighteous men whom God uses to scourge with temporal punishments those whom He chooses; since for the unrighteous themselves, whose evil nature He justly employs to inflict temporal evils on others, He reserves everlasting punishment, if they do not reform. But as for yourself, fix your mind upon God, turn your thoughts to Christ, Who has bestowed such great blessings and endured such great sufferings. Those who desire to attain to His kingdom and to live with Him and under Him in everlasting blessedness, love even their enemies, do good to those who hate them and pray for those who persecute them a; and if at any time in the interests of discipline they employ irksome severity, they do not, however, lay aside their sincere affection. If, then, benefits have been conferred upon you by the Roman Empire, though they be earthly and transitory b (for that Empire itself is earthly, and not heavenly, and it can bestow only what lies within its own power); if, then, benefits have been bestowed upon you, render not evil for good; but if evil has been inflicted upon you, render not evil for evil. a Which of these two has been your lot, I do not wish to discuss nor am I able to decide; for my part I am speaking to a Christian: render not evil for good nor yet evil for evil.

[325446] You perhaps say to me, What do you want me to do in these straits? If you ask advice from me as after the spirit of this world, how your safety, transitory as it is, may be secured, and your power and wealth either preserved in their present condition or increased to greater dimensions, I am at a loss what to answer you; things as uncertain as these do not admit of any certain counsel. b But if, as in the sight of God. you consult me about saving your soul from destruction and fear the word of Truth Who says, What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul?, c I certainly have an answer to give; I am ready with advice which you must hear from me. Yet what need is there for me to say anything different from what I have already said: Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh and the lust of the eyes and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world passeth away, and the lust thereof; but he that doeth the will of God, abideth for ever, even as God abideth for ever. d Here is advice for you; lay hold of it and act upon it. Let it now be seen if you are a strong man: vanquish the desires with which you love the world. Do penance for the misdeeds of the past, when these desires had you vanquished and empty passions dragged you in their train. If you will receive this advice and hold fast to it and keep it, you will both attain to those blessings which are certain and pass through the midst of these uncertain things without harm to your own soul.