WORK: The Case of Ireland's Being Bound by Acts of Parliament in England, Stated  (slug: william-molyneux-the-case-of-irelands-being-bound-282569)

CHAPTER: 02-the-case-of-ireland-s-being-bound-by-act-of-parlia



[110237] Is the Reason of England’s Parliament not binding Ireland, because we do not send thither Representatives? And is the Efficacy of this Reason taken off, by our being named in an English Act? Why should sending Representatives to Parliament, bind those that send them? Merely because thereby the Consent of those that are bound, is obtained, as far as those sort of Meetings can possibly permit; which is the very Foundation of the obligation of all Laws. And is Ireland’s being named in an English Act of Parliament, the least Step towards obtaining the Consent of the People of Ireland? If it be not, then certainly my Lord Cook’s Parenthesis is to no purpose. And it is a Wonder to me, that so many Men have run upon this vain Imagination, merely from the Assertion of this Judge: For I challenge any Man to shew me, that any one before him, or any one since, but from him, has vended this Doctrine: And if the bare Assertion of a Judge, shall bind a whole Nation, and dissolve the Rights and Liberties thereof, we shall make their Tongues very powerful, and constitute them greater Lawgivers than the greatest Senates. I do not see why my denying it, should not be as authentic as his affirming it. It is true, he was a great Lawyer and a powerful Judge; but had no more Authority to make a Law, than I or any Man else. But some will say, he was a learned Judge, and may be supposed to have Reason for his Position. Why then does he not give it us? And then what he asserts would prevail, not from the Authority of the Person, but from the Force of the Reason. The most learned in the Laws have no more Power to make or alter a Constitution, than any other Man; and their Decisions shall no farther prevail, than supported by Reason and Equity. I conceive my Lord Chief Justice Cook applied himself so wholly to the Study of the Common Laws of England, that he did not enquire far into the Laws of Nature and Nations; if he had, certainly he could never have been guilty of such an erroneous Slip; he would have seen demonstrably, that Consent only gives humane Laws their Force, and that therefore the Reason in the Case he quotes is unanswerable, Quia non mittunt Milites ad Parliamentum. Moreover, the Assertion of Cook in this Point is directly contrary to the whole Tenor of the Case which he cites: For the very Act of Parliament on which the Debate of the Judges did arise, and which they deemed not to be of Force in Ireland, particularly names Ireland. So that here again Lord Cook’s Error appears most plainly. For this I refer to the Report, as I have exactly delivered it before, page 90, 91. by which it appears clearly to be the unanimous Opinion of all the Judges then in the Exchequer Chamber: That within the Land of Ireland, the Parliaments of England have no Jurisdiction, whatever they may have over the Subjects of Ireland on the open Seas: And the Reason is given, Quia Hibernia non mittit Milites ad Parliamentum in Angliâ.

[113188] This Assertion likewise is inconsistent with himself in other Parts of his Works. He tells us in his 4th Inst. page 349. That it is plain that not only King John (as all Men allow) but Henry the Second also, the Father of King John, did ordain and command, at the instance of the Irish, that such Laws as had been in England should be observed, and of Force in Ireland. Hereby Ireland being of itself a distinct Dominion, and no Part of the Kingdom of England, was to have Parliaments holden there as in England. And in page 12. he tells us, that Henry the Second sent a Modus into Ireland, directing them how to hold their Parliaments. But to what End was all this, if Ireland nevertheless were subject to the Parliament of England? The King and Parliaments of these Kingdoms are the supreme Legislators; if Ireland be subject to two, (its own, and that of England) it has two Supremes; it is not impossible, but they may enact different or contrary Sanctions; which of these shall the People obey? He tells us in Calvin’s Case, Fol. 17. b. That if a King hath a Christian Kingdom by Conquest, as Henry the Second had Ireland, after King John had given to them, being under his Obedience and Subjection; the Laws of England for the Government of that Country: No succeeding King could alter the same without Parliament. Which, by the way, seems directly contradictory to what he says concerning Ireland, six Lines below this last cited Passage. So that we may observe my Lord Cook enormously stumbling at every Turn in this Point.

[114721] Thus I have done with this reverend Judge; and in him, with the only positive Opinion against us. I shall now consider what our Law Books offer in our Favour on this Point.

[114895] To this purpose we meet a Case fully opposite, reported in the Year-Book of the 20th of Henry the Sixth, Fol. 8. between one John Pilkington, and one A.

[115049] Pilkington brought a Scire Facias against A. to shew Cause, why Letters Patents, whereby the King had granted an Office in Ireland to the said A. should not be repealed, since the said Pilkington had the same Office granted to him by former Letters Patents of the same King, to be occupied by himself or his Deputy. Whereupon A. pleaded, that the Land of Ireland, Time-out of Memory, hath been a Land separated and distinct from the Land of England, and ruled and govered by the Customs of the same Land of Ireland. That the Lords of the same Land, which are of the King’s Council, have used from time to time, in the Absence of the King, to elect a Justice, who hath Power to pardon and punish all Felons, &c. and to call a Parliament, and by the Advice of the Lords and Commonalty to make Statutes. He alledged further, that a Parliament was assembled, and that it was ordained by the said Parliament, that every Man who had an Office within the said Land, before a certain Day, shall occupy the said Office by himself, otherwise he should forfeit. He shewed that Pilkington occupied by a Deputy; and that therefore his Office was void, and that the King had granted the said Office to him the said A. Hereupon Pilkington demurred in Law; and it was debated by the Judges, Yelverton, Fortescue, Portington, Markham, and Ascough, whether the said Prescription in relation to the State and Government of Ireland, be good or void in Law. Yelverton and Portington held the Prescription void. But Fortescue, Markham, and Ascough held the Prescription good, and that the Letters Patents made to A. were good, and ought not to be repealed. And in this it was agreed by Fortescue and Portington, that if a Tenth or Fifteenth be granted by Parliament in England, that shall not bind Ireland, although the King should send the same Statute into Ireland under his great Seal; except they in Ireland will in their Parliament approve it; because they have not any Commandment by Writ to come to the Parliament of England: And this was not denied by Markham, Yelverton, or Ascough.

[117120] The Merchants of Waterford’s Case, which I have observed before, page 68, as reported in the Year-Book of the 2d of Richard the Third, fol. 11, 12, is notorious in our Behalf, but needs not be here repeated.

[117329] The Case of the Priory of Lanthony in Wales, mentioned by Mr. Pryn against the 4th Instit. ch. 76, page 313, is usually cited against us. But I conceive it is so far from proving this, that it is very much in our Behalf. The Case was briefly thus. The Prior of Lanthony brought an Action in the Common Pleas of Ireland against the Prior of Mollingar, for an Arrear of an Annuity, and Judgment went against the Prior of Mollingar; hereon the Prior of Mollingar brought a Writ of Error in the King’s-Bench of Ireland, and the Judgment was affirmed. Then the Prior of Mollingar appealed to the Parliament of Ireland, held 5 Henry the Sixth, before James Butler, Earl of Ormond, and the Parliament reversed both Judgments. The Prior of Lanthony removed all into the King’s-Bench in England; but the King’s-Bench refused to intermeddle, as having no Power over what passed in the Parliament of Ireland. Hereupon the Prior of Lanthony appealed to the Parliament of England. And it does not appear by the Parliament-Roll that any Thing was done on this Appeal; all that is entered being only the Petition itself at the End of the Roll. Vid. Pryn against chap. 76, page 313.

[118497] Now whether this be a Precedent proving the Subordination of our Irish Parliament to that of England, I leave the Reader to judge. To me it seems the clear contrary. For, first, we may observe the King’s-Bench in England absolutely disclaiming any Cognizance of what hath passed in the Parliament of Ireland. And next we may observe, that nothing at all was done therein upon the Appeal to the Parliament of England: Certainly if the Parliament of England had thought themselves to have a Right to enquire into this Matter, they had so done, one way or the other, and not left the Matter undetermined and in suspence.

[119116] It has ever been acknowledged that the Kingdom of Ireland is inseparably annexed to the Imperial Crown of England. The Obligation that our Legislature lies under by Poyning’s Act, 10 Henry the Seventh, c. 4. Makes this Tye between the two Kingdoms indissoluble. And we must ever own it our Happiness to be thus annexed to England: And that the Kings and Queens of England, are by undoubted Right, ipso facto Kings and Queens of Ireland. And from hence we may reasonably conclude, that if any Acts of Parliament made in England should be of Force in Ireland, before they are received there in Parliament, they should be more especially such Acts as relate to the Succession and Settlement of the Crown, and Recognation of the King’s Title thereto, and the Power and Jurisdiction of the King. And yet we find in the Irish Statutes, 28 Henry the Eighth, c. 2. An Act for the Succession of the King and Queen Anne; and another, Chap. 5. declaring the King to be supreme Head of the Church of Ireland; both which Acts had formerly passed in the Parliament of England. So likewise we find amongst the Irish Statutes, Acts of Recognition of the King’s Title to Ireland, in the Reigns of Henry the Eighth, Queen Elizabeth, King James, King Charles the Second, King William and Queen Mary. By which it appears, that Ireland, though annexed to the Crown of England, has always been looked upon to be a Kingdom complete within itself, and to have all Jurisdiction to an absolute Kingdom, belonging, and subordinate to no legislative Authority on Earth. Though it is to be noted, these English Acts relating to the Succession, and Recognition of the King’s Title, do particularly name Ireland.

[120799] As the civil State of Ireland is thus absolute within itself, so likewise is our State ecclesiastical, this is manifest by the Canons and Constitutions, and even by the Articles of the Church of Ireland, which differ in some Things from those of the Church of England. And in all the Charters and Grants of Liberties and Immunities to Ireland, we still find this, that Holy Church shall be free, &c. I would fain know what is meant here by the Word free: Certainly if our Church be free, and absolute within itself, our State must be so likewise; for how our civil and ecclesiastical Government is now interwoven, every Body knows. But I will not enlarge on this Head, it suffices only to hint it; I shall detain myself to our civil Government.

[121545] Another Argument against the Parliament of England’s Jurisdiction over Ireland, I take from a Record in Reyley’s Placita Parliamentaria, page 569, to this Effect: In the 14th of Edward the Second, the King sent his Letters Patents to the Lord Justice of Ireland, letting him know, that he had been moved by his Parliament at Westminster, that he would give Order that the Irish Natives of Ireland might enjoy the Laws of England concerning Life and Member, in as large and ample Manner as the English of Ireland enjoyed the same. This therefore the King gives in Commandment, and orders accordingly, by these his Letters Patents. From hence, I say, we may gather, that the Parliament of England did not then take upon them to have any Jurisdiction in Ireland, (for then they would have made a Law for Ireland to this Effect) but instead thereof, they apply to the King, that he would interpose his Commands, and give Directions that this great Branch of the Common Law of England should be put in Execution in Ireland, indifferently to all the King’s Subjects there, pursuant to the original Compact made with them on their first Submission to the Crown of England.

[122712] Let us now consider the great Objection drawn from a Writ of Error’s lying from the King’s-Bench of England, on a Judgment given in the King’s-Bench in Ireland; which proves (as it is insisted on) that there is a Subordination of Ireland to England; and that if an inferior Court of Judicature in England can thus take Cognizance of, and over-rule the Proceedings in the like Court of Ireland; it will follow, that the supreme Court of Parliament in England may do the same, in relation to the Proceedings of the Court of Parliament in Ireland.

[123258] It must be confessed that this hath been the constant Practice; and it seems to be the great Thing that induced my Lord Cook to believe, that an Act of Parliament in England, and mentioning or including Ireland, should bind here. The Subordination of Ireland to England, he seems to infer from the Subordination of the King’s-Bench of Ireland to the King’s-Bench of England. But to this I answer:

[123656] 1. That it is the Opinion of several, learned in the Laws of Ireland, that this Removal of a Judgment from the King’s-Bench of Ireland, by Writ of Error, into the King’s-Bench of England, is founded on an Act of Parliament in Ireland, which is lost amongst a great Number of other Acts, which we want for the Space of 130 Years at one Time, and of 120 at another Time, as we have noted before, page 58. But it being only a general Tradition that there was such an Act of our Parliament, we only offer it as a Surmise, the Statute itself does not appear.

[124211] 2. Where a Judgment in Ireland is removed, to be reversed in England, the Judges in England ought, and always do judge, according to the Law and Customs of Ireland, and not according to the Laws and Customs of England, any otherwise than as these may be of Force in Ireland; but if in any Thing the two Laws differ, the Law of Ireland must prevail, and guide their Judgment. And therefore in the Case of one Kelly, removed to the King’s-Bench in England, in the Beginning of King Charles the First, one Error was assigned, that the Præcipe was of Woods and Underwoods, which is a manifest Error, if brought in England; but the Judges finding the Use to be otherwise in Ireland, judged it no Error. So in Crook, Charles, fol. 511. Mulcarry vers. Eyres. Error was assigned, for that the Declaration was of one hundred Acres of Bogg, which is a Word not known in England; but it was said, it was well enough understood in Ireland, and so adjudged no Error.

[125166] From whence, I conceive, it is manifest, that the Jurisdiction of the King’s-Bench in England, over a Judgment in the King’s-Bench of Ireland, does not proceed from any Subordination of one Kingdom to the other; but from some other Reason, which we shall endeavour to make out.

[125445] 3. We have before observed, that in the Reign of King Henry the Third, Gerald Fitz-Maurice, Lord Justice of Ireland, sent four Knights to know what was held for Law in England in the Case of Coparceners. The Occasion of which Message (as before we have noted out of the King’s Rescript) was because the King’s Justice of Ireland was ignorant what the Law was. We may reasonably imagine that there were many Messages of this Kind; for in the Infancy of the English Government, it may well be supposed, that the Judges in Ireland were not so deeply versed in the Laws of England: This occasioned Messages to England, before Judgment given in Ireland, to be informed of the Law. And after Decrees made, Persons who thought themselves aggrieved by erroneous Judgments, applied themselves to the King in England for Redress. Thus it must be, that Writs of Error (unless they had their Sanction in Parliament) became in use. Complaints to the King by those that thought themselves injured, increased; and at last grew into Custom, and obtained the Force of Law.

[126502] Perhaps it may be objected, that if the Judges of the King’s-Bench in England ought to regulate their Judgment by the Customs of Ireland, and not of England, it will follow, that this Original which we assign of Writs of Error to England, is not right.

[126756] I answer, that this may be the primary Original, and yet consist well enough with what we have before laid down: For though the Common Law of England was to be the Common Law of Ireland, and Ireland, at the Beginning of its English Government, might frequently send into England to be informed about it; yet this does not hinder, but Ireland, in a long Process of Time, may have some smaller Customs and Laws of its own, gradually, but insensibly crept into Practice, that may in some measure differ from the Customs and Practice of England; and where there is any such, the Judges of England must regulate their Sentence accordingly, though the first Rise of Writs of Error to England may be as we have here suggested. In like manner, where the Statute Law of Ireland differs from that of England, the Judges of England will regulate their Judgments by the Statute Law of Ireland: This is the constant Practice, and notoriously known in Westminster-Hall: From which it appears, that removing a Judgement from the King’s-Bench of Ireland to the King’s-Bench of England, is but an Appeal to the King in his Bench of England, for his Sense, Judgment, or Exposition of the Laws of Ireland. But of this more hereafter.

[127972] 4. When a Writ of Error is returned into the King’s-Bench of England, Suit is made to the King only; the Matter lies altogether before him; and the Party complaining applies to no Part of the political Government of England for Redress, but to the King of Ireland only, who is in England: That the King only is sued to, our Law-Books make plain. This Court is called Curia Domini Regis, and Aula Regia, because the King used to sit there in Person, as Lambard tells us; and every Cause brought there is said to be coram Domino Rege, even at this very Day, Cook, 4 Inst. page 72. Therefore if a Writ be returnable coram nobis ubicunque fuerimus, it is to be returned to the King’s-Bench. But if it be returnable coram Justiciariis nostris apud Westm. it is to be returned into the Common-Pleas. This Court (as Glanvil and other Ancients tell us) used to travel with the King, wherever he went. And Fleta, in describing this Court, says, Habet Rex Curiam suam & Justiciarios suos, coram quibus, & non alibi nisi coram semet ipso, &c. falsa Judicia & Errores revertuntur & Corriguntur. The King then (as Britton says) having supreme Jurisdiction in his Realm, to judge in all Causes whatsoever; therefore it is, that erroneous Judgments were brought to him out of Ireland. But this does not argue that Ireland is therefore subordinate to England; for the People of Ireland are the Subjects of the King to whom they appeal. And it is not from the Country where the Court is held, but from the Presence and Authority of the King (to whom the People of Ireland have as good a Title as the People of England) that the Pre-eminence of the Jurisdiction does flow, and I question not, but in former Times, when these Courts were first erected, and when the King exerted a greater Power in Judicature than he does now, and he used to sit in his own Court, that if he had travelled into Ireland, and the Court had followed him thither, erroneous Judgments might have been removed from England, before him into his Court in Ireland; for so certainly it must be, since the Court travelled with the King. From hence it appears, that all the Jurisdiction that the King’s-Bench in England has over the King’s-Bench in Ireland, arises only from the King’s Presence in the former. And the same may be said of the Chancery in England, if it will assume any Power to controul the Chancery in Ireland; because, as Lambard says, page 69, 70, the Chancery did follow the King, as the King’s-Bench did; and that, as he tells us, out of the Lord Chief Justice Scroope, the Chancery and the King’s-Bench were once but one Place. But if this be the Ground of the Jurisdiction of the King’s-Bench in England over the King’s-Bench in Ireland, (as I am fully persuaded it is) the Parliament in England cannot from hence claim any Right of Jurisdiction in Ireland, because they claim a Jurisdiction of their own; and their Court is not the King’s Court in that proper and strict Sense that the King’s-Bench is.

[130952] But granting that the Subordination of the King’s-Bench in Ireland to the King’s-Bench in England be rightly concluded from a Writ of Error out of the latter, lying on a Judgment in the former; I see no Reason from thence to conclude, that therefore the Parliament of Ireland is subordinate to the Parliament in England, unless we make any one Sort of Subordination, or in any one Part of Jurisdiction, to be a Subordination in all Points, and all Parts of Jurisdiction. The Subjects of Ireland may appeal to the King in his Bench in England, for the expounding of the old Common and Statute Law of Ireland; will it therefore follow, that the Parliament of England shall make new Laws to bind the Subjects in Ireland? I see no manner of Consequence in it; unless we take expounding old Laws, (or Laws already made) in the King’s-Bench, and making new Laws in Parliament to be one and the same Thing. I believe the best Logician in Europe will hardly make a Chain of Syllogisms, that from such Premises will regularly induce such a Conclusion.

[131996] To close this Point, we find that a Judgement of the King’s-Bench in Ireland may be removed by a Writ of Error to the Parliament in Ireland: But the Judgment of the Parliament of Ireland was never questioned in the Parliament of England. This appears from the Prior of Lanthony’s Case aforegoing.

[132294] I shall conclude this our fifth Article with a memorable Passage out of our Irish Statutes, which seems to strengthen what we have delivered on the Business of a Writ of Error, as well as the chief Doctrine I drive at; and that is 28 Henry the Eighth, chap 19, the Act of Faculties. This Statute is a Recital at large of the English Act of the 25th of Henry the Eighth, c. 21. In the Preamble of which English Act it is declared, That this your Grace’s Realm recognizing no Superior but your Grace, hath been, and yet is free from any Subjection to any Man’s Laws, but only such as have been devised within this Realm, for the Wealth of the same, or to such others, as by Sufferance of your Grace and your Progenitors, the People of the Realm have taken at their free Liberties by their own Consent; and have bound themselves by long Use and Custom to the Observance of, &c.

[133170] This Declaration, with the other Clauses of the said English Act, is verbatim recited in the Irish Act of Faculties; and in the said Irish Act it is enacted, That the said English Act, and every Thing and Things therein contained, shall be established, affirmed, taken, obeyed and accepted within this Land of Ireland as a good and perfect Law, and shall be within the said Land of the same Force, Effect, Quality, Condition, Strength and Virtue, to all Purposes and Intents, as it is within the Realm of England; (if so, then the said Clause declares our Right of being bound only by Laws to which we consent, as it does the Right of the People of England) And that all Subjects within the said Land of Ireland shall enjoy the Profit and Commodity thereof in like manner as the King’s Subjects of the Realm of England.

[133991] I am now arrived at our Sixth and last Article proposed, viz. the Reasons and Arguments that may be farther offered on one Side and the other in this Debate.

[134150] I have before taken Notice of the Title England pretends over us from Conquest: I have likewise enquired into the Precedents on one Side and the other, from Acts of Parliament, from Records, and from Reports of the learned in the Laws. There remains another Pretence or two for this Subordination to be considered; and one is founded on Purchase.

[134498] It is said, that vast Quantity of Treasure, that from time to time has been spent by England in reducing the Rebellions, and carrying on the Wars of Ireland, has given them a just Title at least to the Lands and Inheritances of the Rebels, and to the absolute Disposal thereof in their Parliament; and as particular Examples of this, we are told of the great Sums advanced by England for suppressing the Rebellion of the Irish Papists in 41, and opposing the late Rebellion since King William’s Accession to the Throne.

[135019] To this I answer, that in a War there is all Reason imaginable that the Estates of the unjust Opposers should go to repair the Damage that is done. This I have briefly hinted before. But if we consider the Wars of Ireland, we shall perceive they do not resemble the common Case of Wars between two foreign Enemies; ours are rather Rebellions, or intestine Commotions; that is, the Irish Papists rising against the King and Protestants of Ireland; and then it is plain, that if these latter, by the Assistance of their Brethren of England, and their Purse, do prove Victorious, the People of England ought to be fully repaid: But then the Manner of their Payment, and in what Way it shall be levied, ought to be left to the People of Ireland in Parliament assembled: And so it was after the Rebellion of 41. The Adventurers then were at vast Charges, and there were several Acts of Parliament in England made for their Reimbursing, by disposing to them the Rebel’s Lands. But after all, it was thought reasonable that the Parliament of Ireland should do this in their own Way; and therefore the Acts of Settlement and Explanation made all the former English Acts of no Force; or at least did very much alter them in many Particulars, as we have noted before. In like manner we allow that England ought to be repaid all their Expences in suppressing this late Rebellion: All we desire is, that, in Preservation of our own Rights and Liberties, we may do it in our own Methods regularly in our own Parliament: And if the Reimbursement be all that England stands upon, what availeth it whether it be done this Way or that Way, so it be done? We have an Example of this in Point between England and Holland in the glorious Revolution under King William the Third: Holland, in assisting England, expended 600000 Pounds, and the English Parliament fairly repaid them: It would have looked odly for Holland to have insisted on disposing of Lord Powis’s and other Estates by their own Laws, to reimburse themselves.

[137027] It is an ungenerous Thing to villify good Offices, I am far from doing it, but with all possible Gratitude acknowledge the mighty Benefits Ireland has often received from England, in helping to suppress the Rebellions of this Country; to England’s charitable Assistance our Lives and Fortunes are owing: But with all humble Submission, I desire it may be considered, whether England did not at the same Time propose the Prevention of their own Danger that would necessarily have attended our Ruin; if so, it was in some Measure their own Battles they fought, when they fought for Ireland; and a great of their Expence must be reckoned in their own Defence.

[137685] Another Thing alledged against Ireland is this; if a foreign Nation, as France or Spain for instance, prove prejudicial to England, in its Trade, or any other Way; England, if it be stronger, redresses itself by Force of Arms, or denouncing War; and why may not England, if Ireland lies cross their Interests, restrain Ireland, and bind it by Laws, and maintain these Laws by Force?

[138069] To this I answer: First, that it will hardly be instanced, that any Nation ever declared War with another, merely for overtopping them in some signal Advantage, which otherwise, or but for their Endeavours, they might have reaped. War only is justifiable for Injustice done, or Violence offered, or Rights detained. I cannot by the Law of Nations, quarrel with a Man, because he, going before me in the Road, finds a Piece of Gold, which possibly, if he had not taken it up, I might have light upon and gotten. It is true, we often see Wars commenced on this Account underhand, and on Emulation in Trade and Riches; but then this is never made the open Pretence, some other Colour it must receive, or else it would not look fair; which shews plainly, that this Pretence of being prejudicial, or of reaping Advantages which otherwise you might partake of, is not justifiable in itself. But granting that it were a good Justification of a War with a foreign Nation, it will make nothing in the Case between England and Ireland; for if it did, why does it not operate in the same manner between England and Scotland, and consequently in like manner draw after it England’s binding Scotland by their Lawsat Westminster? We are all the same King’s Subjects, the Children of one common Parent; and though we may have our distinct Rights and Inheritances absolutely within ourselves; yet we ought not, when these do chance a little to interfere to the Prejudice of one or the other Side, immediately to treat one another as Enemies; fair amicable Propositions should be proposed, and when these are not hearkened to, then it is Time enough to be at Enmity, and use Force.

[139735] The last Thing I shall take Notice of, that some raise against us, is, that Ireland is to be looked upon only as a Colony from England: And therefore as the Roman Colonies were subject to, and bound by, the Laws made by the Senate at Rome; so ought Ireland by those made by the Great Council at Westminster. Of all the Objections raised against us, I take this to be the most extravagant; it seems not to have the least Foundation or Colour from Reason or Record: Does it not manifestly appear by the Constitution of Ireland, that it is a compleat Kingdom within itself? Do not the Kings of England bear the Stile of Ireland amongst the rest of their Kingdoms? Is this agreeable to the Nature of a Colony? Do they use the Title of Kings of Virginia, New England, or Mary-land? Was not Ireland given by Henry the Second in a Parliament at Oxford to his Son John, and made thereby an absolute Kingdom, separate and wholly independent on England, until they both came united again in him, after the Death of his Brother Richard without Issue? Have not Multitudes of Acts of Parliament both in England and Ireland, declared Ireland a compleat Kingdom? Is not Ireland stiled in them all, the Kingdom, or Realm of Ireland? Do these Names agree to a Colony? Have we not a Parliament, and Courts of Judicature? Do these Things agree with a Colony? This on all hands involves so many Absurdities, that I think it deserves nothing more of our Consideration.

[141184] These being the only remaining Arguments that are sometimes mentioned against us, I now proceed to offer what I humbly conceive demonstrates the Justice of our Cause.

[141352] And herein I must beg the Reader’s Patience, if now and then I am forced lightly to touch upon some Particulars foregoing. I shall endeavour all I can to avoid prolix Repetitions; but my Subject requires, that sometimes I just mention, or refer to several Notes before delivered.

[141633] First therefore, I say, that Ireland should be bound by Acts of Parliament made in England, is against Reason and the common Rights of all Mankind.

[141782] All Men are by Nature in a State of Equality, in respect of Jurisdiction or Dominion: This I take to be a Principle in itself so evident, that it stands in need of little Proof. It is not to be conceived, that Creatures of the same Species and Rank, promiscuously born to all the same Advantages of Nature, and the Use of the same Faculties, should be subordinate and subject one to another; these to this or that of the same Kind. On this Equality in Nature is founded that Right which all Men claim of being free from all Subjection to positive Laws, until by their own Consent they give up their Freedom, by entering into civil Societies for the common Benefit of all the Members thereof. And on this Consent depends the Obligation of all human Laws; insomuch that without it, by the unanimous Opinion of all Jurists, no Sanctions are of any Force. For this let us appeal, amongst many, only to the judicious Mr. Hooker’s Eccles. Polity, Book 1. Sect. 10. Lond. Edit. 1676. Thus he:

[142769] Howbeit, Laws do not take their constraining Force from the Quality of such as devise them, but from that Power which doth give them the strength of Laws. That which we spake before, concerning the Power of government, must here be applied to the Power of making Laws whereby to Govern, which Power God hath over all; and by the natural Law, whereunto he hath made all subject, the lawful Power of making Laws, to command whole politic Societies of Men, belongeth so properly unto the same entire Societies, that for any Prince or Potentate, of what kind soever upon Earth, to exercise the same of himself, and not either by express Commission immediately and personally received from God, or else by Authority derived at the first from their Consent, upon whose Persons they impose Laws, it is no better than meer Tyranny. Laws they are not therefore, which public Approbation hath not made so: But Approbation not only they give, who personally declare their assent by Voice, Sign, or Act, but also when others do it in their Names, by Right, originally, at the least, derived from them: As in Parliaments, Councils, &c.

[143893] Again, Sith Men naturally have no full and perfect Power to command whole politic Multitudes of Men; therefore utterly without our Consent, we could in such sort be at no Man’s Commandment living. And to be commanded, we do consent, when that Society whereof we are Part, hath at any Time before consented, without revoking the same after by the like universal Agreement: Wherefore, as any Man’s Deeds past is good, as long as himself continueth; so the Act of a public Society of Men, done five hundred Years sithence, standeth as theirs who presently are of the same Societies, because Corporations are immortal; we were then alive in our Predecessors, and they in their Successors do still live. Laws therefore humane of what kind soever are available by Consent, &c.

[144665] And again, but what Matter the Law of Nations doth contain, I omit to search; the Strength and Virtue of that Law is such, that no particular Nation can lawfully Prejudice the same by any their several Laws and Ordinances, more than a Man by his private Resolutions the Law of the whole Commonwealth or State wherein he liveth; for as Civil Law being the Act of a whole Body Politic, doth therefore over-rule each Civil Part of the same Body; so there is no Reason that any one Commonwealth of itself should to the Prejudice of another, annihilate that whereupon the whole World hath agreed.

[145258] To the same Purpose may we find the universal Agreement of all Civilians, Grotius, Puffendorf, Locke’s Treat. Government, &c.

[145385] No one or more Men can by Nature challenge any Right, Liberty or Freedom, or any ease in his Property, Estate or Conscience, which all other Men have not an equally just Claim to. Is England a free People? So ought France to be. Is Poland so? Tuakey likewise, and all the Eastern Dominion ought to be so: And the same runs throughout the whole Race of Mankind.

[145747] Secondly, it is against the Common Laws of England which are of Force both in England and Ireland, by the original Compact before hinted. It is declared by both Houses of the Parliament of England, 1 Jac. cap. 1. That in the High Court of Parliament, all the whole Body of the Realm, and every particular Member thereof, either in Person or by Representation (upon their own free Elections) are by the Laws of this Realm deemed to be personally present. Is this then the Common Law of England, and the Birth-right of every Free-born English Subject? And shall we of this Kingdom be denied it, by having Laws imposed on us, where we are neither personally, nor representatively present? My Lord Cooke in his 4th Inst. cap. 1. saith, that all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and all the Commons of the whole Reaim, ought ex Debito Justiciæ to be summoned to Parliament, and none of them ought to be omitted. Hence it is called Generale Concilium in the Stat. of Westminst. 1. and Commune Concilium, because it is to comprehend all Persons and Estates in the whole Kingdom. And this is the very Reason given in the Case of the Merchants of Waterford foregoing, why Statutes made in England, should not bind them in Ireland, Quia non habent Milites hic in Parliamento; because they have no Representatives in the Parliament of England. My Lord Hobbard, in the Case of Savage and Day, pronounced it for Law, that whatever is against natural Equity and Reason, is against Law; nay, if an Act of Parliament were made against natural Equity and Reason, that Act was void. Whether it be not against Equity and Reason that a Kingdom regulated within itself, and having its own Parliament, should be bound without their Consent, by the Parliament of another Kingdom, I leave the Reader to consider. My Lord Cooke likewise, in the first Part of his Institutes, fol. 97. b. saith, Nihil quod est contra Rationem est Licitum. And in the old Modus tenendi Parliamenta of England, said to be writ about Edward the Confessor’s Time, and to have been confirmed and approved by William the Conqueror: It is expresly declared, that all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses ought to be summoned to Parliament. The very same is in the Modus sent into Ireland by Henry the Second. And in King John’s Great Charter dated 17 Johannis, it is granted in these Words, Et ad habend. Commune Concilium Regni de Auxiliis & Scutagiis Assidendis, submoneri faciemus Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Comites & Majores Barones, Regni Sigillatim per Literas nostras & faciemus submoneri in general per Vicecomites omnes alios, &c. Math. Paris ad An. 17. Johann. All are to be summoned to Parliament, the Nobility by special Writs; the Commons by general Writs to the Sheriffs. And is this the Common Law of iEngland? Is this Part of those Liberæ Consuetudines, that were contained in the Great Charter of Liberties of the People of England; and were so solemnly granted by Henry the Second, King John, and Henry the Third, to the People of Ireland, that they should enjoy and be governed by; and unto which they were sworn to be obedient? And shall they be of Force only in England, and not in Ireland? Shall Ireland receive these Charters of Liberties, and be no Partakers of the Freedoms therein contained? Or do these Words signify in England one Thing, and in Ireland no such Thing? This is so repugnant to all natural Reason and Equity that I hope no rational Man will contest it: I am sure if it be so, there is an End of all Speech amongst Men; all Compacts, Agreements and Societies are to no purpose.

[149365] Thirdly, it is against the Statute Laws both of England and Ireland: this has been pretty fully discussed before; however, I shall here again take Notice, that in the 10th of Henry the Fourth, it was enacted in Ireland, that Statutes made in England should not be of Force in Ireland, unless they were allowed and published by the Parliament of Ireland. And the like Statute was made the 29th of Henry the Sixth. And in the 10th Year of Henry the Seventh, Chap. 23. Irish Statutes, the Parliament which was held at Drogheda, before Sir Christopher Preston, Deputy to Jaspar Duke of Bedford, Lieutenant of Ireland, was declared void, for this Reason amongst others, that there was no general Summons of the said Parliament to all the Shires, but only to four. And if Acts of Parliament made in Ireland shall not bind that People, because some Counties were omitted; how much less shall either their Persons or Estates be bound by those Acts made in England, whereat no one County, or Person of that Kingdom is present? In the 35th of Edward the First, Cap. 6. It was enacted by the Parliament of England in these Words, Moreover from henceforth we shall take no manner of Aid, Taxes or Prizes, but by the common Assent of the Realm. And again, in the Statute of Liberties, by the same King, Cap. 1. De Tallag. non Concedend. it is enacted in these Words, No Tallage or Aid shall be taken or levied by us, or our Heirs, in our Realm, without the good Will and Assent of Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and other Freemen of the Land. The like Liberties are specially confirmed to the Clergy, the 14th of Edward the Third, and were these Statutes, and all other Statutes and Acts of the Parliament of England ratified, confirmed and adjudged by several Parliaments of Ireland to be of Force within this Realm? And shall the People of Ireland receive no Benefit by those Acts? Are those Statutes of Force in England only? And can they add no Immunity or Privilege to the Kingdom of Ireland, when they are received there? Can the King and Parliament make Acts in England to bind his Subjects of Ireland without their Consent? And can he make no Acts in Ireland without their Consent; whereby they may receive any Privilege or Immunity? This were to make the Parliaments of Ireland wholly illusory and of no effect. If this be reasonable Doctrine, to what end was Poyning’s Law in Ireland, that makes all the Statutes of England before that in Force in this Kingdom? This might as well have been done, and again undone when they please, by a single Act of the English Parliament. But let us not make thus light of Constitutions of Kingdoms, it is dangerous to those who do it, it is grievous to those that suffer it.

[152101] Moreover, had the King or his Council of England, in the 10th Year of Henry the Seventh, in the least dreamt of this Doctrine, to what end was all that strict Provision made by Poyning’s Act, Irish Stat. cap. 4. That no Act of Parliament should pass in Ireland, before it was first certified by the chief Governor and Privy Council here, under the broad Seal of this Kingdom, to the King and his Privy Council in England, and received their Approbation, and by them be remitted hither under the broad Seal of England, here to be passed into a Law? The Design of this Act seems to be the Prevention of any Thing passing in the Parliament of Ireland surreptitiously, to the Prejudice of the King, or the English Interest of Ireland. But this was a needless Caution, if the King and Parliament of England had Power at any Time to revoke or annul any such Proceedings. Upon this Act of Poyning’s many and various Acts have passed in Ireland relating to the Explanation, Suspension, or farther Corroboration thereof in divers Parliaments, both in Henry the Eighth’s, Phil. & Mary’s, and Q. Eliz. Reigns; for which see the Irish Statutes. All which shew that this Doctrine was hardly so much as surmised in those Days, however we come to have it raised in these latter Times.

[153372] Fourthly, it is against several Charters of Liberties granted unto the Kingdom of Ireland: This likewise is clearly made out by what foregoes. I shall only add in this Place, that in the Patent-Roll of the 17 Rich. 2. m. 34. de Confirmatione, there is a Confirmation of several Liberties and Immunities granted unto the Kingdom and People of Ireland by Edward the Third. The Patent is somewhat long, but so much as concerns this Particular, I shall render verbatim, as I have it transcribed from the Roll by Sir William Domvile, Attorney General in Ireland during the whole Reign of King Charles the Second. “Rex omnibus, &c. Salutem: Inspeximus Literas Patentes Domini Edwardi nuper Regis Angliæ, Avi nostri fact. in hæc verba: Edwardus dei Gra. Rex Angliæ & Franciæ, & Dominus Hiberniæ, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Ministris nostris tam Majoribus quam Minoribus, & quibuscunque aliis de Terra nostra Hiberniæ fidelibus nostris ad quos Præsentes Literæ pervenerint, Salutem: Quia, &c. Nos hæc quæ sequuntur Ordinanda Duximus & firmiter observanda, &c. Imprimis, viz. Volumus & Præcipimus quod Sancta Hibernicana Ecclesia suas Libertates & Liberas Consuetudines illesas habeat, & eis Libere gaudeat & Utatur. Item volumus & præcipimus quod nostra & ipsius Terræ Negotia præsertim Majora & Ardua in Consiliis per Peritos Consiliaros nostros ac Prælatos & Magnates & quosdam de Discretioribus & Probioribus Hominibus de partibus vicinis ubi ipsa Concilia teneri Contigerit propter hoc evocandos, in Parliamentis vero per ipsos Conciliaros nostros ac Prelatos & Proceres aliosque de terra prædicta prout Mos Exegit secundum Justiciam Legem Consuetudinem & Rationem tractentur deducantur & fideliter timore favore odio aut prætio post positis discutiantur ac etiam terminentur, &c. In Cujus Rei Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes Teste meipso Apud Westminst. 25 die Octob. Anno Regni nostris Angliæ, 31, Regni vero Franciæ 18. Nos autem Ordinationes Voluntates & Præcepta Prædicta ac omnia alia & singula in Literis prædictis Contenta Rata Habentes & Grata eo pro nobis & Hæredibus nostris quantum in nobis est Acceptamus, Approbamus, Ratificamus, & Confirmamus prout Literæ predictæ rationabiliter testanter. In Cujus, &c. Test. Reg. apud Westminst. 26 die Junii.”

[155676] Fifthly, it is inconsistent with the Royalties and Præ-eminence of a separate and distinct Kingdom. That we are thus a distinct Kingdom, has been clearly made out before. It is plain, the Nobility of Ireland are an Order of Peers clearly distinct from the Peerage of England, the Privileges of the one, extend not into the other Kingdom; a Lord of Ireland may be arrested by his Body in England, and so may a Lord of England in Ireland, whilst their Persons remain sacred in their respective Kingdoms: A Voyage Royal may be made into Ireland, as the Year-Book, 11 Henry 4. 17 Fol. 7. and Lord Cook tells us; and King John, in the 12th Year of his Reign of England, made a Voyage-Royal into Ireland; and his Tenants in Chief, which did not attend him in that Voyage, did pay him escuage, at the Rate of two Marks for every Knight’s Fee; which was imposed super Prælatis & Baronibus pro Passagio Regis in Hibernia, as appears by the Pipe-Roll, Scutag. 12 Johannis Regis in Scaccario Angl. which shews that we are a compleat Kingdom within ourselves, and not little better than a Province, as some are so extravagant as to assert; none of the Properties of a Roman Province agreeing in the least with our Constitution. It is resolved in Sir Richard Pembrough’s Case, in the 44th of Edward the Third, that Sir Richard might lawfully refuse the King to serve him as his Deputy in Ireland, and that the King could not compel him thereto, for that were to banish him into another Kingdom, which is against Magna Charta, Chap. 29. Nay, even though Sir Richard had great Tenures from the King, pro servitio Impenso & Impendendo, for that was said must be understood within the Realm of England, Cook’s 2d Inst. page 47. And in Pilkington’s Case aforementioned, Fortescue declared, that the Land of Ireland is, and at all times hath been, a Dominion separate and divided from England. How then can the Realms of England and Ireland, being distinct Kingdoms, and separate Dominions, be imagined to have any Superiority or Jurisdiction the one over the other. It is absurd to fancy that Kingdoms are separate and distinct merely from the geographical Distinction of Territories. Kingdoms become distinct, by distinct Jurisdictions, and Authorities legislative and executive; and as Rex est qui Regem non habet, so Regnum est quod alio non Subjicitur Regno: A Kingdom can have no supream; it is in itself supream within itself, and must have all Jurisdictions, Authorities and Præ-eminencies to the Royal State of a Kingdom belonging, or else it is none: And that Ireland has all these, is declared in the Irish Stat. 33 Henry the Eighth, c. 1. The chief of these most certainly is, the Power of making and abrogating its own Laws, and being bound only by such to which the Community have given their Consent.

[158474] Sixthly, it is against the King’s Prerogative, that the Parliament of England should have any co-ordinate Power with him to introduce new Laws, or repeal old Laws established in Ireland. By the Constitution of Ireland under Poyning’s Act, the King’s Prerogative in the Legislature is advanced to a much higher Pitch than ever was challenged by the Kings in England, and the Parliament of Ireland stands almost on the same Bottom as the King does in England; I say almost on the same Bottom, for the Irish Parliament have not only a negative Vote (as the King has in England) to whatever Laws the King and his Privy Councils of both or either Kingdom shall lay before them; but have also a Liberty of proposing to the King and his Privy Council here, such Laws as the Parliament of Ireland think expedient to be passed. Which Laws being thus proposed to the King, and put into form, and transmitted to the Parliament here, according to Poyning’s Act, must be passed or rejected in the very Words, even to a Tittle, as they are laid before our Parliament, we cannot alter the least Iota. If therefore the Legislature of Ireland stand on this foot, in relation to the King, and to the Parliament of Ireland; and the Parliament of England do remove it from this Bottom, and assume it to themselves, where the King’s Prerogative is much narrower, and as it were reversed, (for there the King has only a negative Vote) I humbly conceive it is an Encroachment on the Kings Prerogative: But this I am sure, the Parliament of England will be always very tender of, and his Majesty will be very loth to have such a precious Jewel of his Crown handled roughly. The Happiness of our Constitutions depending on a right Temperament between the Kings and the Peoples Rights.

[160235] Seventhly, it is against the Practice of all former Ages. Wherein can it appear, that any Statute made in England, was at any Time since the Reign of Henry the Third, allowed and put in Practice in the Realm of Ireland, without the Authority of the Parliament of Ireland? Is it not manifest by what foregoes, that from the Twentieth of King Henry the Third, to the Thirteenth of Edward the Second, and from thence to the Eighteenth of Henry the Sixth, and from thence, to the Thirty-second of Henry the Sixth, and from thence to the Eighth of Edward the Fourth, and from thence, to the Tenth of Henry the Seventh, there was special care taken to introduce the Statutes of England (such of them as were necessary or convenient for this Kingdom) by degrees, and always with Allowance and Consent of the Parliament and People of Ireland. And since the general Allowance, of all the English Acts and Statutes in the Tenth of Henry the Seventh, there have several Acts of Parliament, which were made in England in the Reigns of all the Kings from that Time, successively to this very Day, been particularly received by Parliament in Ireland, and so they become of Force here, and not by Reason of any general comprehensive Words, as some Men have lately fancied. For if by general comprehensive Words, the Kingdom of Ireland could be bound by the Acts of Parliament of England, what needed all the former Receptions in the Parliament of Ireland, or what Use will there be of the Parliament of Ireland at any Time? If the Religion, Lives, Liberties, Fortunes, and Estates of the Clergy, Nobility and Gentry of Ireland, may be disposed of, without their Privity and Consent, what Benefit have they of any Laws, Liberties, or Privileges granted unto them by the Crown of England? I am loth to give their Condition an hard Name; but I have no other Notion of Slavery, but being bound by a Law to which I do not Consent.

[162147] Eigthhly, it is against several Resolutions of the learned Judges of former Times in the very Point in Question. This is manifest from what foregoes in the Case of the Merchants of Waterford, Pilkington’s Case, Prior of Lanthony’s Case, &c. But I shall not here enlarge farther thereon.

[162435] Ninthly, The Obligation of all Laws having the same Foundation, if one Law may be imposed without Consent, any other Law whatever may be imposed on us without our Consent. This will naturally introduce taxing us without our Consent; and this as necessarily destroys our Property. I have no other Notion of Property, but a Power of disposing my Goods as I please, and not as another shall command: Whatever another may rightfully take from me without my Consent, I have certainly no Property in. To tax me without Consent, is little better, if at all, than down-right robbing me. I am sure the great Patriots of Liberty and Property, the free People of England, cannot think of such a Thing but with abhorrence.

[163147] Lastly, The People of Ireland are left by this Doctrine in the greatest Confusion and Uncertainty imaginable. We are certainly bound to obey the supreme Authority over us; and yet hereby we are not permitted to know who or what the same is; whether the Parliament of England, or that of Ireland, or both; and in what Cases the one, and in what the other: Which Uncertainty is or may be made a Pretence at any Time for Disobedience. It is not impossible but the different Legislatures we are subject to, may enact different or contrary Sanctions: Which of these must we obey?

[163723] To conclude all, I think it highly inconvenient for England to assume this Authority over the Kingdom of Ireland: I believe there will need no great Arguments to convince the wise Assembly of English Senators, how inconvenient it may be to England, to do that which may make the Lords and People of Ireland think that they are not well used, and may drive them into Discontent. The Laws and Liberties of England were granted above five hundred Years ago to the People of Ireland, upon their Submissions to the Crown of England, with a Design to make them easy to England, and to keep them in the Allegiance of the King of England. How consistent it may be with true Policy, to do that which the People of Ireland may think is an Invasion of their Rights and Liberties, I do most humbly submit to the Parliament of England to consider. They are Men of great Wisdom, Honour, and Justice; and know how to prevent all future Inconveniencies. We have heard great Out-cries, and deservedly, on breaking the Edict of Nantes, and other Stipulations; how far the breaking our Constitution, which has been of five hundred Years standing, exceeds that, I leave the World to judge. It may perhaps be urged, that it is convenient for the State of England, that the Supreme Council thereof should make their Jurisdiction as large as they can. But with Submission, I conceive that if this assumed Power be not just, it cannot be convenient for the State. What Cicero says in his Offices, Nihil est Utile, nisi idem sit Honestum, is most certainly true. Nor do I think that it is anywise necessary to the Good of England, to assert this High Jurisdiction over Ireland. For since the Statutes of this Kingdom are made with such Caution, and in such Form, as is prescribed by Poyning’s Act 10 H. 7. and by the 3d and 4th of Phil. and Mar. and whilst Ireland is in English Hands, I do not see how it is possible for the Parliament of Ireland to do any Thing that can be in the least prejudicial to England. But on the other Hand, if England assume a Jurisdiction over Ireland, whereby they think their Rights and Liberties are taken away; that their Parliaments are rendered merely nugatory, and their Lives and Fortunes depend on the Will of a Legislature, wherein they are not Parties, there may be ill Consequences of this. Advancing the Power of the Parliament of England, by breaking the Rights of another, may in Time have ill Effects.

[166147] The Rights of Parliament should be preserved sacred and inviolable, wherever they are found. This kind of Government, once so universal all over Europe, is now almost vanished from amongst the Nations thereof. Our King’s Dominions are the only Supporters of this noble Gothick Constitution, save only what little Remains may be found thereof in Poland. We should not therefore make so light of that Sort of Legislature, and as it were abolish it in one Kingdom of the Three, wherein it appears; but rather cherish and encourage it wherever we meet it.

[166700] Bishop of Derry in the House of Lords, and prohibiting Exportation of our Woollen Manufacture in the House of Commons.

[166820] Giraldus Cambr. Hib. Expug. Lib. C. 1.

[166860] Mr. Selden will not allow that ever Henry II. used this Stile. Tit. Hon. Par. 2. C. 5. Sect. 26.

[166958] Bishop of Salisbury’s Pastoral Letter.

[166998] Tit. Hon. Par. 2. C. 5. Sect. 26. Edit. Lon. An. 1672.

[167054] Against Cook’s 4th Instit. C. 76.

[167089] Against the 4th Instit. c. 76, p. 249.

[167129] Topograph. Hibern. l. 3, c. 18. Hib. Expug. l. 11, c. 33, 34.

[167192] Hoveden Annal pars-post. 302. Brampton Chr. Col. 171. Knighton de Even. Angl. l. c. c. 10, Col. 2394, 2395. Pol. Virg. Hist. Angl. l. 13, Rudal. de Diceto. Walsingham, &c. Original Compact for Ireland.

[167395] Selden’s Tit. Par. 1. C. 8. Sect. 5. Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, of the Religion of the ancient Irish, Cap. 11.

[167509] Act. Concil. Constant. Ses. 28. MS. in Bib. Reg. not in the printed Acts.

[167584] Pryn against the 4th Inst. c. 76. p. 250.

[167627] Against Cook’s 4th Inst. page 252.

[167663] Fourth Instit.

[167679] Against the 4th Instit.

[167704] Piacita Parliamentaria.

[167729] Selden Notæ & specileg. ad eadmerum, page 171.

[167777] Leges W. 1. Cap. 63. apud Selden in notis ad eadmerum, p 192.

[167840] Vid. Selden ut supra.

[167863] Mat. Paris. adan. 1215. page 253, &c.

[167902] Cook’ Pref. to the 2d. Inst.

[167932] Annals of Ireland at the End of Camden’s Britan. Edit. 1637. page 196, 197, &c.

[168013] Ibid. p. 160. Pryn against the 4th Instit. Chap. 76.

[168067] Cook’s 4th Instit. cap. 76. p. 351.

[168104] Vid. Irish Stat.

[168122] Irish Stat. 13 C. 2. c. 2. 13 C. 2. c. 3. 14 & 15 C. 2. c. 1. 14 & 15 C. 2. c. 19. 17 & 18 C. 2. c. 3. 17 & 18 C. 2. c. 11. English Stat. 12. C. 2. c. 12. 12 C. 2. c. 3. 12 C. 2. c. 14. 12 C. 2. c. 24. 12 C. 2. c. 33. 16 & 17 C. 2. c. 5.

[168361] For we had two several Acts transmitted to us at different Times, to this very Purpose. One we rejected in the Lord Sydney’s Government, the other we passed under the Lord Capell.

[168542] Title in the English Statutes is, No Imposition shall be paid to the Bishop of Rome.

[168628] 20 H 6. 8. Pilkington’s Case. 32. H. 6. 25. 20 Eliz. Dyer. 360. Plowd. Com. 360.

[168710] This Statute we may reckon amongst the Number of those that are lost during the long Intervals of our Irish Acts, noted before, page 65. to be about 118 Years.

[168871] Rot. Parl. An. 8 Henry the Sixth, in ult.

[168914] 14 Edward the Second, Par. 2. Memb. 21 Int.

[168959] See before page 65.

[168980] Pulton’s Col. Eng. Stats. Edit. 1670. page 63.

[169028] Ibid page 75.

[169043] Ibid page 113.

[169059] 10 H. 7. c. 22.

[169076] 28 H. 8. c. 4. 28 H. 8. c. 20. 3 & 4. Ph. & M. c. 4. 11 Eliz. Ses. 2. c. 1. 11 Eliz. Ses. 3. c. 8.