WORK: Ephesiaca  (slug: xenophon-of-ephesus-ephesiaca-b45210)

CHAPTER: 03-book-3



[0] 1.1. So that day they returned to the cave, and what little strength they had left they restored to themselves and to their horses; for Hippothous too had a horse hidden in the wood. The next day they passed by Cilicia and made their way toward Mazacus, a great and beautiful city of Cappadocia.

[297] 1.2. For from there Hippothous planned, by gathering young men in their prime, to form a robber band again. As they went through large villages there was abundance of all provisions, for Hippothous was skilled in the Cappadocian tongue, and everyone treated him as one of their own.

[581] 1.3. Completing the journey in ten days, they came to Mazacus, and there settled near the gates and decided to recover themselves for some days from their toil.

[743] 1.4. And as they were feasting, Hippothous groaned and shed tears; Habrocomes asked him the cause of his tears. He said, "My story is a long one, and full of tragedy."

[912] 1.5. Habrocomes begged him to tell it, promising to relate his own as well. So, taking it up from the beginning (for they happened to be alone), Hippothous told his story.

[1085] 2.1. "I am," he said, "by birth from the city of Perinthus (the city is near Thrace), of those who are foremost in power there; and you have heard how famous Perinthus is, and how prosperous the men there.

[1292] 2.2. While I was young I fell in love with a beautiful youth; the youth was one of the local people, and his name was Hyperanthes. I fell in love first when I saw him wrestling in the gymnasium, and I could not hold out.

[1514] 2.3. So when a local festival was being held, and an all-night vigil at it, I went up to Hyperanthes and begged him to take pity on me. The youth heard me and, taking pity, promised everything.

[1709] 2.4. The first stages of love were paved with kisses and touches and many tears from me; at last, finding our opportunity, we managed to be alone together, and our age put us above suspicion. And for a long time we were together, loving each other beyond measure, until some divinity grew jealous of us.

[2014] 2.5. There came from Byzantium (and Byzantium is near Perinthus) a man among the foremost in power there, proud of his wealth and abundance; he was called Aristomachus.

[2184] 2.6. As soon as he set foot in Perinthus, as if sent by some god against me, he saw Hyperanthes with me and was at once captivated, marvelling at the beauty of the youth—beauty that could draw anyone whatever.

[2395] 2.7. Having fallen in love, he no longer kept his passion within bounds, but at first sent messages to the youth; and when that was impossible for him (for Hyperanthes, out of his affection for me, would let no one approach), he persuaded the youth's father, a base man and weaker than money.

[2689] 2.8. His father gave him Hyperanthes on the pretext of teaching, for Aristomachus claimed to be a master of rhetoric. Taking him, he at first kept him shut up, and after this departed for Byzantium.

[2889] 2.9. I followed too, despising all my own affairs, and I was with the youth as much as I could be; but I could do little, and a kiss became a rare thing for me, and talk difficult, for I was watched by many.

[3098] 2.10. At last, no longer able to bear it, I goaded myself and went back to Perinthus, sold all the property I had, gathered the money, and came to Byzantium; and taking a small sword (this too seemed good to Hyperanthes), I went by night into the house of Aristomachus, found him lying with the boy, and, filled with rage, struck Aristomachus a mortal blow.

[3457] 2.11. While all was quiet and everyone at rest, I went out unnoticed, just as I was, taking Hyperanthes with me; and travelling all night to Perinthus, I at once boarded a ship, with no one knowing, and sailed for Asia.

[3678] 2.12. For a while the voyage went prosperously; but at last, when we were off Lesbos, a violent wind fell upon us and overturned the ship. I swam along with Hyperanthes, supporting him and making his swimming lighter; but when night came the youth could endure no longer, gave out in the swimming, and died.

[3987] 2.13. I managed only to bring his body safe to land and to bury it. With many tears and groans, I gathered his remains, and finding somewhere a suitable stone, I set up a pillar over the tomb and inscribed on it, in memory of the unhappy youth, an epigram that I composed on the spot:

[4273] Hippothous made this tomb for renowned Hyperanthes, no fitting grave from death for a holy citizen, deep beneath the earth—a glorious flower, whom once a divinity snatched away on the sea, while a great gale blew.

[4488] 2.14. After that I resolved not to go to Perinthus, but turned through Asia toward Greater Phrygia and Pamphylia; and there, from want of a living and from despondency at my misfortune, I gave myself to a robber band. At first I became a servant of the band, but at last I myself organized a band around Cilicia, which was renowned for a long time, until my companions were taken not long before I saw you.

[4896] 2.15. Such is the fortune of my story. But you, dearest, tell me your own; for it is clear that you too are under some great compulsion in your wandering."

[5053] 3.1. So Habrocomes told that he was an Ephesian, that he had fallen in love with a girl and married her, and of the oracles, and the journey abroad, and the pirates, and Apsyrtus, and Manto, and the bonds, and the flight, and the goatherd, and the road as far as Cilicia.

[5326] 3.2. While he was still speaking, Hippothous joined him in lamenting and said, "O my parents, O fatherland that I shall never see again, O Hyperanthes, dearest of all to me! You, Habrocomes, will at least see your beloved and recover her at last in time; but I can never see Hyperanthes again."

[5622] 3.3. As he spoke he showed a lock of hair and wept over it. When both had lamented their fill, Hippothous, looking at Habrocomes, said, "There is another story I passed over without telling.

[5814] 3.4. A little before the band was taken, a beautiful girl came wandering to the cave, of the same age as you, and she said your fatherland was hers; more than that I did not learn. It was decided to sacrifice her to Ares. Everything was made ready, when our pursuers came upon us; and I escaped, but what became of her I do not know.

[6149] 3.5. She was very beautiful, Habrocomes, and plainly dressed; golden hair, charming eyes." While he was still speaking, Habrocomes cried out, "You have seen my Anthia, Hippothous! Where has she fled, then? What land holds her? Let us turn toward Cilicia, let us seek her; it is not far from the band.

[6451] 3.6. Yes, by the very soul of Hyperanthes, do not willingly wrong me, but let us go where we can find Anthia." Hippothous promised to do everything, but said they must gather a few men for the safety of the road.

[6665] 3.7. So they were occupied with this, planning how they should go back to Cilicia. Meanwhile, for Anthia the thirty days had passed, and the preparations for the marriage were being made by Perilaus: victims were brought down from the country, and there was great abundance of everything besides. With him were his household and kinsmen, and many of the citizens too came to celebrate Anthia's wedding.

[7069] 4.1. During the time when Anthia, taken from the band, had come to Tarsus, there arrived an old Ephesian, a physician by profession, Eudoxus by name; he had come to Egypt after falling into a shipwreck on his voyage.

[7287] 4.2. This Eudoxus went about to the other men too, all those of Tarsus most esteemed, asking from some clothing, from others money, and telling each his misfortune; and he came to Perilaus too and said that he was an Ephesian and a physician by profession.

[7545] 4.3. Perilaus took him and led him to Anthia, thinking she would be pleased to see a man who was an Ephesian. She greeted Eudoxus kindly and inquired whether he could tell her anything about her own people; but he said he knew nothing, since his absence from Ephesus had been a long one. None the less, Anthia was glad of him, recalling her home.

[7893] 4.4. So he became a familiar of the household and went in constantly to Anthia, enjoying all provisions, and always begging her to send him back to Ephesus; for he had children and a wife.

[8083] 5.1. So when all the preparations for the wedding had been completed by Perilaus, and the day was at hand, a costly banquet had been made ready for him, and Anthia had been adorned in bridal array. But she ceased not to weep, neither by night nor by day, and always held Habrocomes before her eyes.

[8383] 5.2. She thought of many things at once—her love, her oaths, her fatherland, her parents, the necessity, the marriage. And so, finding herself alone and seizing the moment, she tore her hair and said, "Wholly unjust and base am I, who do not repay Habrocomes in like measure.

[8660] 5.3. For he, that he might remain my husband, endures bonds and tortures, and perhaps even has died; but I am forgetful of these things and am being married, wretch that I am, and someone will sing the wedding hymn over me, and I shall come to the bed of Perilaus.

[8926] 5.4. But, dearest soul of Habrocomes, do not grieve at all on my account; for I would never willingly wrong you. I will come to you, and remain until death your bride."

[9096] 5.5. So she spoke; and when Eudoxus the Ephesian physician came to her, she led him aside to a quiet room, fell at his knees, and begged him to tell no one anything of what she was about to say, and adjured him by the goddess of her fathers, Artemis, to help her in all that she should ask of him.

[9395] 5.6. Eudoxus raised her up, for she was lamenting much, urged her to take heart, and swore, promising to do everything. So she told him of her love for Habrocomes, and the oaths to him, and the agreements about her chastity.

[9621] 5.7. "If it were possible," she said, "for me, alive, to recover Habrocomes alive, or to escape and run away from here unnoticed, I would take counsel about these things. But since he is dead, and flight is impossible, and it is unbearable for me to endure the coming marriage—for I will neither break my agreements with Habrocomes nor disregard my oaths—do you, then, become my helper, finding somewhere a drug that will release me, ill-fated as I am, from my troubles.

[10093] 5.8. And in return you will have many blessings from the gods, to whom I will pray for you often even before my death; and I myself will give you money and arrange your passage home. You will be able, before anyone learns of it, to board a ship and sail for Ephesus; and arriving there, seek out my parents Megamedes and Euippe, and tell them of my death and all that happened on the journey, and say that Habrocomes is dead."

[10521] 5.9. So saying, she rolled at his feet and begged him to contradict her in nothing and to give her the drug. And bringing out twenty minas of silver and her necklaces (for she had all things in abundance, having control over all of Perilaus' goods), she gave them to Eudoxus. He, after much deliberation, pitying the girl for her misfortune, and longing for the road to Ephesus, and overcome by the silver and the gifts, promised to give the drug, and went off to fetch it.

[10996] 5.10. Meanwhile she lamented much, bewailing her own youth and grieving that she was to die before her time, and called often upon Habrocomes as though he were present.

[11166] 5.11. After a little while Eudoxus came, bringing not a deadly drug but a sleeping one, so that the girl should suffer no harm and he himself, having got his provisions for the journey, might come safe home. Anthia took it, gave him many thanks, and sent him away. And he at once boarded a ship and set sail, while she looked for a suitable moment to drink the drug.

[11534] 6.1. By now it was night; the bridal chamber was being prepared, and those appointed to the task came to lead Anthia out. She went out unwilling and in tears, hiding the drug in her hand; and when she came near the chamber, the household raised the wedding hymn.

[11798] 6.2. But she lamented and wept, saying, "Once before I was led like this, with Habrocomes for my bridegroom, and the fire of love escorted us, and the wedding hymn was sung over a happy marriage.

[11995] 6.3. But now what will you do, Anthia? Will you wrong Habrocomes—your husband, your beloved, who has died for your sake? I am not so cowardly, nor so timid in my troubles. Let this be resolved: let us drink the drug. Habrocomes must be my only husband; him I desire, even dead."

[12275] 6.4. So she spoke, and was led into the chamber. And when she was alone—for Perilaus was still feasting with his friends—she pretended that in her agitation she was seized by thirst, and ordered one of the servants to bring her water, as if to drink. When the cup was brought, she took it, and with no one present within, threw in the drug, and weeping said,

[12635] 6.5. "O soul of dearest Habrocomes, behold, I fulfil my promises to you and come the road to you—an unhappy road, but a necessary one. Receive me gladly, and grant me there with you a happy life." So saying, she drank the drug; and at once sleep took hold of her, and she fell to the ground, and the drug did all that it could.

[12964] 7.1. When Perilaus came in and at once saw Anthia lying there, he was struck with horror and cried out, and there was great confusion in the house and mingled emotions—wailing, fear, dismay. Some pitied her who seemed to have died, others grieved with Perilaus, and all lamented what had happened.

[13263] 7.2. Perilaus rent his clothes, fell upon the body, and said, "O dearest girl, who before the marriage have left your lover, having for a few days been the bride of Perilaus—to what a chamber, the tomb, shall we lead you?

[13486] 7.3. Happy, then, was that Habrocomes, whoever he was; blessed indeed was he, to receive such gifts from his beloved." So he lamented, and embraced her whole body, and kissed her hands and feet, calling her a wretched bride, an unhappier wife.

[13731] 7.4. He adorned her, clothing her in rich garments and putting much gold about her; and no longer able to bear the sight, when day came he laid Anthia on a bier (and she lay senseless) and bore her to the tombs near the city. There he placed her in a chamber, sacrificing many victims and burning much clothing and other ornament.

[14063] 8.1. So when he had performed the customary rites, he was led back to the city by his household. But Anthia, left behind in the tomb, came to herself and, realizing that the drug had not been deadly, groaned and wept and said, "O drug that deceived me, that hindered me from travelling the happy road to Habrocomes! I have failed, then, even of the desire for death—a new misfortune.

[14448] 8.2. But it is still possible, by staying in the tomb, to accomplish the work of the drug through starvation. For no one would take me from here, nor would I look upon the sun nor come into the light." So saying, she held out, awaiting death nobly.

[14698] 8.3. Meanwhile, when night had come, certain robbers, learning that a girl had been buried richly, and that much women's adornment lay buried with her, and much silver and gold, came to the tomb and, breaking open the doors, went in and were taking up the ornaments, when they saw Anthia alive. Thinking this too a great profit, they raised her up and wished to lead her away.

[15076] 8.4. But she rolled at their feet and begged them much, saying, "Men, whoever you are, take all this adornment, whatever it is, and all that was buried with me, and carry it off; but spare my body.

[15275] 8.5. I am dedicated to two gods, Love and Death; let me devote myself to them. By the very gods of your own fathers, do not bring out into the day one whose misfortune befits the night and the darkness." So she spoke; but she did not persuade the robbers. They led her out of the tomb, brought her down to the sea, put her aboard a small boat, and set sail for Alexandria; and during the voyage they tended her and urged her to take heart.

[15716] 8.6. But she, thinking of the troubles into which she had fallen, lamenting and bewailing, said again, "Robbers and the sea, again I am a captive—but now more wretched, because not with Habrocomes.

[15915] 8.7. What land, then, will receive me? What men shall I look upon? Not Moeris again, not Manto, not Perilaus, not Cilicia. May I come to a place where I shall see at least the tomb of Habrocomes." So she wept continually, and would take neither drink nor food, though the robbers forced her.

[16208] 9.1. They, completing the voyage in a few days, put in at Alexandria, and there disembarked Anthia, and decided, when she had recovered from the voyage, to hand her over to some merchants. Perilaus, learning of the breaking-open of the tomb and the loss of the body, was in great and ungovernable grief.

[16513] 9.2. Meanwhile Habrocomes kept searching and inquiring whether anyone knew of a foreign girl, a captive, brought from somewhere by robbers. When he found nothing, he gave up, worn out, and came to where they were lodging. Hippothous and his men had prepared a meal for them.

[16789] 9.3. The others were dining, but Habrocomes was very despondent, and throwing himself on the couch he wept and lay there, taking nothing.

[16928] 9.4. As the drinking went on, an old woman who was present among Hippothous' company, named Chrysion, opportunely began a story. "Listen," she said, "strangers, to a tragedy that happened not long ago in the city.

[17143] 9.5. A certain Perilaus, one of the foremost in power, was elected to keep the peace in Cilicia; and going out in search of robbers, he captured and brought back some, and with them a beautiful girl, and persuaded her to marry him.

[17376] 9.6. All the preparations for the marriage had been completed; but she, going into the chamber, whether driven mad or in love with someone else, drank a drug she had got from somewhere and died—for that was said to be the manner of her death." Hearing this, Hippothous said, "This is the girl whom Habrocomes seeks."

[17694] 9.7. Habrocomes heard the story, but was overcome by despondency; at last, starting up at the sound of Hippothous' voice, he said, "But now Anthia is plainly dead, and perhaps her tomb is here, and her body is preserved."

[17917] 9.8. So saying, he begged the old woman Chrysion to lead him to her tomb and show him the body. But she groaned and said, "This is the most wretched thing of all for the poor girl: for Perilaus buried her richly and adorned her; but robbers, learning what was buried with her, dug up the tomb, took up the ornaments, and made the body vanish. There is a great and mighty search for them by Perilaus."

[18319] 10.1. Hearing this, Habrocomes rent his tunic and lamented greatly that Anthia had died honourably and chastely, but, after death, had perished wretchedly.

[18476] 10.2. "What robber, then, is so amorous as to desire you even dead, and to carry off your body? I am robbed of you, wretch that I am, the one consolation left to me.

[18643] 10.3. I am resolved, then, to die in any case; but first I will hold out until I find your body, and embracing it I will bury myself together with it." So he spoke, lamenting; and Hippothous and his men urged him to take heart.

[18872] 10.4. And then they rested all that night; but thoughts of everything came over Habrocomes—of Anthia, of her death, of the tomb, of the loss of her body. No longer able to bear it, and unnoticed by all (for Hippothous and his men lay overcome with drink), he went out as if needing something, and leaving them all he came to the sea, found a ship setting sail for Alexandria, and embarked, hoping to overtake in Egypt the robbers who had carried off everything; an unhappy hope led him to this.

[19368] 10.5. So he sailed toward Alexandria; and when day came, Hippothous and his men were vexed at Habrocomes' departure, but recovering themselves after a few days they decided to go robbing toward Syria and Phoenicia.

[19584] 11.1. The robbers handed Anthia over to merchants in Alexandria, taking much silver; and the merchants fed her richly and tended her body, always seeking a buyer worthy of her.

[19762] 11.2. There came to Alexandria a man from India, one of the kings there, to view the city and on business of trade, Psammis by name.

[19896] 11.3. This Psammis saw Anthia with the merchants, and seeing her was captivated, and gave the merchants much silver and took her as his servant.

[20042] 11.4. Having bought her, the barbarian man at once attempted to force her and use her for intercourse; but she, unwilling, at first resisted, and at last pretended to Psammis (barbarians are superstitious by nature) that her father had, at her birth, dedicated her to Isis until the time of her marriage, and she said the time was still set a year off.

[20396] 11.5. "So if you outrage one consecrated to the goddess," she said, "she will be angry, and the punishment is grievous." Psammis was persuaded, did obeisance to the goddess, and kept away from Anthia; and she remained with Psammis under guard, regarded as sacred to Isis.

[20669] 12.1. But the ship carrying Habrocomes missed the course to Alexandria and was cast ashore at the mouths of the Nile, at the place called Paraetonium and the part of Phoenicia along the sea.

[20861] 12.2. As they were cast ashore, the herdsmen of that place ran upon them, plundered their cargo, bound the men, and led them by a long, desolate road to Pelusium, a city of Egypt, and there sold them off, one to one buyer, another to another. So Habrocomes was bought by an old soldier (he was discharged), Araxus by name.

[21185] 12.3. This Araxus had a wife loathsome to look upon, much worse to hear, surpassing all in licentiousness, Cyno by name. This Cyno fell in love with Habrocomes as soon as he was brought into the house, and could no longer restrain herself; she was terrible both in falling in love and in wishing to gratify her desire.

[21505] 12.4. Araxus was fond of Habrocomes and treated him as a son; but Cyno made a proposal of intercourse, begged him to consent, promised that he would have her for a wife, and that she would kill Araxus. This seemed dreadful to Habrocomes, and he considered many things at once—Anthia, his oaths, the chastity he had so often wronged already; at last, as Cyno pressed him, he consented.

[21891] 12.5. And when night came, she, thinking to have Habrocomes for a husband, killed Araxus and told Habrocomes what she had done. But he, unable to bear the woman's wantonness, left the house and abandoned her, saying that he would never lie beside a murderess.

[22152] 12.6. When she came to herself, at daybreak she went to where the crowd of the people of Pelusium was, lamented her husband, and said that the newly bought slave had killed him; and she made much lamentation and seemed to speak credibly to the crowd. They at once seized Habrocomes, and binding him sent him up to the man who was then governor of Egypt.